Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 30 May 2002 .
As you know , colleagues , the principle of transparency is enshrined in the first article of the Treaty on European Union .
Its coming into force has heralded a new era in which decisions are to be taken openly , as visibly and as close to citizens as possible .
This is designed to ensure greater legitimacy , greater accountability and more efficiency of public authorities in the democratic system .
On 30 May 2001 Parliament adopted under codecision Regulation 1049 / 2001 on public access to documents of Parliament , the Council and the Commission .
The regulation required the institutions to open not later than 3 June 2002 a register to which citizens have electronic access .
I am very pleased today to be able to announce on behalf of Parliament that that register was opened to the public on 3 June 2002 on our website .
It is available at the regular web address of " europarl.eu.int / register " .
24 000 documents are already available on that site .
The uploading of Parliamentary documents for that register continues at a significant pace .
This is a crucial instrument for reinforcing our democratic principles , very much in line with fundamental rights as set down in Article 6 of the Treaty on European Union and in the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
It is fitting that our House should be at the forefront in European terms in promoting this degree of transparency .
Mr President , last week , some of us were given a demonstration of how the documents are now available .
As a former rapporteur , together with Mr Cashman , I have to say that our Administration , our services , deserve a great deal of the credit for the efficient manner in which they have now put this procedure in progress .
I hope that the teething troubles will soon be overcome .
However , sterling work has been done , and we should be able to say so once in a while .
Mr President , as co-rapporteur on the report on access to documents , I should like to echo Mrs Maij-Weggen 's words .
We have a modest beginning but we are sending the signal that transparency and accountability are the only ways in which to connect the citizen to the European project .
I should like to compliment the staff who have worked tirelessly to do this .
It is a reminder to this House that without the commitment of the staff and the services we would achieve nothing .
We now move to the order of business .
I have received a request from 34 Members to postpone every item on the agenda to our July part-session .
Mr President , as all the Members know , we are risking our health in attending this part-session , and we are risking the health of those working for us and the health of visitors to Parliament too .
This is clear from the tests which have revealed the presence of Legionella , it is clear from the fact that several Members have fallen ill , and this is an illness with very serious consequences for physical health .
Only a modicum of common sense is needed to see that we should have held this part-session in Brussels , in complete tranquillity , and if we had done so this speech would just have been a speech on the minimum safety conditions necessary for Parliament .
However , I regret to say that we are a parliament which is not free even to decide on this matter .
I call upon each and every Member to vote for the proposal to postpone all the reports to the next part-session .
This is both a problem of safety , health and hygiene for all of us and for the people who work with us , and a problem of the dignity of Parliament , which should have the right to meet when and where it wishes .
This is what we are about to vote on .
I call upon each Member , irrespective of recommendations and party lines , out of the modicum of common sense which this situation , this state of affairs , requires , in the name of that precautionary principle which we are constantly invoking in reports on health , the environment or other matters , out of respect , if not for ourselves , for the people who work with us and for the people who visit Parliament , I repeat , I call upon you to postpone all the reports to the next part-session .
Mr President , I think those of you who know me in this House , will know that I am not one to make a fuss .
But this is a big public health issue and I want to speak firstly from personal experience .
Last autumn , following the first session back after the summer , I was very ill for some four weeks , culminating in a week in hospital .
Those who looked after me told me that as far as they were concerned it was legionella .
I was in no doubt that I caught it when I came back to this Parliament after the summer recess .
A number of other colleagues have told me that they had had similar , though not such severe , symptoms .
The problem is that we all go back to our own doctors in our various home towns and therefore any links between our symptoms and this House are perhaps lost .
I feel that we have to take this extremely seriously .
It is not just our health , but the health of our staff and the many visitors in this House that is at risk .
I am told we will not have hot water .
If we do not have hot water , how can food be prepared safely and hygienically on these premises ?
I thought very carefully about coming this week .
I decided that of course I should come .
We have a democratic duty to be here and perform our duties .
But if anyone going away from this House this week , Member , staff or visitor , has symptoms , then those that run this House will be guilty of having let us come here this week and it will be their responsibility .
Mr President , this is not a question of nationality .
I would also say the same thing if we were in Brussels .
The main cause of health problems and mortality in all the Member States of the Union , in all developed countries , is iatrogenic contamination , in other words , contamination from being in hospital or from taking drugs .
This is one of the perverse effects of an over-developed society , whereby medicine that we take to make us better sometimes makes us ill .
We are all familiar with this subject .
We are not going to mention every illness we have ever suffered in another country .
I am not going to say that , having spent four days in Berlin , I fell ill , which proves that you can contract some nosocomial illness there and that you must never go to Berlin again .
So , in very simple terms , I shall ask this question .
You mentioned visitors , but the visitors have been informed .
If , like you , visitors come here , it is because they have chosen to come .
When you say , Mrs Wallis , that we have a duty to be here - I would say that we have a duty to stay .
What sort of image would we give of the European Parliament if we were so afraid that we sought to impose zero risk and create panic !
It would be dreadful and would do no credit to us at all .
Mr President , I have taken the floor for personal reasons , to apologise for interrupting you .
In actual fact , I was just trying to ask a question , namely why it is that we have not met in Brussels .
Clearly , we too realise how difficult it would be to postpone all the reports to the next part-session , although we feel that this is now the only remaining alternative .
What is outrageous is that , not even in a hazardous situation , is Parliament able to decide in which location we should meet .
I feel that this is a point which should be addressed , something which is an outrage for all of us .
There are two points here .
On the question of Brussels last week , subject to reassurances , the Conference of Presidents was prepared to proceed as normal .
Of course I hope , like everyone here , that the systems which have been duly treated respond in the manner that the engineers and scientists tell us should be the case .
I want to make sure everyone gets a copy of all the relevant attestations .
We will open a hotline within the House this week so that the services in the House can offer whatever reassurance those colleagues for whom there is a residual fear in this matter may seek .
Mr President , what you have just said has given us a lot of comfort and security .
However , it gave the impression that the guarantee was only for Members of this House .
For us the choice is to come or not ; for the staff who work here the choice is somewhat different .
I would hope that you could ensure that guarantee extends to everybody .
I take your point on the different systems working .
Nevertheless , this is such a serious issue .
It has been raised in my own group whether the trade unions - the workers ' representatives here - were consulted and informed in this important process .
The relevant trade unions sit on Parliament 's health and safety committee which agreed to the measures which have been taken to try to eradicate the problem .
Your point is well made but has already been fully anticipated and acted on .
We now come to the other proposals for changes to the agenda .
On Monday I have no proposals for change .
On Tuesday there is a proposal by the ELDR Group that the Commission communication on the Green Paper on consumer protection which is foreseen to be communicated to the House at 5.30 p.m. should be replaced by the subject nitrofen contamination of foodstuffs .
Is there a speaker in favour of that request ?
Mr President , we in Europe have , in the past few years , witnessed a number of food scandals , and the scandal involving nitrofen in Germany has once again gained considerable attention .
If we are able to discuss this matter in plenary this week , then we should do this , in my view .
When did the Commission find out about this ?
What measures has it taken and what is the position of the Commission at the moment ?
In Europe there is also the Food and Veterinary Office in Dublin that falls within the remit of the Commission .
It inspects all organic production not only in Germany but across Europe .
What has this Office achieved over the past few years ?
What have been its findings ?
I should like to discuss all of this , in view of its urgency and since it causes so much concern in Europe as a whole .
The Commission has indicated that it would be happy to address this matter .
We would also like to touch on the subject of the Green Paper on Consumer Protection .
Could we take it as an addition ?
Would that meet with the agreement of the House ?
( The House accepted this proposal )
Tuesday shall be so amended .
There is no proposal for change to Wednesday .
On Thursday , with regard to topical and urgent subjects of major importance , on human rights there is a proposal from the Liberal Group to replace sub-item " Malaysia " by a new sub-item , " Plane spotters in Greece " .
The ELDR Group has asked for a roll-call vote .
( Parliament rejected the proposal )
Still on human rights , I have received from the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance a proposal to add under subject 3 , human rights , a fifth sub-item : the abolition of the death penalty in Japan , South Korea and Taiwan .
( Parliament agreed to the proposal )
Mr President , when discussing the topical and urgent subjects of major importance , we usually vote in favour of including an item on Human Rights .
I wrote to you when you first took up your post , just as I wrote to Mrs Fontaine , to suggest that , in our work , we use the terminology that we agreed to use in the Charter and that we should speak of ' rights of the individual ' .
I am well aware that this terminology is not yet in use within in the United Nations .
We must , however , set an example and we must speak of ' rights of the individual ' , as we did in the Charter and as , I hope , we can do within the institutions of the European Union .
I would ask the services to ensure that all the linguistic versions take what you have said into account .
The phrase " human rights " in English does not have a gender specific connotation in same way as in French .
The order of business is thus established
Last week , the American Senate agreed to a proposal which would make it possible to invade the European Union using military force .
The reason for this improbable and tough provocation is the fact that the International Criminal Court will be based on European soil .
The US is prepared to remove American suspects by force .
The European Parliament has always been a staunch supporter of the International Criminal Court .
Now that the US is trying to undermine its success with draconian measures of this kind , it is important for us to stand up for this Criminal Court .
I deem it rather unlikely that the US will actually be besieging its NATO ally , the Netherlands , but the statement by the American senators is uncompromising .
It requires a rapid and sharp reaction , including from Europe .
I would therefore ask you to add this item to the transatlantic agenda and create an opportunity for this Parliament to discuss this matter with High Representative Solana .
My group will be proposing an oral question and debate for the forthcoming plenary session .
Mr President , given the threat of invasion , this is no laughing matter .
We need to address it in association with the Commission and the Council , bearing in mind that the fifteen Member States have ratified the Treaty on the International Criminal Court .
This matter therefore merits serious treatment and my group would also like to call for this matter to be discussed at the next plenary in July , together with the respective statements by the Council and the Commission .
Mr President , it is only right and proper that this item be discussed , for it is an extremely sad and serious matter , particularly as it originates from a nation that is on friendly terms with both the European Union and the Netherlands .
The suggestion , not only made as a proposal , but now also approved in the American Senate , that there is every likelihood that American military can come to the Netherlands to free people who are brought before the International Criminal Court , is an unprecedented provocation in respect of a NATO partner .
It is of the absolute essence that this matter be looked into and raised for discussion .
In addition , it is absolutely necessary to send a missive to the United States not only from the Netherlands , as a protest has already been lodged there , but also from the European Union , in order to explain to them that this is totally unacceptable and is going too far .
We must solve this as good friends and not with something like a threat of war .
Thank you , Mr President . I will not be repeating what my fellow MEPs , Mrs van der Laan and Mrs Maij-Weggen , have said .
It does , however , seem to me to be extremely important that we should not postpone Parliament 's reaction until the next part-session , for example .
I would therefore suggest to the fellow MEPs and the President that this should be added to the resolution on the Seville Summit .
It seems to me to be extremely important to broach this decision in that forum too , and , as far as I am concerned , to reject it .
I would therefore suggest to the fellow MEPs who are involved in the negotiations about this resolution to include this as part of the resolution and then to hold a regular plenary debate about this extremely serious matter at the earliest opportunity .
I think there is a high level of consensus indicated by those contributions both with regard to Seville and the suggestion of the leader of the Socialist Group .
I am sure we can act appropriately in the course of the week .
Mr President , the House may be aware that the United States have announced this afternoon the arrest of a suspect for an alleged plot to detonate a radioactive dirty bomb on United States soil .
The package of measures which were passed by this House before Christmas and immediately after Christmas on an effective European response to terrorism are still not on the statute book despite the pains that we went to deal with them quickly .
On behalf of this House , I therefore ask you to call on the Justice and Home Affairs Ministers , who are meeting on Thursday of this week , to make sure that that package goes through as quickly as possible .
I believe we owe it to our friends in the United States to ensure that Europe 's safeguards against terrorism are as good as possible , since they are clearly still facing a very serious potential threat .
Mr President , I want to raise a different matter - the subject of Zimbabwe .
I would like to first of all express my condolences to the much-afflicted people of Zimbabwe at the awful bus crash that took place near Masvingo in Zimbabwe last night , when over 30 trainee teachers were killed .
I would also like to express my concern at the rather hypocritical presence , or likely presence , of President Mugabe in Rome this week at the United Nations World Food Summit .
I say ' hypocritical ' because , of course , there are millions of people in Zimbabwe now who are suffering from food shortages and starvation , much of it as a result of the misguided land policies of President Mugabe .
But of course it is also of concern to us that we are supposed to have a travel ban on President Mugabe and his associates .
There are supposed to be sanctions against them and the fact that he can travel to conferences like this makes something of a mockery of those sanctions .
Last month he was in New York at the United Nations World Children 's Summit .
A final point : we have heard nothing about the results of the EU troika that went to southern Africa in the middle of last month .
I specifically asked the members of the troika to take certain measures and to report back to us .
Could I ask , in the light of all these points that I have raised , for the Council to make a full statement on the situation in Zimbabwe and the action that it intends to take ?
Mr Van Orden , you can draw Mr Pique I Camps ' attention to your concern about Zimbabwe when he addresses the House later this week .
The attendance of the President of Zimbabwe is consistent with rights under the UN Charter , even if appears curious .
Mr President , on a point of order , I shall respect your request not to raise the issue of the building but I wish to make two points .
I presume the presence of the bacteria was detected through a regular check-up , because this is the second time this has happened here and we were promised regular check-ups .
It is inevitable that unused buildings will become sick buildings if they are not regularly checked .
I should like to refer to Mrs Wallis ' point regarding quite a lot of anecdotal evidence about Members ' illnesses , particularly following the Strasbourg part-sessions .
It would be a very useful exercise if Members would consider reporting to the medical services any unusual illnesses that they may have contracted and which are treated at home in their Member State .
This applies also to staff , assistants , etc .
The only way we will really find out whether there is more than anecdotal evidence is to have regular reports to the medical services .
I propose , as a Quaestor , to discuss this with the medical services .
In view of those remarks , let me give the floor to Mrs Ludford , who was not allowed to speak earlier when she wished to make a point that may have been somewhat similar .
Mr President , on a point of order , as we are again discussing Legionella , my understanding of what you said earlier was that there was no guarantee that Legionella was not present .
That is an important distinction .
I should like to request that each Member of this Parliament receive a copy of the expert report .
Could we also have details of what the law is in France regarding the occupation of buildings found to have Legionella in their systems and , if possible , information on what would happen in other Member States if a building was found to have Legionella in it ?
We can then see , firstly , whether this building is being treated in the same way as other buildings would be in France and , secondly , how that compares to buildings in other Member States ?
I mentioned earlier that we will establish a Members hotline .
I take note of your questions but I would encourage colleagues that whatever questions , or comments they have , to feed them through that system .
I want to give the maximum transparency but I want to do so with the maximum account being taken the concerns of Members and what reassurances it is appropriate to give in the circumstances .
Mr President , I will certainly not have anything to say about legionella at this point .
I would like to address a question to you , one that , although it has no connection with the Guinness Book of Records , does indeed have to do with what may be the world 's longest waiver of immunity proceedings .
What is the position in the proceedings to waive the immunity of Marcello Dell 'Utri MEP ?
Last Thursday , the Spanish Supreme Court threw out an application by counsel for Mr Berlusconi and Mr Dell 'Utri for proceedings to be stayed and it authorised the Spanish judiciary to continue to proceed against the two persons named , one of them Mr Dell 'Utri , who remains a Member of this House .
Now , this attempt to waive immunity is not about bumps sustained in traffic or penalties for unauthorised parking , but serious offences such as fraud , tax evasion to the tune of millions , suspected membership of a Mafia organisation , and so on .
This action for the waiver of immunity has been gathering dust in the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights for over a year and a half .
The Spanish judicial authorities have now sorted out the issues of interest to the Spanish , and so there are no longer any reasons to leave this case in the hands of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
The following are my requests of you :
Firstly , if you have more up-to-date news of the state of play , please present it to us .
Secondly , if you do not have new information on how things stand , I would ask you to communicate with the chairman of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights in order to get this matter into plenary as quickly as possible .
We in the Socialist Group want this for two reasons : firstly , because of the circumstances involving Mr Dell 'Utri , but also because it is not acceptable that cases of such wide scope which have extended over such a long period should not be brought into plenary .
It is not only an impediment to us as Members of this House , but also prevents the Members concerned from making statements to justify themselves here in plenary and in the relevant committee .
We therefore ask you to speed matters up now , so that Parliament should not be subject to unjustified suspicions .
On the procedural question as distinct from the substantive question , my understanding is that the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market has or will be requesting additional information from the Spanish authorities - I presume in the light of what you have just said .
Let me turn to our rapporteur for the Legal Affairs Committee , Mr MacCormick .
If he is in a position to shed any light on this question , I would be happy to hear his view .
Mr President , on a point of order , the matter came before the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market earlier this year .
Against my own advice the Legal Affairs Committee held that further and clearer information was required and a letter was sent requesting such information , to which I understand no reply has yet been received .
However , about a couple of weeks ago I raised this at the coordinators ' meeting of the Legal Affairs Committee , saying that I hoped that a further inquiry might be made in order to clarify this matter one way or the other , as we ought , as speedily as we reasonably can .
Mr President , a little while ago you very vigorously wrote to Air France protesting at conditions in which people travel to this Parliament .
You received a very emollient reply from Air France assuring you that no such untoward thing would occur ever again .
I should like to report to Members of the House , who I am sure will feel an agony of sympathy for me , that today , for the second successive occasion , on turning up at Edinburgh Airport in good time for my check-in for the Air France flight from Edinburgh to Paris to catch the Strasbourg plane , I was told the plane was overbooked and I should re-route myself via Brussels in order to arrive here for 5 o 'clock .
This is a pretty poor show and I have written a letter drawing attention to this shabby state of affairs - which will , no doubt , not receive as emollient a reply as yours did .
I am sorry because I had hoped to raise a point about the agenda , which we have now adopted .
Perhaps I will have a chance tomorrow morning .
It seems that as regards the question raised by Mr Schulz the matter is in hand but perhaps we will write a note to colleagues in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market urging that due attention be given to this follow-up question .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mrs Banotti for pointing out that we have had a problem with bacteria of this sort before - two years ago , in fact - and in the days before the Friday plenary sittings were done away with .
As this topic is back on the agenda in this part-session , I find it very interesting that these same bacteria should choose this of all times to put in a reappearance .
This is not to say that I do not take this matter seriously , or that thorough checks should not be made , but I do take the view that an objective examination should be carried out rather than inflaming emotions and mixing up different issues that have nothing to do with each other .
If there really is a problem with the building , then , for God 's sake , we will just have to move into the Palais de l 'Europe across the river .
We could be accommodated there for this part-session on a provisional basis .
I really do , though , want to take a stand against the ballyhoo and hysteria with which this serious topic is being treated .
It is important to distinguish between two separate things .
How colleagues wish to react to the scientific evidence that there may be a bacterium , may be either scientific or political .
But the existence of the bacterium was established scientifically and was not itself a political act .
It is important to draw that distinction .
Mr President , this is not a point of order ; I would just like to draw attention to something .
While Parliament has been worrying about the health of its Members , 24 000 people world-wide have died of hunger today , most of them women and children .
The World Food Summit begins today in Rome and it should be noted that only 3 % of the commitments given five years ago have been fulfilled .
When will we discuss this in detail in Parliament ?
Allow me , therefore , to draw the attention of all politicians and institutions to this situation , since we have a great responsibility in this field .
Mr President , as the first Member so far to actually refer to the Rules can I raise a point of order under Rule 137 ( 1 ) which relates to explanations of vote .
I requested from the services an explanation of vote on Mr Cappato 's proposal for a suspension of the session .
I would like to know why you have not given it to me and given me the opportunity of explaining that while I agree with Mr Duhamel that the building is as safe as is reasonable , it is as stupid and expensive as always to meet here .
That is why I voted in favour of suspending the session .
You are such an expert on the Rules of Procedure that you will know that Rule 137 ( 2 ) says that explanations of vote shall not be admissible in cases of votes in procedural matters .
I know that you knew that already .
Mr President , last Monday and Tuesday , 3 and 4 June , I was pleased to take part in the work of the EU-Bulgaria Joint Parliamentary Committee .
I would like to express my concern here at the situation in the energy sector in Bulgaria .
Before the end of the year , Bulgaria and the European Union have to decide on the definitive date for closing units 3 and 4 of the Kozloduy nuclear power station .
All the representatives of the Bulgarian Parliament - both the party in power and the opposition - and of the government were unanimous in stressing that the closure of these units will , or would be extremely harmful to the Bulgarian economy .
I feel - and this is why I have taken the floor - that we must ensure that Bulgaria and the Bulgarian people do not see these negotiations as a threat to themselves or to their desire to accede to the European Union as soon as possible .

Mr President , a few days ago , port workers were savagely attacked in the port of Piraeus on the orders of the Greek Government . ? he port police , the metropolitan police and special armed forces launched a particularly ferocious attack on port workers striking for insurance rights and more humane working conditions .
A ship was ordered to continue on its way , despite the fact that the president of merchant fleet engineers was hanging on to its ramp .
Shipowners in the port were seen directing the attack by the special forces and several dozen injured people were treated as common criminals , just for defending their basic rights .
This is where policies on insurance systems , including the policy of the European Union , lead ; this is what happens when you refer to grass-roots movements as terrorism .
I should like this to be noted and for you to intervene in order to ensure that we do not witness a repeat occurrence of such ugly scenes .
Mr President , I am afraid the best has not been saved for last , as the saying goes , for I have to inform Mr Schultz - this being the world cup season - that a thundering own-goal has been scored .
In other words , he asked a question on the issue of Mr Dell 'Utri 's immunity and then answered it himself .
I remember the vote held on the matter in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market .
The committee adopted the decision to request further information from the Spanish judiciary on the case .
Now , then , it is not the European Parliament or the Committee on Legal Affairs which is holding back but the Spanish judiciary , which , in all probability , no longer knowing which way to turn , not knowing how exactly to respond to the European Parliament 's request , is playing for time .
There may , however , be another reason : if we consider that the investigation was very thorough , it would appear that the magistrate dealing with the case has realised that he has very little or no evidence with which to proceed .
What we have here , then , are delaying tactics , a delaying strategy , in which the Spanish judiciary is continuing to pad out an indefinite investigation with the intention of keeping the matter open and never resolving it .
I know you have provoked Mr Schulz into further comment but I would ask him to exercise self-restraint .
I would suggest that I send a note to the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market to seek an update and to seek reassurance that the engagement with the relevant authorities in Spain is advancing by due process .
If we can agree to do that , we would have found at least the next necessary step .
Mr President , you said the trade unions have been consulted .
I would like to know whether all workers have been consulted .
After all , we are not going to lose our jobs as MEPs if we do not turn up but some of the workers might .
Can I also have assurances that the trade unions have not been pressurised ?
I know that pressure has been put on them in the past about this building , so I would like to seek those assurances on behalf of the trade unions and the other workers .
So far as I am informed , you are expressing concerns on behalf of the trade unions which they have not yet expressed for themselves .
To the best of my information , no one has felt a coercive influence by the institution internally or externally , and no member of staff has had any indication from the institution of a threat to their employment .
The questions you pose would be valid if they were the views of the trade unions but I suppose we should let the trade unions in the first instance express their own concerns .
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A5-0008 / 2002 by Richard Corbett , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on the General Revision of the Rules of Procedure ( 2001 / 2040 ( REG ) ) ;
A5-0252 / 2000 by Richard Corbett , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on amendments to Parliament 's Rules of Procedure to ensure balanced rights between individual Members and Groups ( 1999 / 2181 ( REG ) )
A5-0306 / 2000 by Lord Inglewood , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on the amendment of the Rules of Procedure as regards provisions governing the justification of amendments ( 1999 / 2195 ( REG ) ) .
Mr President , thank you for your kind words of support which I trust apply to every proposal in the report .
I have ten minutes speaking time , I intend to take five now and five at the end of the debate so that I can reply to some of the points taken , as I am entitled to do under the Rules .
On a point of order , I interrupt the rapporteur to say that I am extremely pleased that you are the first Member to start using that procedure .
I would highly commend it to the political groups as a standard practice for all our debates .
Mr President , thank you , but I am not the first to do so .
Ms Thorning-Schmidt created the precedent not very long ago .
It is with great pleasure that I am able at last to present these two reports , the general revision of the rules and a particular report which has been waiting even longer to be put on our agenda .
I should like to comment mainly on the general amendment of the Rules of Procedure .
There are several reasons that compel us to revise our Rules and that are at the origin of this report .
One is that we are facing enlargement and we will soon be a parliament of at least 732 Members .
We must streamline our procedures and focus more on priorities if we are to function effectively as the democratic voice of the peoples of Europe .
Secondly , the Nice Treaty , although not yet ratified , implies a certain number of specific changes which , if we vote for them today , will come into force as the Treaty of Nice , or equivalent provisions , come into force .
We are not prejudicing the result of any national decision-taking procedure with regard to ratification of that Treaty .
Thirdly , there was the series of problems identified by the Bureau of Parliament in the report by Mr Provan , who is sitting just behind you ready to chair this debate , and a very appropriate chairman he will be .
All this has been drawn together in the committee 's report and it is a package of nearly 120 specific changes to our Rules of Procedure .
Over 80 of them are not controversial .
There are , however , a few that are and I will focus my comments on just a few of those .
Firstly , there is a whole package of measures to try and streamline our procedures in plenary , to try to decongest plenary , especially at voting time , but also in general .
That is the item that Members single out as being in need of reform , but it is very difficult to agree on reforms meeting with the necessary support .
We have put forward a number of suggestions that non-controversial items , i.e. items that get a majority of more than 90 % in committee , should be assumed to be non-controversial and go through plenary with a single vote - no amendments and no debate - unless there is a specific request to have a debate or to invite amendments .
The burden of proof would be that way round .
Secondly , for some own-initiative reports we should have the option of noting the report of the committee as it stands and forwarding it to the other institutions , without trying to redraft paragraph by paragraph in plenary in a drafting committee of over 600 members .
Thirdly , when he or she judges it useful , the President should be allowed to send reports which have attracted a very large number of amendments back to committee for the committee to act as a sort of filter and test which amendments have a measure of support and which do not .
Those that are supported by less than one tenth of the members in committee would not need to be put to the vote in plenary because it is clear that they have no chance of being adopted .
They will remain on paper , they will have been circulated and put on record but they need not detain the whole House with voting on them .
That , along with several other minor measures which for reasons of time I will not go into , should decongest our plenary .
We also propose to scrap the topical and urgent procedure , not the subjects of course , these would be dealt with by other existing procedures or new procedures more appropriate to those subjects .
We also suggest changing the way we have our debates .
Some Members are strongly in favour of switching to a " catch-the-eye " system as Mr Provan proposed , some strongly against .
We have come up with a compromise : we start each debate , as now , with speakers from each group , maybe one or two or even three rounds of speakers , but allowing ourselves for the possibility of finishing with a " catch-the-eye " debate .
That would enliven our proceedings .
The same people might speak again in response to what has been said and no doubt Members who have stayed in the Chamber throughout the debate will catch the eye of the President and be able to speak .
That is a reasonable and workable compromise .
It conforms to what the Conference of Presidents said , because it has the word " may " .
It could be tried out for a period and if it does not work we can abandon it .
If it does work we can continue .
I would urge those in the House who are hesitating to give it a try .
Why not try out something new ? See if it works .
Give us the chance to enliven our debates .
Mr President , I see it says seven minutes , but if you remember you interrupted me for at least two minutes at the beginning .
I will close with a short remark on my other report .
I will not go through all the items in my own report .
The other report was drafted at a time when we were facing accusations that our Rules discriminated against Members who do not belong to a political group .
Our committee made an inventory of all the places in the Rules where you could imagine that might be the case or where it clearly is the case .
We came up with possible remedies to each of those cases . Those will be put to the House .
There are some that the House will judge are not necessary and we may have been over-zealous in our work .
There are others the House will be able to approve .
It is appropriate that the groups look at this .
I know some have suddenly asked for more time .
That is curious for a report that has been ready for a year and a half and has been envisaged for some time that it be taken in conjunction with this main report of mine , the general revision .
I would regret it if it has to be referred back to committee .
If necessary then fine , but it would be better to proceed and deal with this matter , recognising that further work on this is required at other levels besides the Rules of Procedure
I will stop now to allow myself some time to reply to the debate at the end .
You have put in so much work and you have waited so long to speak to us that you can avail of the full 40 seconds available to you to reply at the end .
I am sure my interruption was at least five minutes long and I ask the president in the chair to take that into account whenever you come to reply .
Mr President , I imagine that the vast majority of Members of this House have not even noticed the Inglewood report sitting so closely in the shadow of the two Corbett reports as it does .
I must begin by congratulating Mr Corbett on the very comprehensive work that he has carried out in this wide-ranging review of the Rules .
The Inglewood report , like the second Corbett report , was prepared around two years ago because of initial internal inconsistencies in the Rules of this House , as then drafted , in respect of the justification of amendments .
At that time it was thought it would be brought forward quite quickly , and then could be amended if necessary , as part of the more wide-ranging debate about the Rules we are currently engaged in .
It did not happen .
Indeed , it disappeared over the horizon more or less completely .
I would just like to record my gratitude to the Fisheries Committee , which is not usually associated with these matters , for having , as far as I know , been the only other people involved in this Parliament , other than myself , and possibly Mr Corbett , who had appreciated it had not gone forward .
Nevertheless , what was originally intended to be a precursor to the general revision of the Rules is now seen as something running in parallel with them and , in fact , is substantively part of the overall package .

In simple terms , it is proposed that the question of whether or not amendments should be justified individually , calls for a single answer regardless of the context in which they are tabled .
Secondly , it is suggested that a strict obligation to justify every amendment in this House does not really make sense . It is recognised that an individual justification can be helpful in the context of legislative procedures .
Finally , in the interests of clarity and legal certainty , and also to avoid certain technical problems , the individual justifications of amendments should remain the responsibility of their authors and , consequently , should not be put to the vote .
I would like to commend my report to the House .
Mr President , Mr Corbett 's report is excellent and I am very glad that it has finally found its way here so we can vote on it .
Not only will it make our lives easier by shortening our voting times , more importantly , it will make what we do in this House more transparent , more comprehensible to the outside world , because votes would focus on the key issues without taking away the right of minorities to express views .
Focusing on the issue of urgencies and the changes proposed by Mr Corbett , I know some Members are concerned at how human rights and topical and urgent items will be dealt with if the present procedure is abolished .
What is proposed gives us a much better option .
For human rights , the relevant committee - the Committee on Foreign Affairs - would bring forward a resolution on human rights .
That means that human rights would be dealt with in exactly the same way as any other important issue in this House , in committee , in a considered manner , rather than rushed through on a Thursday afternoon in Strasbourg when very few Members are here .
I hope that we in this House will support this very important proposal and work better on human rights .
I have been an MEP for four years and since I have been here there have been constant complaints that there are too many votes , we do not know what we are voting for , there are hundreds of amendments in plenary .
If we want to change that , we have to vote on this report and vote for change .
Unless we do , there will be no change , we will be back to the status quo and the complaints will continue .
Please support the Corbett report .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate Mr Corbett warmly on something which I am tempted to refer to as a magnus opus , as well as Mr Inglewood on his contribution to the same .
These reports seem to codify nearly everything we have recently experienced in Parliament .
They also contribute to the development of the European constitution .
I believe that in this respect , we should not underestimate the importance of this matter as a whole .
The Committee on Budgets has tabled fifteen amendments , not to this report , of course , but to the issue underlying this report .
Ultimately , this is about one thing and one thing only : this Parliament mainly has a traditional power , namely a budgetary power .
We , together with the Council , make up the budgetary authority .
It strikes me time and again that many people do not always realise this .
On occasions , they ask the Commission questions about issues on which we ourselves have to decide .
This decision-making power also brings with it a certain responsibility which is expressed in two ways .
Firstly , in the work of the committee itself , of course , but secondly , in the cooperation with the other committees .
An important part of these amendments are about this cooperation with other committees .
They aim to let this cooperation run as smoothly , efficiently and even-handedly as possible .
Secondly , this , in turn , means that everyone who asks a question or makes a decision , must try to produce a financial memorandum , so that they have an insight into the financial side and can thus give substance to our extremely important competence in the field of finances .
A competence which we hope will be extended to include areas where it does not exist .
Mr President , I would like to start by congratulating both rapporteurs on this debate and on these reports .
Speaking on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , I would like to say that fourteen committees submitted opinions , so just reading all that and sorting through it was a great labour , Mr Corbett .
Many congratulations on your achievement .
For our part , we in the Committee on Budgetary Control worked on two issues .
One has to do with the Court of Auditors , and you have taken it on board in its entirety , notably the appointment of the Court 's members as carried out by us in the committee and in plenary , which has been customary ever since Mr Lamassoure and Mr Bourlanges produced their reports in 1992 and 1995 respectively .

For the sake of the rules ' clarity , that now has to be firmly established .
The second issue has to do with OLAF , and gave rise to much controversy as to how members should be treated by OLAF or should act in regard to it .
At the time , we in the Committee on Budgetary Control had delivered an opinion on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , which , however , found its way into plenary by another route .
Our opinion was thus dropped at the time .
This then resulted in a complaint .
I think that now the time has come when we can consistently and properly put members in such a position as regards how they deal with OLAF and act in relation to it , that they are not lumped together with the administration .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats has now tabled an amendment on this , and I wish to support it .
In the final analysis , it covers the amendment by the Committee on Budgetary Control which you have been unable to deal with in your report .
I would be happy if we could vote for it , and then we would no longer need the complaint and the appeal .
Mr President , first of all I too would like to congratulate the rapporteur on the excellent work that he has done , especially in watering down his initial proposals in order to achieve consensus , something that always creates momentum for reform in this House .
That is exactly what we need , a momentum behind the reform so that we achieve it rather than just talking about it .
I hope that the entire House will support the compromise amendments that he has agreed with various groups within the House .
Of course , the amendments the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms placed before the committee responsible did not receive universal support .
Nonetheless we were dealing with the Member States ' possibility of making legislative proposals under Article 67 of the EC Treaty and the developments and gaps in that practice .
We are similarly looking at the category of amendments that relate to responsibility of the committee in relation to the respect for fundamental rights in the EU .
Although , as I said , our opinion was not carried in its entirety , I nonetheless will support and will urge others to support , the rapporteur .
Let me add a note of caution , this revision does not refer to the interinstitutional agreement on confidential information and sensitive documents , known as the Brok Agreement , which is still under negotiation with the Council .
I must urge the House to think very carefully before accepting the so-called Brok Framework Agreement , because it puts Parliament at a great disadvantage compared to any of the other institutions .
It actually gives ordinary members of the public a greater right of access to sensitive documents in that any request must be duly considered .
Under these proposals , Parliament is in an imbalanced situation in that we have no right to initiate access to confidential documents .
With those caveats and those warnings , I urge the House to totally support the rapporteur 's proposals .
Mr President , following the Maastricht Treaty , I was joint rapporteur on the adjustments to the Rules of Procedure that became necessary .
I know just how laborious that is , and so my thanks and congratulations to Mr Corbett are all the more heartfelt .
Let me make a general comment before I deal with three points raised by the Committee on Legal Affairs .
The objective of strengthening plenary and having the great political debates carried on here is a good one , but if you want to do that , you have to give the committees greater responsibility .
That is possible only if you raise the hurdles on the route from committee to plenary .
That is absolutely imperative .
What Mr Corbett and the committee are proposing is going in the right direction .
Perhaps we will have to go a little further in the future .
There were , and are , three points of importance to the Committee on Legal Affairs . The first is legislative initiatives .
Outside , we call for Parliament to have the right to initiate legislation , a right which we have only in a very limited form .
The obstacles put in our way by Parliament itself are quite appalling .
To take just one example , an initiative by me on discrimination in legal aid was stuck in the Conference of Committee Chairmen for many , many months .
These are the obstacles you have to demolish .
The second point has to do with the votes to confirm the President of the Commission and the Commission as a whole .
Here , the procedures in the Member States are utterly different .
In Parliament 's present position , I consider a secret ballot rather than a roll call to be , in both instances , a very important safeguard for Parliament .
As a final point , I concur with what has been said about OLAF .
A large number in my group will give it their support .
Mr President , I wish to begin by congratulating Mr Corbett on the quality of his report .
In this report on the general revision of the Rules of Procedure , the rapporteur puts forward proposals that would enable us to simplify procedures and to focus parliamentary work on legislation and on topical and important political debates .
In the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , I highlighted some issues that seek , in some way , to optimise the performance of this institution .
These issues are : with regard to Question Time , the President of the sitting should have the option of referring questions for Question Time to the committee responsible , which would have the advantage of freeing up time in plenary for debates .
It is also important that , under the open method of coordination , the European Parliament should not run the risk of being excluded from the debate on issues of the utmost importance . Hence , the proposal that I put forward in my opinion seeks to refer the decision on the process to be followed to the committee responsible , which may then propose that a report be drawn up .
Another aspect that should not be overlooked - although it has been - is that the committee responsible may decide , in the light of reports and annual reports of the Council and the Commission , to request individual members of the Council to appear before the committee to answer questions .
The purpose of this would be , once again , to increase the European Parliament 's influence under the open method of coordination , thereby making it more effective .
Finally , I should like to highlight the close relationship that exists between lifelong learning and the issues that fall within the remit of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , which would make it logical to include this matter amongst the competences of that parliamentary committee .
Mr President , I would have liked a bit more time to prepare my speech , but that means I will certainly keep to the speaking time .
Parliament must become the Centre Court of European debate .
That is our ambition , but on its own it is of course not enough for us to want it ; we also have to adapt our ways of operating accordingly .
That , I think , is at the heart of the report that the Committee on Constitutional Affairs has adopted .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats strongly supports this objective .
We wish to thank Mr Corbett most warmly for the multitude of ideas he has elaborated here , which will carry us further forward .
We wish to thank him for his meticulous work on highly complex legal material .
We also wish to thank him for his exemplary cooperation and frankness , which have been a hallmark of this consultation process , which has gone on for a year and a half already .
We want our work to become more political , for us to concentrate on the essentials , and we also want to organise it in a more responsible way .
We want the current affairs debate , which is soon to be introduced , to make us more political .
It is quite extraordinary that we have to make use of instrumental crowbars in order to get a current issue into this honourable House .
We have to demand statements by the Commission or the Council in order to be able to express ourselves on the burning political issues of the day .
One consequence of that is that the spectacle the European summits provide continues to get more attention than the decisions reached in this Parliament of ours .
We need changes to our Rules of Procedure in order to achieve better balance in this respect .
We also want to work in a more concentrated way .
We need to do without time-consuming routine resolutions , even though many Members have become attached to them .
We need a simplified procedure for uncontroversial reports in order to be able to concentrate on our legislative work .
We in this House are all aware that by now some 80 % of European legislation needs Parliament 's consent , but I doubt whether more than half of our time in plenary session is spent on legislative work .
We should also do something about working in a somewhat more responsible manner once our decisions have acquired legal effect and become something more than just demands and resolutions .
That is why the proposal is rightly made to give the Committee on Budgets and the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market greater responsibility for compatibility with the Budget and with the law .
There is no point in us making demands that cannot come to anything due to financial considerations or the absence of any basis in law .
At the same time , though , we want to safeguard the rights of individual MEPs and those of the groups .
It goes without saying that Members of this Parliament must have the right to speak here in their mother tongue , and that the groups must be entitled to put motions , but the prospect of eastward enlargement and the need to prevent this House being fragmented requires us to tighten up somewhat the conditions for the formation of groups .
If I may mention my personal view , individual arrangements for bringing texts into plenary without them being discussed in committee have to be restricted , in order to enable them to be better prepared , and we have to limit them to really urgent cases .
I say this with particular reference to the matters for urgent debate , which have recently developed into a procedure in which a relatively small number of Members are able to pass Parliamentary resolutions at a point when most of us are already on our way home .
The procedure has to guarantee that as many Members as are able attend the group and committee discussions .
Exceptions should be permitted only in cases of real urgency .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats supports changes in this House that improve the way we work , making us more political , more visible and the European Union more democratic .
Mr President , I am especially delighted that I can comment on the important Corbett report concerning a more political and more exciting Parliament that also appeals to the press and the people .
A real parliament , in other words .
Needless to say , we as Parliament still too often lack powers .
In defence , migration , agriculture and in other areas too , and this is what the fight in the Convention about the future of Europe is about .
At the moment , the European Commission and Council are often too technocratic in this respect too .
They drag us down into detail and thus conceal the real political choices .
These are subsequently brought to us in an ambiguous format which , in turn , has a negative bearing on their appeal to the citizen .
Perhaps we as Parliament should be given a temporary foot and mouth inquiry committee , modelled on the BSE inquiry committee .
These are ways in which we can turn into a tiger rather than a toothless lamb .
Every parliamentary committee can already develop activities in order to become more powerful , and we actually want to gain a more solid position as Parliament , much like the American Congress and the Senate .
Today , we are , in fact , tackling a component , an important component in which tradition , technocracy and - unfortunately - conservatism have hampered us too much in order to become a more political and more interesting parliament .
Nowadays , we often have a list , sometimes in the form of insulting one-minute statements , which make a mockery of the parliamentary debates .
The most insulting of all must be that the Commission and the Council sometimes take up three times as much speaking time as all the group leaders combined .
I would ask the Commission and the Council at this stage to adopt more stringent restrictions of their own volition .
Subsequently , we ourselves must limit the number of speakers on behalf of the group .
We must liven up the debate here and there by using the catch-the-eye principle .
This principle should not be used for empty talk , but exactly allow those who have already spoken to take the floor again , so that a true dialogue can take place .
I should now like to turn to the point of urgent debates .
I have the honour of coordinating the urgent resolutions on behalf of the PSE Group .
This is often a disgrace in my view .
The groundwork is far too cursory and judgment is passed on all manner of things without the specialist committees being involved .
I recognise that human rights can warrant a resolution and be of value to a government or country involved .
These , however , should be prepared thoroughly and be closely monitored , even following adoption , and be given a sound follow-up .
My group supports the idea of the human rights / NGO community and in this respect , has asked Pat Cox and yourselves to set up a parliamentary committee with a wide remit , much like the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities , at the earliest opportunity .
In that case , the urgent debates can be abolished and we will gain a far better and more credible perspective .
I am interested to hear the reactions to this .
Mr Corbett has done a considerable amount of work and made compromises in order to reach a common position .
With this , Parliament has searched its own conscience .
We as Parliament , would , pending the forthcoming enlargement by 10 to 12 new Member States , ask for frequent reforms of all European institutions , including the Council and the Commission . This is also required as a matter of urgency .
However , we should not at the same time be frightened about carrying out reforms that are desperately needed ourselves .
We should admit that the previous reforms of the European Parliament have achieved precious little .
They can be summed up as much ado about nothing .
This is because individual interests , interests of smaller groups , one-sided interests and ever tighter legislation , time and again , result in voting on hundreds of amendments , split votes and roll-call votes .
Mr Corbett has made a valiant effort in all these areas and has sought to compromise .
However , the self-same interests are threatening to undermine the whole show again .
I call on all fellow MEPs to serve the total interest of our Parliament 's democratic politics and not to remain focused on one-sided interests .
Indeed , by voting on the Corbett report with a majority , we should demonstrate that we are up to the task , and the fruits should be a little more significant this time .
Parliament should have the courage to shrug off its past .
Mr President , every parliament needs a Richard Corbett - a man whose knowledge of and commitment to the Rules of Procedure is beyond compare and , although my expertise is less than his , I fully share with Mr Corbett the belief that good rules make for sound democracy .
The reform package that we have before us is not revolutionary , but it amounts to a sensible and incremental change which will contribute towards making this Parliament far more mature , efficient and transparent .
I trust that the conservatism that is sometimes displayed by representatives of the PPE and PSE Groups on this question will not , at this late stage , hinder the drive towards reform .
That would be an incredibly poor signal to send out to the Convention and would seriously weaken the standing of our parliamentary delegation .
The Liberal Group puts great stress on trying to make plenary sessions livelier .
That is why we propose an amendment to make the " catch-the-eye " procedure mandatory rather than voluntary , along with another amendment to ensure that it is practical to interrupt speakers without penalising their speaking time .
We need more drama in this place , more critical exchanges and a better balance between the necessary privileges of the party groups and the rights of individual members to express themselves .
Mr President , I would like to say to Mr Duff that I am one of those conservative people , although I belong to neither the Group of the Party of European Socialists nor the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats .
My group was quick to express great doubts about the need for revision of the Rules of Procedure which goes beyond the reforms necessary after Nice , and we raised sincere objections to the method which has changed this report from a report introducing minor changes to a report based on Mr Corbett 's creativity more than a genuine need .
Indeed , I would remind you by way of context that very many of the reforms which he himself , moreoever , has introduced in past years have not been implemented , notably the legislation on the Commission 's powers .
Mindful of this , we have worked quickly to avoid any of his main proposals subsequently being adopted by the House .
We will see what happens tomorrow .
Indeed , I defy anybody , Mr President , to predict what will happen during the vote tomorrow as things stand , for these reforms are , as I said , extremely wide-ranging and incoherent .
I would like to raise two very brief points if I may , Mr President .
First of all , we objected strongly to the idea of a quantitative rather than a qualitative approach , deciding what to deal with in plenary and what to refer back to committee purely on the basis of the number of amendments or the number of votes cast for and against .
The truth of the matter , as things stand in Parliament , is that all those lengthy , tedious voting sessions are essentially the result of poor preparation in committee .
The committees that do their work properly are those which are able , under the current system , to keep voting time to a minimum and to put just a few genuinely important points to the vote in plenary ; those which do not succeed in doing this are precisely those committees which cause us to waste time .
Furthermore , we are extremely sceptical as regards the option of referring reports back to committee , of letting the committees make the decisions in the cases stipulated by the Corbett report .
We are concerned for the simple reason that Parliamentary committees do not always reflect the views of the majority of Parliament , and we would be in very great danger of ending up with conflicting resolutions with conflicting content .
I would like to have said a lot more but my time is running out .
I would , in any case , like to thank Mr Corbett for his work - despite the fact that he has not listened to most of my speech !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , before I consider a number of the proposals to amend our Rules of Procedure which my group does not go along with , I really must express my sincere thanks to our rapporteur Mr Corbett for the immense amount of work he has done .
We have been discussing for over a year now how our work in Parliament can be made more efficient and more lively .
The commitment Mr Corbett has shown , both in committee and together with other Members of this House , to bringing about changes in this area is indeed admirable .
It is proposed in the report that Rule 50 of the Rules of Procedure should be amended by the abolition of debates on topical and urgent subjects and the insertion of new rules introducing such things as a special debate on highly topical events , especially of a political nature .
Such a special debate would be decided on at the beginning of each part-session on Monday afternoon .
Although there is much to be said for this proposal , my group would prefer us to stick with the present rule .
Why is this so ?
The main argument against the innovation is that the special debate would not result in anything .
It is not , in our view , acceptable to do without a vote in plenary on the issue in question , above all because our debates on matters of topical and urgent importance have hitherto seen us pass resolutions which express positions especially on human rights violations , which give significant support and encouragement to many who campaign for democracy and human rights in the countries in question .
No , my group does not want us to let this important political tool fall from our hands .
Procedural matters are not just binding rules for our work together , but also have to do with power .
This makes it all too understandable that small groups subject every paragraph to the minutest examination under the magnifying glass .
The Rules of Procedure must ensure that groups are treated equally and must not limit small groups ' parliamentary opportunities .
I take these premises as my starting point in rejecting , on behalf of my group , the report 's proposed amendment to Rule 110 of the Rules of Procedure , which amendment provides that , in future , groups will not be able to introduce amendments into plenary on their own ; only two groups acting jointly , or 32 Members , will be able to do so .
This proposal has two snags .
One is that it is not evident why 32 MEPs should have more rights than a political group .
The other is that we consider it to be a group 's legitimate parliamentary right to table amendments to be voted on in plenary .
It goes without saying that amendments express the groups ' political will .
As for the argument presented by Mr van den Berg , that small groups ' amendments have no chance anyway and that they get in the way of voting , I do not believe that that holds water .
In committee , I moved that the Rules of Procedure should be framed in gender-neutral language , and Mr Corbett agreed with this .
That had not been done the last time , for some reason or other .
I hope that something can now be done about this in cooperation with the services .
Mr President , all MEPs are entitled to be treated equally , whether they are part of a large political group or are here as sole representatives of a group of electors .
Our task is to ensure equality among elected representatives and a situation in which we all have the same opportunities to be active in Parliament .
The political groups constitute a practical arrangement for giving MEPs the opportunity to work in conjunction with more or less like-minded people .
A political group cannot have special rights to which MEPs outside the groups do not also have access .
Otherwise , we should not be equal under the law .
The principle of equality applies everywhere in the EU , including in this Parliament .
I am pleased that this was expressly stated by the Court of Justice in the grounds of the judgment whereby the Technical Group was disbanded because it expressly stated that it did not want to be a political group .
The judgment requires Parliament to go through the various arrangements for MEPs and ensure that no discrimination takes place against those MEPs who do not form part of a group .
By implying in its judgment that MEPs who are nonetheless discriminated against are welcome to initiate new legal proceedings , the Court is doubtless concerned to ensure that the principle of equality is observed to the full .
The Corbett report is not a response to the Court 's judgment .
It contains a long list of proposals designed to strengthen the groups , and it will also make it more difficult to form new political groups .
In future , at least 16 MEPs from a fifth of the Member States will be needed to form a group .
That is the compromise forced through by the large groups .
I have doubts about both the wisdom and the legality of this restriction , which might lead to the regionalists still perhaps being without their own group and to the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance perhaps having no group following the next elections .
Whether one agrees or disagrees with the regionalists , they nonetheless have a common programme and are part of a common , supranational federation of parties in the form of the European Free Alliance .
There are not enough of them to form their own group , but should they not be entitled to act as an independent political entity if they wish to do so ?
The Greens were also such an entity before there were enough of them to form a political group .
Are we to lose a green group in Parliament because the Greens do not have sufficient support in an enlarged EU or because , following an election in Germany , they are perhaps back in a situation in which they have less than the minimum percentage of the votes which , undemocratically , is required of them if they are to be represented in Parliament .
Alternatively , take the Italian radicals who , with their international radical party , are registered with the UN and who have a Belgian representative on their list .
Can the seven Italian radicals be deprived of their equal political status with other groupings ?
I think we are obliged to ensure that all those who cannot form an independent political group are able to have their proportionate rights recognised in the Rules of Procedure and by means of practical and pragmatic arrangements which guarantee genuine equal status .
If a political group is entitled to have proposals placed on the agenda on every occasion , that same entitlement could be given to smaller groupings in turn .
If a political group is entitled to table an endless number of proposals , MEPs outside the groups should be allowed , at least once in a while , to table a proposal and have it debated and put to the vote .
If a political group is entitled to a certain budget and number of staff , MEPs outside the groups should be guaranteed their proportionate share of such a budget and number of staff .
A democracy is to be recognised by the way in which it treats its minorities .
We are not fair to our minorities at present .
We should give them the same rights enjoyed by those of us who have been fortunate enough to have a sufficient number of MEPs to form political groups .
Why not give MEPs outside the groups the right to form a technical group so that they themselves are able to administer a mutual distribution of the rights due to a group .
What we need is Corbett 2 , giving individual MEPs their full rights .
Mr President , the Corbett report on the revision of the European Parliament 's Rules of Procedure introduces some technical improvements , but it follows three general political guidelines that we do not support .
First of all , the report seeks to give new powers to the European Parliament that the Treaty does not confer on it ; this is particularly the case in draft Amendments Nos 14 , 29 , 33 , 45 , 48 , 49 , 52 , 53 and 56 .
In Amendment No 56 for example , the European Parliament takes upon itself the right to call on the Council to implement Article 7 of the TEU on possible breaches of human rights .
Yet , as you know , and as the European Court of Justice has already reiterated , the European Parliament cannot proceed in this manner , as it is not an assembly with full sovereign powers .
Parliament only possesses the powers that are specifically conferred on it by the Treaty .
The second guideline we do not support is that , in order to enter into force , many of the draft amendments assume that the Treaty of Nice will be ratified .
Whether or not it will be ratified remains open to question .
This is illustrated , for example , by draft Amendments Nos 8 , 9 , 41 and 58 . Of course , you will say to me that if the Treaty of Nice is not subsequently ratified , these amendments will not enter into force and there will be no legal problems .
I feel , however , that there is a problem of political behaviour : our prior approval of these amendments would be a clear dismissal of the views of the Irish people .
Lastly , the third unacceptable guideline is that the report reveals a certain inclination on the part of Parliament to silence minority groups , something that Mr Corbett kindly described earlier as ' simplifying procedures ' .
This regrettable inclination can be seen in particular in draft Amendments Nos 6 , 59 , 63 , 68 , 74 , 85 and 101 .
Draft Amendment No 59 , in particular , makes it more difficult for minority groups to table amendments to a text in plenary if they have not gained more than 10 % of the votes in committee .
And everything is in keeping with this .
It is obvious , Mr President , this report , in our opinion , is not fit to be adopted .
Mr President , the first thing I want to specify is that I shall be referring in particular to the second of the Corbett reports , in other words , the Corbett report on balanced rights between individual Members and groups .
This , however , is no reason not to thank him for the huge amount of work he has done on the general report and reiterate the comments made earlier by my Group Coordinator , Mr Wuemerling .
As time is short , I would like to specify that the second Corbett report discusses the fact that Parliament will continue to operate on the basis of political groups , or , where appropriate , these political groups will be supplemented by purely functional parliamentary groups composed of Non-attached Members .
The position of the Group of the European People 's Party has been extremely clear from the start .
We would like a parliament composed of political groups , which were the embryos that became the European political parties and will continue to be their driving force .
The European Parliament is not a technical body , but rather a political assembly in which political decisions are taken , and the citizens have the right to know the political positions of the people making those decisions .
Choosing political groups over technical groups is the most transparent option .
This does not mean reducing the rights of Members who do not want to join a group due to their political affinities .
Individual MEPs , whether or not they are part of a group , have the same rights as Members .
It would be something else altogether to give groups special rights which will not , of course , be granted to those who are not part of the existing groups , but the difference between the rights of a group and the rights of a Member must be made very clear .

The Corbett report has two objectives : first , to clarify that when MEPs decide to form a group , Parliament accepts their political affinity as a given , unless it is expressly denied ; secondly , to increase the participation of Non-attached Members in the Conference of Presidents and the preparatory meetings .
It thereby reinforces the rights of Non-attached Members without needing to introduce an artificial mixed group that would be a group only in name .
I am therefore calling for the Corbett report to be adopted , with the exception of the second point of the Resolution , which refers to the Sessional Service , as I do not think it fair to impose a responsibility on this Service that , in any case , should be that of the political groups .
Mr President , Mrs Frassoni has asked what it is we are about here today and what kind of problem we are trying to solve .
Why fix something that is not broken ?
I have to disagree with you on that point , Mrs Frassoni .
There is in fact something dysfunctional here in Parliament , and it is the process of debate which , for far too long , has been far too predictable and therefore quite boring as well .
MEPs enter in turn and read out their two-minute speeches , and the result is Parliament in which there is in actual fact no proper lively debate .
We do not give people the opportunity to see a parliament in which there is a real conflict of opinions , and that is of course a pity , for we do in fact have a parliament in which , in the committees , we have quite lively and spontaneous debates .
People just do not get to see that , however .
The Corbett report tries to create a basis for a more lively debate and , clearly , it is very negative to object to this ' catch-the-eye ' procedure .
One thing is certain , however , and that is that , if we ourselves do not try to do something , nothing will happen .
I therefore think that we need to put the lid on this tendency simply to continue in our old ways .
It is also excellent that we are now being given the opportunity to distinguish between what is important or controversial and what is not controversial .
That too will result in people 's being presented with a livelier Parliament .
I should like to conclude by saying a couple of words about the amendments tabled by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
With the Treaty of Amsterdam , we arranged , as you know , for a new procedure - the open coordination method , beginning with employment policy - to be introduced .
What those of us in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs proposed was simply that Parliament 's role should be established in the light of this method .
The result would be more openness and more focus on this procedure .
It would also mean more democratic control in the framework of the open coordination method . It is therefore very annoying that this knowledge or insight has not made much of an impression upon the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , which has not appreciated that it was important in this area too , which is quite new and of great relevance to the EU , to try to make democratic progress .
I would thank Mr Corbett for an outstanding report .
Mr President , the European Parliament is one of the most open parliaments in the world .
The Chamber is often packed , even though more people often attend the committee meetings .
The voting and the preparatory work can be followed on the Internet , and hundreds of thousands of visitors to the locations in Strasbourg and Brussels get a sense of how the work proceeds .
On quite a few occasions , I have seen sceptical seventeen year-olds put the headphones on and be fascinated by the fact that it is in actual fact possible to conduct a debate in different languages .
There is a change in attitude on the part of these seventeen year-olds .
I believe it would be good for the legitimacy of the EU if all school pupils were to have the opportunity to visit us .
We should be proud of this openness , even if there is room for a number of improvements , which are also under way .
Once people have ceased to be fascinated by Parliament 's openness , it is not however always easy to understand how we work .
The voting goes on forever , with sometimes hundreds of amendments .
Instead of a vigorous debate in the Chamber , with quick responses and opposition , we have a series of long monologues in which we read out our papers written in advance , as I am doing today .
Sometimes , the Chamber is all but empty , in spite of the fact that interesting issues are being debated .
That is partly due to the fact that we speak different languages .
We can , however , do more to reform the work of Parliament .
Our president is helping with this by ensuring that we table political proposals and , with Mr Corbett 's report , we are taking quite a few very significant steps forward .

As my colleague , Mr Duff , said , the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party supports Mr Corbett 's work and his efforts to simplify and tighten up the procedures and make them more focused .
These are very important changes , and I hope they may be accompanied by a desire to be more alert in making use of the Rules of Procedure than we have been previously .
On certain issues , there is of course great creativity when it comes to using the Rules of Procedure .
We should like to take still further steps with a view to obtaining more lively debates and disposing of more issues that come before the European Parliament .
Proposals were tabled earlier for creating a type of technical committee .
Perhaps we can return to that subject at a later stage .
Nor are we completely satisfied with the proposal for dealing with urgent cases , and we have therefore proposed a compromise in order to highlight these issues .
As Mrs Kaufmann indicated , we are carrying out important work on human rights which has resonance far beyond the walls of this Chamber .
We shall certainly have the opportunity to make new changes and to take a step further , especially following enlargement when , presumably , both the Chamber and the political groups will be more heterogeneous than before .
It is therefore a question of finding a balance between efficiency and democracy .
The greatest changes required if the European Parliament is to operate entirely democratically , responsibly and satisfactorily depend upon treaty changes , and we are unable to do much on that score in the present situation .
It is a question of introducing the right of co-decision on a greater number of issues , of getting rid of the peculiar way of dividing up the budget and of dealing with the matter of travel between Strasbourg and Brussels .
These are issues we can perhaps solve in the Convention .
For the time being , Mr Corbett 's work is a major step forward for us , and I really wish to congratulate him on this .
Mr President , despite a few positive points , this motion to amend the Rules of Procedure basically represents yet another restriction on Members ' rights and powers of speech .
In essence , whatever the rapporteur and numerous other Members may claim , what we have here is an attempt to gag any opposition , especially to the ways and means chosen in the corridors of power of the European Union .
An attempt to boost the bipartite model and marginalise everyone else , especially the political thorns in Parliament 's side .
Members have already lost the right to table individual amendments , motions and proposals to plenary .
Now there is a motion to abolish the urgent and topical procedure , to make it even harder to set up political groups , to extend the system of voting on reports without debate in plenary , to prevent small groups from tabling amendments which garner less than 10 % of the vote in committee and to prevent groups from tabling amendments which ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , I do not know whether Mr Corbett has been inspired by the great jurists of the European Parliament or whether he has carried out a detailed analysis of the regulations in force in most of our parliaments ; what I do know for certain is that he must have read Orwell 's ' Animal Farm ' and the plays by Ionesco which are described , appropriately , as the ' Theatre of the Absurd ' .
His task was to simplify Parliament 's work and make it more transparent , not least in order to make it easier for public opinion , for the general public to understand .
And the result ? Mr Corbett is seeking to abolish topical and urgent debates , which are one of Parliament 's most effective ways of expressing itself and making its voice heard throughout the world .
As regards the procedures , the Corbett report introduces casuistry worthy of the Sacred Roman Rota in the best Jesuit tradition - no offence to the Jesuits .
Thus , an amendment tabled in plenary may not ever reach plenary session , a report intended for plenary may not ever reach it either , and the procedures laid down for each report are in danger of being distorted with each successive committee meeting , as the previous speakers have said , on the basis of majorities which may or may not change .
With regard to all this , the idea seems to be , Mr President - to misquote George Orwell - that all groups are equal but some groups are more equal than others , and , in any case , the individual Members do not count for anything .
That is why , Mr President , with regard to the general revision of the Rules of Procedure , through which Mr Corbett is seeking , not least , to introduce the concept of a form of ongoing dialogue on reform , the Italian radicals call for the majority of Mr Corbett 's proposals to be rejected on Wednesday .

As regards the other Corbett report , Mr President , we have been waiting and calling for two years for this House to get round to adopting a position on the treatment reserved by our Rules of Procedure for the Non-attached Members .
The seven Members of the Bonino List , the seven radical Members , for instance , elected by over two and a half million Italian citizens , have not been able to table even a single amendment to the Corbett report purely on our own behalf , such that we have had to ask two group chairman to grant us the favour of - symbolically - allowing us to table symbolic amendments together with them - and I would like to thank them for this .
I am saying this to illustrate the fact that , as individual Members , we have not been able to table even a single amendment on the report which will decide our fate in Parliament .
Following the judgment of the Court of First Instance which disbanded the Technical Group of Independent Members , nine discriminatory conditions were imposed .
We see the Corbett report - the second report , I mean - as a hesitant step towards resolving matters and , naturally , in this regard , we feel that the best solution would be to set up a mixed group .
Thanks to the kindness of one of the groups , we have been able to table an amendment to this effect which we hope the House will adopt .
We feel that it would be an initial step towards better definition of the necessary balance of relationships between the individual rights of the Members of the European Parliament and respect for national political balances and for the groups in this House .

Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Corbett and Lord Inglewood - whose work has not passed completely unnoticed - for the time and effort they have put into what is certainly not a straightforward report , a report which is based on the question of whether the quality of our work as Members of the European Parliament needs to be improved , whether we need more transparent and effective procedures and whether we need to organise our work according to specific rhythms and requirements .
I feel that this evening 's debate confirms the need for us to change the way we work in the European Parliament .
A full spectrum of positions have been expressed on Mr Corbett 's report , from opposition to support , veiled criticism and open criticism .
This evening 's debate confirms this .
Our political family - and this is the first time I have been in this situation - is going to hold a last , lengthy debate tomorrow to decide our final position on the voting list .
I would , however , like to focus on the method .
The Rules of Procedure are a secondary rather than a primary point of reference .
Therefore , we are currently witnessing a period of great change in our institutional architecture .
We have two years to decide whether we have made the right changes to our Rules of Procedure or whether further changes need to be made . At the end of the Convention 's work , we will certainly have to compare our work on the Rules of Procedure with the decisions taken on the legislative procedures .
We must therefore have confidence , above all in ourselves , and decide to experiment with new ways of doing things .
In conclusion , I have to say that , apart from the issue of topical and urgent debates , I do feel that there are problems , and the Corbett report certainly proposes a number of solutions .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would also like to praise the work of Mr Corbett , who is our expert on the Rules of Procedure and it is right that we should place our trust in him .
His aim is to improve how Parliament works , to couple efficiency with democracy .
Mr Corbett is today proposing that we anticipate the ratification of the Treaty of Nice .
No one , in my view , can criticise us for doing so , since , realistically speaking , the provisions that Mr Corbett is proposing should enter into force at the same time as the Treaty .
This solution seems to be reasonable .

I also imagine that we will be needing Mr Corbett again in the future because , as Mr Fiori said , it seems that , in the light of the European Union 's agenda , whether this tackles the Convention or enlargement , the Rules of Procedure will again have to be amended in several respects .
I shall only discuss two aspects , namely the monitoring of subsidiarity and comitology .
The results of the Convention in these areas will obviously need to be included in a new set of rules .
I should like to draw your attention to various points made in the Corbett report .
First of all , it discusses taking into account the nature of a convention , how to appoint its members and how to establish its mandate .
I think that this shows how our Rules of Procedure can be adapted , which is something that I welcome .
Next , the report puts across the idea that the European Parliament must involve the national parliaments in drawing up the broad political and economic guidelines .
This is an essential element which we approve through the Rules of Procedure , and I welcome this .
Lastly , like my fellow Member , Mrs Kauffmann , I would also like to draw the attention of our rapporteur to the issue of gender neutrality .
I already touched upon this issue in plenary earlier and , in the context of the report , I would like to reiterate what I said .
From now on , we must speak of ' the rights of the individual ' , and whilst quickly leafing through Mr Corbett 's report , I unfortunately noticed that , despite vigilant efforts on both sides , some mistakes have still slipped through the net .
For example , the French version of Amendment No 51 in Article 104 ( a ) still speaks of the ' droits de l 'homme ' ( literally , ' rights of man ' ) .
Mr President , I believe the rapporteur when he says that he has carefully searched the Rules of Procedure for any discrimination that could break the internal balance between individual Members and groups .
The question of political violence in the Basque country has been raised many times in this House but never has there been a debate on it .
Last Saturday thousands of people marched quietly through the streets of Bilbao denouncing the continuing practice of torture within the Spanish police headquarters .
Everybody will agree that political violence should be overcome by political means but could the rapporteur tell me how I , as an individual Member , can put this internal European Union question on to the agenda of this House to tackle this urgent and important issue ?
I agree with Mr Gil-Robles Gil-Delgado when he spoke about the political character ?
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , I also take the view that a series of thoroughly sensible amendments has been proposed here , but I believe that Mr Corbett has , in a number of respects , thrown the baby out with the bathwater .
My first criticism concerns the matters for urgent and topical debate , something with which I have dealt for years in this House .
I have observed no lack of serious and sound work done in this area as compared with any other , and I note that assertions are being made about the matters for urgent and topical debate mainly by Members who have never done any work on them .
I am proud of the successes I achieved as a parliamentarian through motions on matters of urgency , helping to actually free people from wrongful imprisonment and eliminate serious violations of human rights within a matter of days , and I could call any number of witnesses to confirm this to you .
It is therefore my opinion that we can introduce an additional current affairs hour ; I have nothing against that .
It goes without saying that we can also focus matters of urgent and topical debate more on human rights , but , as for the monthly urgent matters procedure with at least five subjects - usually between ten and fifteen are submitted , and it is only with difficulty that we can agree on five of them - that should be kept .
It has proved its worth , and the results it has achieved are among this House 's truly great highlights which do it such great credit .
I wish furthermore to take a stand against all the motions that seek to limit the less widely spoken languages or the smaller groups , to make this House bureaucratic and centralised .
To take just one small example , we are no longer to be able to express our solidarity with other Members using a lesser used language when they object to their motion not being available in it .
We will have Member States which will find it difficult to get the requisite twelve Members together .
I also protest as a representative of a major language ?
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , masochists still in the visitors ' galleries , masochists here in plenary - all twenty of you ! - what is being played here is ' Much Ado About Nothing ' .
Is what is going on here in plenary ' As You Like It ' ?
Is it even ' What You Will ' ?
Surely not .
That is why we want to alter our Rules of Procedure , but we do not really dare to .
We will just go a little bit in the direction we have to go in , at a time when it is no longer great industrial armies , hosts of workers , or political parties ' foot soldiers that count , but networks , connections and the individual .
We had to have Rules of Procedure in which individuals had as many rights as possible .
They do not .
Yet Mr Corbett is a bit daring , for he knows the Rules of Procedure inside out , or rather , he is allowed to take the risk .
Well done !
What we do not yet , though , trust ourselves to have , is an open debate .
Why not ?
What are we ourselves afraid of ?
Of people actually watching us ?
Of them no longer seeing themselves as masochists , but rather really experiencing here what they learn at school , what democracy would mean if it were lived out ?
It cannot be that .
But we can work at it , and that is why what we are debating here at the moment is as important as changes to the offside rule in football .
This is an abstract debate behind closed doors , now being played out again briefly by a number of Members , but with very wide-ranging effects .
I do think that we should support the attempt , at least , at considering how we can allow debates to be held which have an effect on the public and in which individual MEPs have rights too .
If we were to carry on that way , it would also mean that ' All 's Well That Ends Well ' .
That too is a play by Shakespeare , which he wrote in 1601 .
If you are a sceptic , you look to 1610 , when only the tempest is left .
Is that what you want ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , just a couple of points in view of the lateness of the hour .
The first , which the speakers before me have already touched on , is that citizens ' parliaments stand for openness and therefore public accessibility , for democratic legitimacy , comprehensive controls , and lawmaking , for the exchange of opinions and competing ideas , for information and communication .
Our Rules of Procedure serve to shape our procedures in such a way that we can perform our duties .
Not only do we have to regulate our procedures , but we also have to acquire the competences to do justice to the demands made of us .
As I see it , this may well be about the Rules of Procedure , but , in a parliamentary democracy founded on party democracy and thus also on parliamentarianism dominated by political groups , it is about the balance and interaction of work in committees , in the groups and in plenary .
It is about the interaction of electoral law , the statute for MEPs , about having the same rules on incompatibility and about what we are doing here , because we may well be able to have common rules , but different presuppositions lead to different ways of doing things .
I therefore welcome the strengthening of the legislative procedures and of legislative debate , not at the expense of parliamentary control and political discourse , but in a balanced fashion .
I therefore agree completely with Mrs Randzio-Plath 's view that we have to be careful that a large majority in committee does not result in diminished debate in plenary , as we will otherwise be impairing the creation of a broad majority and putting on a sham debate beforehand .
Parliamentarians in the committees , in the groups , and in plenary must work together .
( Applause )
Mr President , some here have said that we are now in the midst of reorganising what is a healthy system .
In that respect I agree with them that we could have made many good and necessary improvements to this House 's procedures even based on the current Rules of Procedure , but these are not the only improvements we are making .
I have reached the conclusion that is better to change this system in such a democratic process as this , which the reports of both Mr Corbett and Lord Inglewood symbolise .
It is the only way of bringing some sparkle and life to the procedures of this House , which have definitely been fossilising over the years .
These reformed procedures , including the ' catch-the-eye ' system , appear to have worked extremely well - for example , for all the Members at open meetings of the Conference of Presidents - so I do not understand why they could not also be tried out more generally in plenary .
If such trials show there are shortcomings in the system , we can always return to the old system .
This is a matter of political choices , although we are also speaking about jurisprudence and rules .
In a way Members are always the children of their own parliamentary culture . They all have experience gained in their own national parliaments , and it is perhaps difficult to find a European view in matters such as these .
However , this report contains a very subtle element of balance that meets demands for greater efficiency and the requirements of democracy .
Perhaps the fact that there will now be fewer amendments to discuss in plenary means that debates will be more political in nature and in that sense more interesting .
Perhaps we will really have arguments now here in favour of or against the amendments tabled and the debates will also have more substance to them .
As images of the European Parliament start to be transmitted everywhere in Europe over the Internet I hope the picture will be a little more colourful than the television test card , and that there will be colourful speeches and argument , and real debate here .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Rules of Procedure are the instruments which Parliament uses to regulate its work .
They are , in a manner of speaking , the calling card that we present to the world outside .
Being the only institution in the European Union to possess democratic legitimacy , Parliament is committed to the greatest possible transparency and clarity in the way it works , so that the citizens out there can also judge our working processes with an understanding of the thinking that underlies them .
It is only through those processes being as clear and simple as possible that we will achieve the public acceptance of our work that we desire .
A member of the Committee on Budgetary Control , in particular , sees any MEP 's main right as being that of putting questions to the Commission and having them answered .
This right , of vital significance for the control of budgets in particular , is enshrined in Article 197 of the Treaty establishing the European Communities and in Rule 44 of the Rules of Procedure .
It is an expression of Parliamentary control over the administration and must not be restricted .
Attempts have , though , been made in the past to limit this right , for example by the framework agreement of July 2000 , which restricts every MEP 's access to documents and items of information .
It was not least for this reason that Parliament has decided to alter this framework agreement as soon as possible .
I take this opportunity to remind the President of his task in this respect .
I am very glad that the report before us makes clear , in a supplement on Rule 44 , that the content of questions for written answer is the sole responsibility of the questioner .
This excludes the possibility of their being examined beforehand by the President or by a body of any kind .
In the past , this too was at least a matter of doubt .
Mr President , I am grateful for the contributions , the compliments and the criticisms expressed so clearly .
I will focus on the criticisms .
Some were expected and some were surprising .
I was surprised at the vehemence of Mrs Frassoni 's criticisms .
She made the same speech she made when we started our work in committee a year and a half ago .
She also accused me of not listening to her speech , so I want to make a point of refuting her argument , because she seemed to make the point that we have moved on in one year and a half .
I am glad that the shadow rapporteur from her group was very constructive .
Indeed , many of the amendments I have tabled have been co-signed by her group and mine .
Firstly , let me refute some arguments that various speakers made .
I am not trying to stifle debate or limit minorities .
I am trying to expand the debate on the important subjects , to have more time on the really important and controversial matters .
That , in turn , implies using simplified procedures for the less important and the less controversial matters .
How do we define less controversial ?
We have said that where there is a majority of over 90 % in committee , we can take that prima facie as not controversial .
Even then , we can go back to the usual procedures if only two groups or 32 Members make such a request .
It is a very low threshold ; it is very easy to go back to a full normal procedure .
But let the onus be that way around .
Let us assume that if it is simple and uncontroversial it can go through under a simplified procedure unless there is a request to the contrary , and then we will gain time for more debate , more views to be expressed on the important matters .
Similarly , I refute the argument that there is any danger to the language regime .
Every Member will continue to be able to insist on his or her own language in all instances .
I refute that we are scrapping the human rights issue .
Like Mr Posselt I agree that human rights are very important .
I am not proposing to scrap the issue : I am proposing a different procedure for dealing with it , a procedure which will give more weight to the detailed work done in the committee and which should produce even more important results than at the moment .
The same applies to other urgent matters .
We are not scrapping them ; we are proposing to deal with them under other procedures - either existing or new procedures .
Let me just clarify one or two other points .
As regards " catch-the-eye " , what is on the table is a compromise .
" Catch-the-eye " would only come at the end of debates .
Even then it is not obligatory .
It says the President may have a round of catch-the-eye .
That is a very reasonable compromise .
If the people who have reservations about this are not even willing to try it out for a while at the end of debates , when the President so decides , then really there is not much willingness to compromise at all .
I would urge those who are cautious about this to give it a try .
There is no harm in trying it out .
As regards OLAF , the committee deliberately did not deal with this because the matter was sub judice .
Now it seems that after the Court has ruled there is an appeal , so it will still be sub judice .
But even if it were not , I would say that this would need thorough examination in committee rather than an amendment at the last minute in plenary .
That is the reason why we have not come up with a proposal on OLAF .
As regards the Commission President and the vote on the President of the Commission and the Commission as a whole , Mr Rothley has raised a valid point .
Our national traditions are very divergent on this but it is right that it comes before plenary , and in many groups there will be differences of opinion on this .
Mr Rothley has persuaded me personally but I know that there are many others in the House who still need to be persuaded .
As regards the budget point , we had different views .
Some said that for every item coming before this House there should be a detailed examination of the budgetary implications by the Committee on Budgets .
Others said that this is a constraint on our rights to table amendments in plenary and we should not go down that road at all .
We have come up with a compromise stating that explanatory statements must , where there are expected financial implications , contain an analysis as to how this is compatible with the financial perspective .
This compromise will not satisfy everybody , but , again , it is a workable compromise for us to move forward at the moment .
Finally , the question of gender language .
Mr President , you were quite right to point out that it only affects some languages .
The language in which I drafted the report was not one in which there is gender discrimination and I would not have put it in .
I would remind the House that four years ago , when adopting the report by Mrs De Palacio Vallelersundi and myself , we adopted a decision that the Rules should be revised by the services in all languages to ensure gender-neutral language .
We do not need to come back to that issue ; we need to ensure that what we decided as a parliament is now applied .
Mr President , I just want to tell Mr Corbett very briefly that he will see during tomorrow 's vote that the shadow rapporteur and I entirely endorse my group 's voting list but that we continue to oppose him on all the points I have mentioned .
Mr President , I have followed this afternoon 's debate with great interest .
First of all , I would like to congratulate Mr Corbett on his superb report and on the clear explanations he provided , both at the beginning and at the end .
What is more , given that I was responsible for regulatory issues within my group in the Spanish national parliament for many years , I have followed this matter with the utmost interest and I share the concern over what to do in order to bring a Chamber closer to the citizens and enliven the debate whilst at the same time making it a sufficiently well-ordered working instrument .
I believe that the proposals made by the rapporteur considerably improve the current Rules of Procedure and I congratulate him on this .
It is his text and we can only try to cooperate as much as possible to make this Chamber a more lively one , which is closer to the citizens and enables us to convey to them and make them fully aware of our way of working , and on which we are concentrating all our efforts and dedication .
I would like to point out that to the Prodi Commission - the President has always said this and repeats it whenever the opportunity arises , before this Parliament and before its various governing bodies - the relationship between the Commission and Parliament is a strategic factor and that , from the start , we have been committed to participating and cooperating as much as possible in the work and the functioning of this Chamber .
The vast majority of the reports and legislative issues are handled directly in plenary by the corresponding Commissioners responsible .
I believe this has changed tremendously in relation to past procedures .
The Commission answers over three thousand parliamentary questions every year .
I believe we have reached a suitable agreement with regard to the cooperation and participation of Parliament in international negotiations at which MEPs are customarily present , which I must say , to be quite frank , is most useful .
And we are very satisfied with the functioning of the codecision procedure which , in my opinion , is proving to be a considerable success .
I must also say , in this respect , that we are making a considerable effort to inform Parliament systematically before anyone else and provide it with at least as much information as the Council .
Finally , I believe that the Framework Agreement - even though , as can be expected , there have been a few tense moments in its implementation - is proving a useful instrument in the workings of our relationship .
I would like to repeat my congratulations .
I hope that between us we shall be able to enliven all the European Union institutions and make the work of these institutions more understandable and more immediate , that is to say , make the European Union more understandable and closer to the citizens .
Thank you very much , Mrs De Palacio .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 12.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
( A5-0195 / 2002 ) by Mr Duff on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs on the reform of the Rules of Procedure with regard to parliamentary immunity ;
( A5-0213 / 2002 ) by Mr MacCormick on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market on the immunity of Italian Members and the Italian authorities ' practices on the subject .
Mr President , I am greatly relieved as rapporteur in this case to finally have the opportunity of presenting this report before the House , whether it be rejected or accepted in the end .
I have been a Member of the House for just under three years and for nearly all that time I have been honoured to be one of the rapporteurs on parliamentary privilege and immunity for the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market .
One of the earliest tasks assigned to me was a bundle of requests from Members from Italy , or from their lawyers , concerning their concern that prosecutions or other legal actions were taking place in Italy which violated their immunity .
Our Rules of Procedure which will I hope be amended in the light of the Duff report make elaborate provision for the steps Parliament should take in order to decide whether or not to waive immunity on receipt of a request from the proper authorities of the Member State .
The problem in the Italian cases was that no request had been received other than from the Members themselves and this gave rise to concern .
If it were the case that privileges or immunities enjoyed by Members of this House were being ignored by a Member State that would be a serious matter .
The point that I would make , and the Duff report makes here , is that the privileges and immunities of this House exist not to expand the rights of Members as citizens beyond those of other citizens .
They exist solely to protect the dignity of this assembly as a European legislature and to protect the conditions of effective and free democratic debate in it .
If it were case that Members could show that their position as Members of this House , as legislators on the European scene , was being prejudiced by conduct of a Member State and there was no way to bring this before the House solely because no appropriate authority in a Member State had sought to have the immunity waived , this would in itself be clearly an unsatisfactory state of affairs .
The House possesses immunity under two different provisions .
Under Article 9 of the Protocol of 1965 , Members enjoy immunity from any form of enquiry , detention or legal proceedings in respect of opinions expressed or votes cast by them in the performance of their duties .
There are other immunities which arise in other circumstances where the immunity a Member enjoys is equivalent to that of a Member of a Member State parliament in their own Member State and in other Member States , an immunity from prosecution except with the agreement of Parliament .
After a great deal of study , it became clear that what was at issue in all the cases before us was only an issue concerning Article 9 of the Protocol .
It was the issue of whether prosecutions taken against Members for opinions they were expressing or had expressed violated the immunity they enjoy under Article 9 .
Our Rules of Procedure are silent on what we should do in that case .
It seems to me that as a democratic legislative assembly , we must have some inherent power to draw it to the attention of Member States if the conditions of free debate are being violated in this House .
Taking that view of the matter , the Committee looked over the cases and in all respects save one accepted the recommendations which I was minded to put forward .
Looking at the cases as clearly and candidly as possible , it seems to me that Mr Speroni 's was one where because matters were asked concerning an explanation of votes in the House he was clearly being called to account for an opinion expressed in the exercise of his functions .
Mr Marra 's case was one in which documents published by Mr Marra is his capacity as a Member had , in a complex way , given rise to prosecutions or judicial allegations .
These seem to be clear cases where Article 9 was in issue .
The Committee thought , but I do not think , that Mr Dell 'Utri 's case was the same .
The reason why I differed from the Committee is that in Mr Dell 'Utri 's case , the statements made , whatever their truth and whatever their legal character , were made several years before Mr Dell 'Utri became a Member of the House .
I cannot see any sensible reading of a provision concerning opinions expressed or votes cast by us in the performance of our duties which relates to statements we make before we become Members .
You cannot equate a candidate for office with a holder of office .
This goes for ourselves in our capacities as candidates , by the way .
I therefore recommend to the House that we take the action suggested in my report and that we draw these cases to the attention of the Italian authorities .
My own Parliamentary group has moved an amendment to take the name of Mr Dell 'Utri out of the report and I personally believe that it is the right course to take .
I hope I have given an account to colleagues of why I think it is right course to take and that it is simply a matter of an objective and fair-minded reading of the Protocol rather than an attempt to engage in a political judgement either way about the state of affairs in the Italian Republic .
Mr President , the issue of the reform of Rule 6 was raised first by the controversy surrounding the application by the Spanish courts to waive the immunity of two Italian Members of the European Parliament .
The competence of the Spanish judges to file the application was challenged by Spanish ministers .
This put the European Parliament into a quandary , not of its own making but one that was exacerbated by the weaknesses of its own rules and procedures .
The proposals before us , passed after long deliberation by a large majority of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , have several ingredients .
Firstly , we include a short clear statement of what privileges and immunities are in the modern context .
That is to say , not to say to protect MEPs inclined to a life of crime but primarily , as Mr MacCormick has said , to ensure the dignity of the legislature as a place of independent and pluralistic debate .
Secondly , we concede that there might be more than a single competent authority in some Member States and we permit the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market not only to give a reasoned opinion upon the matter of competence but also to prepare an indicative non-definitive list of such authorities .
Thirdly , the duties of the President of Parliament are more clearly delineated from those of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market .
Fourthly , the procedures of the committee and the criteria that it will use to formulate its opinions are set out in some detail for the benefit of Members ' courts and the public .
Fifthly , provision is made for the rare occasions when a Member is obliged to assert a privilege or immunity before a court .
I trust that all these provisions will equip Parliament to cope with privilege cases at the federal level coordinate with , but not subordinate to , national parliamentary regimes .
The reforms comprise a clarification , as well as a formalisation , of the privileges and immunities system , thereby meeting the requirements of the Court of First Instance in a separate related case .
More radical reform will depend on whether the Convention approaches an amendment of the 1965 Protocol , the formulation of a Members ' Statute and , finally , the matter of improving Parliament 's access to the court on the question of sanctions .
Mr President , while I am going to be speaking about the Duff report , I would like to congratulate both Mr Duff and Professor MacCormick for the very substantial amount of work they have put into this .
We in the PPE-DE Group concur with Mr Duff 's approach and the analysis contained in the report 's explanatory statement .
As is clear , not only from the debate earlier this evening , but also from the discussion in this House and in its committees over the last weeks and months , the whole issue of immunities is arcane , incoherent and muddled .
In Mr Duff 's explanatory statement , it is rightly stated , although perhaps in not quite these words , that MEPs are not merely national MPs who happen to go abroad .
In fact , MEPs are now something distinct from national MPs who might happen to go abroad .
They are people who are similar but , nevertheless , qualitatively different .
That has significant implications for the whole question of immunities and it explains why we are in the present muddle .
He is absolutely right in the report to point out , as he has done in his remarks this evening , that in order to tidy this up and create something sensible and understandable to Europe 's citizens , it is necessary for changes to come both from the forthcoming Convention and from recommendations to the IGC that might be accepted .
In addition , provisions with regard to this ought to be contained in the forthcoming Member 's Statute .
If we do that , we may be able to introduce a degree of sense and coherence into our Rules which is currently missing and will remain missing to our detriment if we do not manage to do it .
Mr President , I would like to first congratulate both rapporteurs for their excellent work but my comments will be addressed to the Duff report .
Mr Duff took a difficult report on a subject that was triggered by a particular case of high controversy and which remains a particular case of high controversy and where my side of the House still differs substantially in its views from many of those on the other side of the House .
Nevertheless , in taking on that case , Mr Duff managed to produce consensus by focusing on the procedures and not on the particular case , and he did this with considerable skill .
If I may return a compliment to him that he paid me earlier this evening , every parliament needs an Andrew Duff .



My group can therefore support what he has done : the clarity with which he has drafted these new Rules and the innovations therein - the innovation that opens the door for us , as a parliament , to assert the immunity of a Member where no request has been forwarded to us to waive it , but proceedings have been started in a Member State , or may be started , and the innovation that there may indeed be more than one national authority that is competent to request the waiver of immunity .
All that , in my opinion , is to the good .
My group will , therefore , be voting for his report but we are still debating paragraph 8 of amendment 2 , where we do have a fear that , in essence , it contradicts the previous paragraphs in the report , and where it opens the door to Parliament becoming involved in the substance of a case rather than in whether or not there should be a waiver of immunity .
That wording is one on which we may request a split vote and vote against .
But we are still open to dialogue with the rapporteur on this because we know what an excellent job he has done .
Mr President , there have always been two points underlying the European Parliament 's rules on immunity , even in this situation which is so confusing and difficult to resolve because of the lack of a clear European Parliament Member statute .
The first is that immunity exists to protect Parliament , not the Member . The second is that on no account can the European Parliament arrogate to itself the right to pass judgment on the allegations themselves in the manner of a sort of court .
I believe - and , quite frankly , it pains me to say so - that , on both counts , the Duff report 's changes are negative and dangerous , for example where it mentions defending immunities with regard to Rule 6.1 ( a ) .

In a situation in which we are asking the Europeans to accept measures such as the European arrest warrant , and therefore to agree to the possibility of being arrested on the basis of forms of evidence and procedures customary in a different State from their own , I feel that it is truly absurd to allow Members to effectively block prosecution proceedings .
It is said that a Member 's scope for action should be limited to the cases of absolute immunity laid down in Rule 9 and that the competent Parliamentary committee should then decide whether the Member 's request is acceptable .
However , quite frankly , Mr Duff 's text does not make this distinction between Rule 9 and Rule 10 , and the fact that the competent committee would , if necessary , be able to make a decision does not convince me .
Indeed , I find the vote which took place on the immunity of Mr Dell 'Utri , a gentlemen who was not even a Member of Parliament at the time of the alleged offence , wholly unconvincing , for the votes cast in a parliament are always politically motivated .
The procedure proposed is therefore too complex : it leaves the door open to totally unscrupulous behaviour which , although certainly unthinkable in Mr MacCormick and Mr Duff 's country , I regret to say is much more common in other countries .
That is why I will vote against the Duff report and I will call upon my group to do the same .
Mr President , the Duff report seeks to streamline the procedure for waiving the parliamentary immunity of MEPs and , at the same time , to introduce greater guarantees against its arbitrary nature , which we can only welcome .
In our view , however , it provides a poor response to the specific technical question which sparked off deliberation on this issue , namely how to determine which is the competent national body for forwarding to the European Parliament the request for the waiver of immunity of one of its Members .
Political common sense tells us that it is up to the Member State in question to appoint this body .
Furthermore , the Lamassoure report , which was only adopted at our last sitting , states that when a competence has not been explicitly attributed to the European institutions , it is assumed that the responsibility falls to the Member States .
Paragraph 13 of Article 6 ( a ) of the Duff report , however , confuses the problem and manages to complicate further this otherwise simple rule .
We are , of course , unable to allow this , Mr President , as I shall state in my explanation of vote .
Mr President , the autonomy and independence of the European Parliament to which the Members are called are two of the principles on which the democratic legitimacy of the European Union system is based .
They must therefore be preserved - and it is our duty to do this - from the attempts coming from a number of quarters to place conditions upon Parliament 's exercising of its functions .
In the institutions of absolute immunity and immunity laid down by the Protocol on the Privileges and Immunities of the European Communities , the European Parliament has the - albeit limited - tools to defend itself against attacks on its independence or autonomy by other public or private authorities .
This is not so in the case of the Members of the European Parliament elected in Italy .
Indeed , very often , the judicial authorities do not take into account the absolute immunity of the Member in question - the European Parliament must understand that - in carrying out the processes laid down in Article 68 ( 2 ) of the Constitution , particularly where the - albeit indirect - interception of telephone communications is concerned .
There is controversy in Italy at this very time regarding the indirect interception of telephone communications carried out in contempt of the principle of this guarantee .
It is apparent that interchanges are taking place which are actually sometimes quite unpleasant between the parliament and certain judges , who are inevitably and , at times , unconsciously , biased .
They use the independence and lack of institutional accountability they enjoy as a shield for what are , in fact , political actions .
The judges themselves , moreover , are raising this issue in conventions and seminars and even in official debates .
In the face of this Italian idiosyncrasy , the European Parliament must defend its independence resolutely , particularly when its Members are accused of offences because of opinions they have expressed in the course of their duties .
In other words , the European Parliament must be able to intervene to confirm cases of absolute immunity and immunity at the request of the accused Member too , provided , of course , that the requisite conditions and assumptions are fulfilled , as happens in the Italian Parliament .

Mr MacCormick and Mr Duff 's reports lay down procedures for making these guarantees effective .

I will end by thanking both Mr MacCormick and Mr Duff , who , in the report on the adoption of the Members ' Statute , have endorsed our work on it , which I hope will be adopted by the House without delay .
The MacCormick report , as adopted by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , has already adopted a position on some of the cases mentioned and feels that the cases of the Members or former Members of Parliament , Mr Marras , Mr Speroni and Mr Dell 'Utri , are , prima facie and in this case , covered by absolute immunity .
In any event , the competent judge - the Italian judge , that is - must send Parliament the necessary documentation and establish whether the case in question fulfils the conditions for absolute immunity laid down in Article 9 of the Protocol .
On behalf of the PPE-DE Group , I can only fully support this approach and recommend that Mr MacCormick and Mr Duff 's reports be adopted without any amendment .


I would like to thank the rapporteurs for their valuable work .
Mr President , I would like to make a few remarks , but , first of all , I would like to congratulate the rapporteurs who , in my view , have done some excellent work on this particularly complicated dossier .
We have discussed every aspect of this issue during the debate , so I shall simply make two or three comments .
The first comment is that we must , in a situation of this kind , always strive to disregard all political considerations , in any case , as far as this is possible , and to give a verdict based on law .
The second comment , which is also an idea underlying this report , relates to the concern for equity , balance and equality between MEPs .
I think that we attach great importance to this , as well as to the desire to affirm , by adopting this type of position and this type of report , the prerogatives of Parliament and its Members .
This is also a point to which we cannot fail to attach great importance , especially since it seeks to harmonise criminal law , something I am hoping and praying for .
I would hope that this harmonisation aims to achieve greater freedom , not only for the Members but for all the citizens of the European Union .
In this area , however , there is unfortunately still a great deal to be done .
I would like to make two final comments .
The first is that it is always regrettable , in matters relating to freedom of individuals , to favour a collective approach over a personal approach .
But the rapporteur is not without good reason .
The procedure states that things should be thus and I think that , in relation to issues which concern individuals and their freedom , their situation under the law , we must ensure that the procedures provide for an assessment of each individual case .
This avoids a collective approach or a political approach to the problem , even if this has not worked in the case before us today .

My second and final comment concerns the case of Mr Dell 'Utri and I echo the calls that have been made to differentiate this case from others for the reasons that have , quite rightly , been outlined .
Thank you very much .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is the report ( A5-0158 / 2002 ) by Mrs Figueiredo , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the communication from the Commission to the Council , the European Parliament , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions : Draft joint report on social inclusion .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the report we are discussing today is the result not only of the work of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , but also of the major contributions made by both the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , by means of the opinion delivered by Mr Alyssandrakis , and by the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities , by means of the opinion delivered by Mrs Swiebel .
I thank them all for their contributions , which I hope a majority in Parliament will approve .
This report is based on the Commission communication on the first 15 National Action Plans for social inclusion that the Member States submitted in June last year , following the decisions taken at the Lisbon European Council , in March 2000 , on the strategy to combat poverty and social exclusion and based on the four common objectives defined in Nice , which are : to facilitate participation in employment and access by all to the resources , rights , goods and services which are essential to live in dignity , to prevent the risks of exclusion , to help the most vulnerable and to mobilise all relevant bodies .
Despite the limitations and the diversity of approaches employed by the various Member States , the joint Commission and Council report approved during the Belgian Presidency highlights major risks and challenges that must be taken into account if we are to make more rapid progress on an in-depth and exhaustive study of the causes of social exclusion and on the concrete measures that need to be put in practice more speedily and with greater commitment . Unless this happens , our stated intentions on the need for greater economic and social cohesion run the risk of remaining words that are not translated into action .
I would remind you , because of their importance , of the main challenges identified in the joint report , which are : to develop an inclusive labour market and promote employment as a right and opportunity for all ; to guarantee an adequate income level and resources to live in human dignity ; to tackle educational disadvantage ; to preserve family solidarity and protect the rights of children ; to ensure good housing for all ; to guarantee equal access to high-quality services ( health , transport , social , care , cultural , recreational and legal ) ; to improve the delivery of services and to regenerate areas of multiple deprivation .
In order to meet these challenges , Member States must make significant improvements in the distribution of resources and opportunities in society so as to ensure the participation and social inclusion of all citizens and the exercise of their fundamental rights .
It is equally important that an integrated and multidimensional strategy should be put in place , that , on the basis of the objectives defined in Nice and the implementation of the Community programme to encourage the fight against social exclusion , specifically the first round table that is due to take place in October during the Danish Presidency , added value should be sought in the fight against poverty and social exclusion and that encouragement is given for the drafting of the second set of National Action Plans for social inclusion to include priorities , specific targets and goals , appropriate policies and measures , accompanied by the corresponding funds and budgetary appropriations .
Consequently , the common challenge that Community policies and the various national governments face is to ensure that the main mechanisms for the distributive effects of the labour market - the tax system , social security , education , housing , health and other public services - become sufficiently universal to respond to the needs of those who are most exposed to the risks of poverty and social exclusion .
Hence also the importance of economic and monetary policies , including policies on competition , farming , fisheries and the Stability Pact , forming a triangle that is consistent with social policies , with each one having to be evaluated on its impact on the social sphere , with a view to reviewing them and ensuring that they comply with the social objectives and the need for greater economic and social cohesion and that they significantly diminish the scandal that is keeping around 18 % of the population of the European Union , in other words , more than 60 million people , living in poverty .
Equally important is the existence of credible and relevant social indicators , also in terms of gender , which enable us not only to observe trends in the social situation in the various EU countries , but also to warn of and monitor trends in the social situation as regards poverty and social exclusion in particular .
We must not , therefore , try to deny the reality of the situation and bear in mind that , although it is difficult to analyse the correlation between public expenditure and social protection on the one hand and the risk of poverty on the other , it is fair to say that without social transfers , notably old age pensions , 41 % of the population of the European Union would be at risk from poverty , a percentage which would still be 26 % if we included old age pensions but excluded income from other social transfers .
I am , therefore , unhappy about the majority of the amendments tabled by the PPE-DE , which are intended to disguise the reality of the situation and to make it more difficult to implement essential measures to achieve social inclusion .
I call on them to withdraw these amendments so that the work that has already been undertaken is not undermined and so that we can make a positive contribution to formalising an effective strategy for fighting against poverty and social exclusion .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to congratulate Mrs Figueiredo on her detailed report and introductory speech .
I should also like to thank the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs for adopting almost all the proposals tabled by the Committee on Culture .
Our committee considers that education , culture and sport are major factors of social inclusion .
I should point out here that , if these factors are to have a positive effect , they need to operate in a beneficial social environment , an environment , for example , which knows how to make the best of highly skilled graduates of the education system .
We go on to identify a number of important points .
Our committee feels that measures to prevent and combat social exclusion in education and culture must be firmly anchored in the public sector .
More importantly , it considers that a free and public education system is a prerequisite to free accessibility without exclusions and calls on the Member States to provide free compulsory education for a minimum of twelve years to all children .
It also considers that the education system should provide young people not only with basic skills , including digital skills , but also with a profound understanding of society that will enable them to become conscious actors of social progress .
Taking account of the large number of young unemployed people , the Committee on Culture calls for the institution of " second chance " schools to be strengthened .
It also calls for measures to be taken to combat illiteracy , ensuring a mastery of the mother tongue and the learning of other languages .
We also call for special programmes for immigrants to learn the basic language of their host country .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the debate held in the parliamentary committees and concluded in plenary today is without doubt a useful and interesting debate .
However , it is not enough .
As the Committee on Culture points out , we need to implement specific actions in the fight against social exclusion if we are to make any headway before we next address this issue .
The European Commission - and especially the Commissioner - deserves a show of approval for this initial integral policy document on the subject of poverty and social exclusion .
It is true that social policy has a dual role to play : promote social cohesion , but also productivity .
The Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities therefore warmly supports the analysis that poverty and social exclusion can only be overcome by increasing productivity and the earning capacity of so-called underprivileged groups .
This applies all the more to women .
This is why it is slightly unfortunate that this analysis has not been thought through properly .
Indeed , we looked for , and failed to find , the insight that it is due to the unequal distribution of paid and unpaid labour between men and women that women are over-represented among the poor .
Poverty among women is directly linked to their lack of economic independence .
The latter must be stimulated by means of paid work that generates a sustainable income for women themselves and for their dependants .
If the Commission and the Member States were willing to adopt this gender analysis , the level of women 's economic independence in Europe would need to be re-examined , and this factor would need to play an autonomous role in the analysis framework and in the policy goals of the anti-poverty policy .
Indeed , single older women and single mothers with young children are particularly vulnerable groups .
Their vulnerability , however , will not diminish unless the causes are truly identified .
As long as the overburdening with unpaid work prevents women , and women with children , in particular , from developing their own earning capacity , they will remain vulnerable groups .
The so-called combination of work with care , which stands an excellent chance as an emancipation strategy at the moment , can also turn out to be a pitfall if too much emphasis on part-time work and holiday arrangements for women prevent these women from developing and maintaining sufficient earning capacity .
The open coordination method can , in this connection , result in useful policy comparisons , and I am looking forward to this with interest .
However , in this framework , the indicators used to measure poverty should no longer be gender-blind , but also chart the individual incomes of the individual family household members .
Mr President , social exclusion is a complex topic .
The word alone gives rise to a whole range of discrepancies .
We know that the Commission introduced the concept of social exclusion some time ago because the word poverty was regarded as too strong by some Member States .
However , we are now facing a certain inconsistency .
One could imagine that it might be possible to be a socially excluded millionaire .
This might well be conceivable but this is not what is at issue here .
What we are ultimately talking about here is mainly money and anything related to it .
Then there is , of course , the question whether poverty in Europe is the same as poverty in the developing world .
No , that is not the case .
People in Europe should be compared with people in Europe .
It is not acceptable for someone who is in dire straits to be compared with someone in the developing world .
That would be all too easy for the governments .
There is nevertheless a problem , namely that in the system of subsidiarity , most of the responsibilities lie with the Member States , even with the local councils , in fact .
We can naturally give a whole host of useful recommendations in this matter .
We can conclude agreements and make comparisons .
This is all possible .
The problem can , in fact , only be solved at the lowest possible geographical level .
This is sometimes overlooked by many .
It is as if we would be able to solve the entire social exclusion issue in this House .
This is impossible .
What we can do , however , is exchange information , set good examples and agree on common issues up to a point , but these common issues should not have a counterproductive effect .
I am of the opinion that we in Europe have not particularly improved the position of children by taking a large number of ideologically inspired measures in the past .
We must not overlook that either .
We are unable to do this ; that is a task for the Member States .
We can , in this context , only give a few wise lessons and leave it at that .
The rapporteur has , in my view , written a good report , but has at times passed over these wise lessons .
Mr President , this communication maps out an integrated social policy .
The rapporteur is therefore right to see this as a proposal of huge political significance , which is why her position deserves the backing of a large majority .
First and foremost , this draft report reaffirms the political will to take combined action against exclusion at European Union level expressed at previous summits .
Having accepted - and in adopting the social agenda we have demonstrated that we do accept - that expenditure on social policy is also a productive factor , we feel that , if the European Union is to stand by what it says , we need to examine current spending restrictions in this light .
We also clearly recognise , and this too is an accepted fact , that we need to join forces in the fight against exclusion and coordinate action on employment , health , housing , education and social protection .
However , the difficulties in implementing these proposals are one of the crucial points .
Indeed , the more vociferously we clamour for an integrated approach , the greater our responsibility to overcome the obstacles to implementing it .
We need a crusade to change practices and customs and to overcome resistance , both from the political leadership and from the officials responsible for implementing this policy .
And if there is to be greater interest in this objective on the part of the trades union , they too need to revise their priorities .
Finally , there are inherent difficulties in organising substantiated public debates which have the right results , at both the design and evaluation stages .
Generally speaking , although the different Member States are trying to move away from political measures scattered across various sectors and towards an integrated approach , suitable mechanisms are lacking and the agencies responsible appear unwilling to get their act together .
We must welcome the fact that the communication takes account of new dangers of exclusion as the result of new structural changes under way in the European Union , the most important being , as it rightly points out , changes on the job market and the privatisation of public services .
Although , having said which , the European Union itself has no clear objectives in its liberalisation policy as to what should stay in the public sector .
The European Union needs to set an example by properly coordinating its individual policies .
That is the only way we shall increase our credibility in the fight against social insecurity , which is one of the main reasons the far-right is gaining in popularity .
We have to be clear on one thing : that the open method of coordination on social policy and the proposed international plans for national action against poverty need to be addressed by the Member States and the Commission with the same degree of earnestness as the stability pact and budgetary discipline .
I should like to close by adding that this draft will only be of any use if the Commission is able to supply us with specific progress indicators in the immediate future .
The Commission has specific responsibilities here .
We do not want , during the second design stage of national plans to combat exclusion , to have to spend yet more time on the basic challenges of and principles behind non-exclusion policies ; we want to examine the measures needed to convert all these principles into operational plans , the success rate of the new methods and the potential for monitoring specific added value .
We should , I think , have a simple , concise report on these issues at the 2003 summit .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur for her work on this .
A number of the national action plans were criticised for not taking on board the particular position of women , as Mrs Swiebel has been pointing out , in terms of social exclusion .
While I would agree with Mr Pronk that a lot of this is about money , it is also about other interlinking factors like a lack of real equality of opportunity .
When you consider that at the moment in the UK there are women graduates likely to earn less than male graduates with similar degrees at the start of their careers , then there is a problem .
The situation is even worse if you are male graduate of Bangladeshi or Pakistani background ; your employment chances are as good as those of a young white man with no qualifications whatsoever .
So there is a whole series of policies here which have to interlink to deal with issues about social inclusion .
Of course , we also know that women are more likely to have career breaks , to work part-time , to work on short-term contracts and they are still less likely to hold elected office .
These factors help to explain why my group will not be supporting amendments which seek to remove the commitment to equal treatment for those in precarious or atypical employment .
Equally , we are not supporting the amendments which seek to delete mention of factors of economic and monetary policy , which we believe have a significant impact on social circumstances .
My group sees the value of social security , not just to assist the sustainability of income , but as a measure of social inclusion as well .
We also believe that the participation of those experiencing social exclusion and working to relieve it is essential in coming to conclusions and solutions .
Social inclusion involves having a voice in the decisions that affect you and we will therefore not be supporting Amendment No 7 either .
Mr President , I wish to thank Mrs Figueiredo for a very important and sound report .
The report is no less important , given the fact that the ideas and objectives concerning social integration and social solidarity were highlighted two years ago in connection with the Lisbon decisions .
A lot has happened since then , however , and the situation has changed .
Many of the governments that contributed to the decision in Lisbon no longer exist for , almost every month , there are new shifts in political power in the governments of the Member States .

That is worrying for , as Mr Pronk pointed out , responsibility for social security and integration lies with the Member States or at lower levels , resulting in a need for governments in the Member States that are concerned to prioritise solidarity and social integration .
If , as I fear , such governments do not exist , account will have to be taken of social mobilisation from below .
In these circumstances , women 's movements , immigrant organisations , local workers ' movements and other organisations and movements which give priority to social solidarity will have to organise themselves and conduct a political struggle .
Simply being generous or having good intentions is not enough .
We know that there are antagonisms and conflicting interests and priorities in political life .
The poor and the deprived are not the main priorities of those who possess political power .
I therefore believe that we in Europe are on the way towards a grim political situation with a wider gulf than we are used to between those who hold power and those who have major and difficult social problems .
I therefore think it important that the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , above all , support Mrs Figueiredo 's report .
I also hope that this will be the case tomorrow when we vote on the report .
Mr President , the risk of poverty and social exclusion in the European Union is one of the most serious and urgent economic and ethical challenges facing us in the twenty-first century and I therefore congratulate the rapporteur on her useful and timely contribution to the debate .
Because poverty is a multidimensional problem , which affects every aspect of human life , this scourge is now being perceived in a different light .
This problem has repercussions not only for the dignity and quality of human life , but also for macroeconomic policies , social security , freedom and security .
It is crucial that the Member States come up with long-term strategies primarily geared towards the groups at the greatest risk of social exclusion and which are most badly affected by poverty ; the long-term unemployed , the disabled , the elderly , women and immigrants .
The new knowledge-based society provides opportunities to reduce social exclusion through the creation of economic conditions that favour growth , employment and through openness to new forms of participation in society .
The key idea is that employment is the best safeguard against social exclusion and poverty .
The Member States must ensure free access to education , including qualifications in the field of information technology and languages , and must promote lifelong learning .
The new open method of coordination must involve greater participation by local and regional authorities and social partners , in order to enable an effective exchange of best practices .
Finally , I should like to emphasise the need for the candidate countries to participate , as soon as possible , in the strategy for social inclusion and to draw up their own national action plans to improve this .
Mr President , as my fellow Members have already pointed out , common objectives on poverty and social exclusion were agreed at the Lisbon , Stockholm and Nice Summits , as it was observed that poverty levels have remained the same since 1995 .
That means that 60 million Europeans , or 18 % of the population , are still below the poverty line , the line that is defined as 50 % of the average income of the Member States .
This is made more serious by the fact that 50 % of income in Luxembourg is not equal to 50 % of income in Portugal .
It is also noted that Member States with social spending above the European Union average , such as Finland , Denmark and Germany , have far lower poverty levels , sometimes 50 % lower , than countries in which social spending is below the European Union average .
These countries include the southern countries and the United Kingdom .
I think a great deal has already been said so far on the need for plans in each of the Member States and also on the need for the European institutions to become involved in these plans .
I therefore believe , Mr President , that none of the proposed amendments must be adopted tomorrow , as this would destroy the philosophy of the report .
In conclusion , Mr President , I am going to state here that one of the amendments proposes abandoning the eight challenges of which Mrs Figueiredo has spoken , including the rights to work , housing , education and health .
If any of these amendments were to be adopted in their current wording , the philosophy of the report would be destroyed .
I therefore call on my fellow Members to adopt the report as it stands , because it is a good report that correctly tackles the problems of poverty and social exclusion .
Mr President , I would , of course , like to congratulate the rapporteur on the initiative and conviction with which she has drawn up this report .
Moreover , the first joint report on social inclusion , drawn up on the basis of national action plans combating poverty and social exclusion , highlighted the need for a joint analysis of the different situations in the European Union .
In this regard , the national plans identify a number of risk factors which combine to underscore the multidimensional importance of the issue , and , in some cases , these factors are consequences as well as causes , which highlights the need to break the cycle of ongoing and intergenerational poverty represented by social exclusion .
Lastly , as happened at the Luxembourg Summit with regard to employment , a similar process of open cooperation and coordination to reach the objectives is starting in the area of social exclusion .
Therefore , in order to contain and resolve the issue of social exclusion , specific actions have been proposed based on the four specific Nice objectives , which include the action to help the vulnerable , people with disabilities and elderly people who are not self-sufficient .
It is important that these objectives are met , not so that we can give gold stars to the different European States but so that genuine added value for the basic objective of social integration can be achieved .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by congratulating and thanking my fellow Iberian Member , Mrs Figueiredo , for her good work .
Lisbon , Nice , Stockholm and more recently the Barcelona Summit , are dates , places , cities , memories of summits which illustrate the social temperature of the European Union , dates when the European Union committed itself to creating a better and more developed economy , more and better jobs , sustained development and social cohesion .
But we should remember the harsh reality : it might shock many of us if we were to stop and think , or if we read in the media , that in the countries we live in , the percentage of the population living below the poverty line ( bearing in mind the commonly accepted criterion of income less than 60 % of the national average income ) is 8 , 12 , 14 , 19 and even 22 % ( with an 18 % average in the Union as a whole ) , and also bearing in mind that , although the European Union has recorded an average rate of GDP growth of 2.5 % , levels of poverty and social exclusion are still very high .

Mrs Figueiredo 's report includes a series of considerations of measures for fighting social exclusion .
I would like to highlight two or three of them : firstly , the development of an integrating labour market and the promotion of employment as a right and opportunity for all , a measure which sometimes means having to take decisions which , as is happening in Spain , may be opposed by some ; that is why social dialogue is so important , but it must be proper social dialogue involving reciprocal concessions , dialogue in the true sense of the word .
There is no question that employment is the best way to ensure integration .
We also need to promote training , new technologies , in view of the risk of technological illiteracy , and , above all , an integrated and multidimensional strategic approach , sex equality , education and environmental good practice as well as improvements in social services .
And of course - and I will end here , Mr President - joint action .
I agree that this should be executed at the lowest possible level , but I must also say that , probably , that execution should also be compatible with promotion actions , with actions carried out by other administrations .
Mr President , my congratulations to Mrs Figueiredo and to the Committees on Culture and Women 's Rights for their contributions to the final text of the report .
The debate has clearly illustrated how important it is for us to work together on all three basic policies , economic policy , employment policy and social policy , that is , how important this isosceles triangle is if we are to have balanced results in all the Member States and in the European Union as a whole .
Two important political points were also raised during the debate .
Can and should the European Union get involved by coordinating or proposing policies on exclusion and poverty ?
Of course , two or three Members have already touched on how we define poverty and exclusion today and of course there is a huge difference compared with developing world poverty .
In Europe we are talking about relative poverty but , still , we should not forget that over 65 million people in Europe are dangerously close to the poverty line , nor should we overlook the wider issue of exclusion defined by new demands in the information society .
So , having agreed on the definition and the complicated issue of indicators , we come to the next question : should the European Union act ?
I think it is clearer now than at any time in the past , both from the conclusions to come out of Nice and the conclusions to come out of Barcelona , that a social policy dimension is needed in European policies and that the impact of European economic policies in the social area needs to be evaluated .
That is why this is the first time , and I think this is worth stressing , that we have had a plan and any attempt to work together at European level on the issues of poverty and exclusion .
The second question is : can the European Union act - under the Treaties and by dividing responsibilities at European and national level ?
I think that we need to be clear and tread carefully here .
Of course there is the question of subsidiarity .
Of course social policy is becoming more and more decentralised and is being exercised at local , regional and government level in all the Member States .
But I am certain that , by applying the method of open coordination , which does not impose legal frameworks , we have already reaped important initial results .
Countries which have never had national action plans are now presenting organised national action plans .
Valuable experience from countries which have already applied programmes is being passed to all the other countries .
We are working together on the important issue of indicators and we are also working together on the important issue of how to apply these plans .
I think that your report has a specific contribution to make and there are a number of points , the most important points , on which I completely agree and it is these points , I think , that should be discussed at the round table scheduled for October , during the Danish Presidency .
So it is important for the public debate on poverty to be an open debate involving more people , involving the people concerned , not just parliaments and social partners .
Ex-post evaluation of each programme also plays an important part .
Quantitative targets at national level are vital , distinguishing responsibilities for national action plans at national , regional and local level is very important and , of course , the budget and linking public funds to proposed policies and measures also plays a very important part .
During the Danish Presidency , we shall be evaluating national action plans on poverty to date and discussing preparations for future plans , as I said , at the round table in October .
These are the issues we need to focus on , in order to ensure that the second generation of national action plans is far more effective .
Finally , given that the Commission has been called on to act in the wake of this report , I should perhaps remind you that , since the Commission presented its communication to Parliament last October , the common position on social employment has been approved in Laeken and the programme on social exclusion , a very specific programme on which we worked together with Parliament and which gives the Member States tools to develop action plans on social exclusion , has also been approved .
It is , I think , important to remember that we have extended the procedure to all the candidate countries and we are in the process of signing action plans on exclusion with all the candidate countries so that , once they have joined , they can integrate fully into current procedures . Of course , we must not forget the very important work carried out - and which will continue during the second half of the year - on the subject of indicators , following approval of the initial 18 indicators at the Laeken Summit last December .
I should like to refer once more to the repeated discussions with your committee on the importance of social indicators to the policies of the European Union as a whole and how social indicators play a very important part at the spring Council , helping to shape final economic decisions in every country .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is the report ( A5-0186 / 2002 ) by Mr Stockmann , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation amending Council Regulation ( EEC ) No 95 / 93 of 18 January 1993 on common rules for the allocation of slots at Community airports .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , there is more and more going on in the skies above Europe , and , fortunately , also in European policy in the field of air transport .
The consequences for the air transport sector of 11 September appear to have been almost overcome , and annual growth rates of up to 5 % are again being assumed , which means that air travel will increase twofold by 2015 .
Whilst we are responding in political terms to this challenge by creating a single European sky , we still need greater capacity at our overstretched airports .
There is also a need for more airport infrastructure , but none of us can seriously imagine that we might manage to double the number of runways by 2015 , and so we have to generate additional capacity .
It is vital that this be done by as efficient as possible a system of allocating takeoff and landing rights on overloaded airports .
The old Regulation on slots dates back to 1993 and can no longer cope with present-day challenges ; its lack of precision meant that it was not uniformly applied by the Member States .
It failed to guarantee fair and transparent allocation of slots , put new applicants at a disadvantage and gave rise to problems such as illicit trading in slots .
The Commission proposal on new rules for the allocation of slots is a necessary intermediate step .
A final regulation must result from discussions over the next few years .
Even though the intermediate step we are taking today appears to many to mainly bring with it technical improvements to details of the old Regulation , it does at the same time have political implications that are necessary from the point of view of regulatory policy and will seem to some people to have a very broad scope .
At this point , I would like to thank the members of the committee for their fine cooperation and their concentration on the issues .
Despite some differences of opinion , we have succeeded in keeping the balance of the regulatory package as a whole before our eyes .
Our improvements to the Commission proposal are intended to make the Commission text more precise , to establish standard European criteria for granting the status of coordinated airports , to further enhance the coordinator 's authority and independence , to retain flexibility and security in terms of planning for established air carriers and to promote the new applicants ' flexibility and opportunities for gaining access to the market .
I want to say something about the individual points .
Firstly , at the heart of the Regulation lies a new definition of the slots as a right of usage , and thus the property neither of airlines , nor of airports , but rather a public good .
The committee has additionally stipulated that the whole of the airport infrastructure required for a flight falls within the definition of a right of usage .
We have for the first time pointed out the connection between airway slots and airport slots , which will make it easier to synchronise the two in the future .
My second point is uncontentious but not , for that reason , insignificant .
We have further strengthened the position of the coordinator , freeing him from any obligations to pay compensation , which I believe to be indispensable to his independence .
We have defined his competences more clearly over against the coordination committee ; he has the right to withhold slots if airlines fail to comply with their duty to provide information , and he is entitled to compare his data with other coordinators and schedules facilitators in order to bring to light any inconsistencies in schedules .
Thirdly , we should discuss the established airlines ' legitimate interests .
Contrary to the Commission proposal , we are in favour of them continuing to have the option of re-timing in order to progressively optimise their schedules .
We have widened the exceptions to the ' use-it-or-lose-it ' rule in order to be able to take the impact of events like those of 11 September , for example , and we have set aside the Commission 's proposal that ' grandfather rights ' should be linked to the size of aircraft , believing as we do that the companies need greater flexibility , which is desirable both for economic and environmental reasons .
The alternative would no doubt have been counterproductive .
I turn , fourthly , to the legitimate interests of the new carriers .
The Commission 's definition of new applicants was , admittedly , not agreeable to many of the established airlines , but we consider it right in principle , as there is a fundamental contradiction between the concentration process which can be observed in air transport and the competition for routes that liberalisation is actually seeking to bring about .
We have tightened up the definition of new applicants in order further to strengthen them and make it easier for them to transfer and exchange slots .
Fifthly , where there are clear rules , there must also be the possibility of sanctions .
We have laid it down that slots can be withdrawn after one warning if they are being misused .
Member States can also impose fines .
Please allow me to end with a glance into the future .
Many members of the committee wanted to have new fundamental rules as soon as possible , and that I can understand , as the intermediate step we are taking today does not yet satisfy the need for renewal .
However , the effects of this Regulation need first to be evaluated , as the air transport market is both a highly sensitive area and one of great importance to the economy , making a rush job inappropriate .
We also still have time - which we need - to seek the consent of the main actors in the air transport market .
The study on models for the allocation of slots , produced at the Commission 's behest , has speeded up , but certainly not yet completed , this process of reaching a consensus .
Our attempt at finding air transport a place in the logic of optimising transport overall could not , unfortunately , be enshrined in the Regulation on slots .
I think that is a pity , but we should not lose sight of this facet of future legislation .
I hope that the report will get as big a majority in plenary tomorrow as it did in the committee .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of my group I wish to thank Mr Stockmann for an excellent and competently prepared report .
It is vital to have careful coordination of slots to improve efficiency and safety at airports .
Take-off and landing times are also of considerable economic importance for air carriers .
Our group supports the rapporteur 's efforts to adopt the key elements of the Commission proposal : an independent coordinator , priority being given to new entrants , and the legal status of slots specifically as a right of use .
It is important to have a system of allocation of slots that is as flexible as possible for those companies , for example , that do business abroad .
The right of Member States to limit ' grandfather rights ' to operate aircraft of a specified minimum size serves little purpose .
Discriminating against small aircraft could , for example , lead to problems for a small country 's traffic heading for another Member State .
Our group has tabled two amendments .
The purpose of Amendment No 56 is to clarify the Commission proposal regarding the allocation of slots to new entrants .
The amendment preserves the idea of priority being given them , but at the same time specifies that priority should be dependent on the number of slots requested .
In my opinion , Amendment No 45 weakens the position of new entrants .
I would also ask what the Commission 's view is of this proposal .
The Commission has started to take action to avoid congestion at airports .
The purpose of the new market mechanisms is to more effectively coordinate supply and demand regarding slots .
Finding long-term solutions has nevertheless been a very slow process in recent years .
Amendment No 57 represents the desire of our group to have the Commission commit to submitting a more comprehensive proposal on slots .
Our group believes the present system must be radically revised .
There has to be greater access to the slots market than there is at present .
On taking up office , Commissioner De Palacio made the state of affairs in aviation one of her key priorities .
Now - halfway through the Commission 's mandate - this is also evident in practice .
This proposal is one of many .
The problems in aviation are making themselves felt in the air and at the airports .
It seems as if the problems on the ground are less pronounced than they are in the air , but appearances are deceptive , in my view .
Parliament has nurtured the wish to review the allocation of slots for a long time .
The intransparent manner in which these rights have been ' allocated ' to airline companies to date is not so much creating clarity as raising more questions .
This , in fact , touches the very core of this proposal .
Namely the question whether these slot rights are ' owned ' or constitute a ' right of usage ' .
I take the view that the latter is the case , given the public nature of airports .
If agreement exists in this matter , there is , in my view , no reason to decide on changing the rules of the game at this stage .
Indeed , if we have to wait until a general consensus has been reached , a decision might be a long time coming .
An important line of approach for this proposal is the opportunities offered to newcomers on the market .
In the interest of an effectively functioning market , it is necessary that they are afforded the opportunity to join .
However , we should remain mindful of the fact that a qualitatively sound network should continue to exist .
The policy must be adapted accordingly .
The distribution of slots must therefore not result in newcomers being accorded discarded slots only .
A good mixture of applications of current providers and newcomers is essential .
This means , Mr President , that we can largely identify with the Stockmann report as it has been submitted by the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism .
We will support it accordingly .
Mr President , Madam Vice-President , ladies and gentlemen , I too , on behalf of my group , would like to warmly welcome Mr Stockmann 's report , as it is an excellent one , and one which deals with its subject very much in depth .
I speak for the majority of my group when I say that my colleague Mrs Foster , for whom I have very high regard , has this evening put forward an opinion held by a minority in our group .
The majority in my group , just as in the committee , supports the Commission proposal to unambiguously clarify the legal nature of slots and to finally make clear that trading in slots between one airline and another is illegal and will remain so .
As rights of usage , the slots belong neither to the air carriers nor to the airports , and have only an ancillary role .
They enable air space to be used efficiently , economically , and in a way that treats the environment with respect , and so my group will be voting against Mrs Foster 's three amendments tomorrow , believing as we do that the Commission is very much in the right .
Secondly , I believe that the new version of the slot regulation aims at formulating the rules for the allocation of slots in a way that is more transparent and more favourable to competition .
Of course , the ' grandfather rights ' of the existing airlines are to be safeguarded , but only to some extent .
We need competition , and I hope that my British colleagues will agree with me on that .
We need competition , and so we also need new slots for new air carriers , in order to better organise competition in air travel and for the passengers ' benefit .
The end result is that the coordinators ' roles and independence are strengthened .
This is to enhance the possibility of taking unused times from the existing airlines and allocating them to others , thus improving the efficiency with which airspace is used in an economical and environmentally friendly way .
That is the objective .
Mr President , Madam Vice-President , please let us conclude by pointing out that I hope that the Council will , under Spanish Presidency , take a significant step in June .
We have done our homework .
We have , admittedly , produced 52 amendments in committee , but they are in the interests of greater precision .
I hope that the Commission will work a miraculous transformation and support most of them .
In any case , it strikes me as important that the Council should reach a decision quickly , as we want the revised slots regulation to benefit air carriers , and we want it without delay .
Airlines have found themselves in difficulties as a result of the general economic recession and of the events of 11 September .
We believe that a revised slots regulation will help airlines , airports and passengers , and so we ask you to support the Stockmann report .
Mr President , Mrs De Palacio , ladies and gentlemen , the airline market is an example of how national egoism is crumbling .
No one can have the sky to himself .
The liberalised airline market makes the free movement of goods and people possible and you can even find your very own flight attendant on board an aircraft , which is what happened to me .
We can promote competition through proper control of slots .
Mr Stockmann has in my opinion succeeded splendidly in balancing the position of the large dominant companies with the need of new , dynamic companies to exploit their own innovative approach .
Consumers and the business world will benefit significantly from this sort of development both in the form of lower prices and new services .
At this stage the Commission has submitted a proposal to us that is slightly larger and broader in scope than the original one , but we cannot wait around for a year in a rapidly developing aviation industry . I therefore earnestly support the approach that has been chosen .
It is of crucial importance to open up the market to the new entrants and it is more than fair that they should have half the vacant slots .
The slots must also be fairly allocated to foreign companies .
Protectionism must have its wings clipped , whatever the cost .
Good air connections have intrinsic value , but that is something national airlines cannot have .
Monopolies are the poor man 's worst enemy , and new Sabenas simply cannot any longer be supported out of the taxpayer 's pocket .
Next we must create transatlantic airspace and end the bilateral agreements between the Member States of the EU and the United States of America .
The current practice very obviously favours the Americans , and I also expect the Commission to act quickly after the Court of Justice has given a decision in this matter .
There is still a lot of room in the airline industry for greater efficiency , and that might be said of us here too in the European Parliament , and for that reason I will end my speech here .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the current rules relating to slots have worked relatively well considering the extra pressure on the system resulting from the increase in air traffic .
But I say ' relatively ' because the reality is that studies and complaints indicate that , unfortunately , there is often a total lack of transparency in the functioning , the allocation and the development of the use of these slots , and that , furthermore , the various Member States of the Union have not been interpreting the current rules in a uniform manner .
Far from it . On this basis , on 20 June 2001 , the Commission decided to review the rules and to approach it in two stages .
I must point out that all of this coincides with what has been said and repeated in this Parliament on various occasions .
As for the two stages in which we propose to implement this reform , the first stage is aimed at clarifying the different provisions of the Regulation which , on being applied , have proven to be clearly deficient and have led to differing interpretations amongst the Member States .
But furthermore it is a question of resolving a series of deficiencies which have been pointed out to us by the airlines and the airports , and by the different operators .
Finally , some of you have pointed out something fundamental : the need to define what a slot is and we clearly opt for defining it as a right of use .
We must be aware , however , that this is extremely important if we want to achieve legal certainty and move beyond the current situation in which there is nothing , there is no concrete definition of the nature of slots .
Because how can we possibly establish a right of ownership , ladies and gentlemen ?
There are slots for taking off , for landing , but also for overflying .
There are no rights of ownership , but rights of use in relation to a public asset such as airspace , the take-off and landing possibilities other than the facilities of the airports or the areas to be overflown in accordance with the support and assistance provided to air traffic from different locations .


While this is the first stage , which is essentially technical - and I thank Mr Deva for saying that we have achieved a good balance , for that is what I believe we are doing - the second stage is the revision of the possibilities for distributing slots , introducing transparent and non-discriminatory market mechanisms .
Of course , we will do so carefully , prudently , in order to prevent any excessive or unbearable shock to our air sector .
Our intention is to consolidate the European air sector ; in no way do we intend to weaken it .
However , while awaiting this second proposal - for which we are preparing studies which guarantee that this shock does not occur - the current situation must be made clear .
With this approach in mind , the proposal intends to guarantee the greatest possible efficiency in the use of such a scarce resource as slots and ensure uniformity in the interpretation of the regulations and the application of the Regulations and therefore in legal certainty .
To this end , the proposal introduces effective and transparent procedures and the system of penalties which will allow us to achieve the greatest degree of efficiency without having to modify the system of acquired rights .
I would like to thank Parliament , and especially Mr Stockmann , for the work you have done - in which you have always taken a constructive approach - and for your dedication .
We particularly appreciate your balanced and pragmatic approach : we believe that , of the 57 amendments presented , the majority ( 35 in total ) add clarity to the proposal and make it more efficient and therefore the Commission can accept them , with modification in some cases .
However , we reject the other 22 , which I will refer to briefly .
Firstly , Amendments Nos 53 , 54 and 55 , which could significantly upset the balance of the proposal , affecting essential points such as the prohibition on creating a black market by means of false exchanges , as well as those relating to penalties .
Furthermore , these amendments have not been adopted by the RETT Committee and the Commission must reject them .
Secondly , we must reject Amendments Nos 1 , 7 , 18 and 28 , which would significantly change the balanced objectives of the proposal we are presenting today .
Amendment No 8 exempts the coordinator from all responsibility , despite their greater obligations and capacities , and the Commission cannot therefore support it .
However , we could accept Amendment No 48 with modifications to the wording in order to guarantee that coordinators are held responsible in the case of serious negligence or wilful misconduct .
Amendment No 20 is incompatible with the definition of a slot and ignores the need to always analyse capacities before imposing the coordination of slots .
It must therefore also be rejected .

The Commission considers Amendment No 23 to be excessively broad and does not agree with it ; we feel the same about Amendment No 25 , which ignores the procedural rules , which are an operative requirement for the coordination committee if transparency is to be guaranteed .
We therefore reject both .
Likewise , Amendments Nos 33 and 34 , except the reference to the guidelines at Community level .
We must also reject Amendments Nos 35 and 43 , since they impact negatively on the recognised Community law on intermodality and public service obligations .
I would like to add that Amendment No 57 , which Mr Pohjamo referred to , introduces a time period which is impossible to comply with .
The Commission has just begun a procedure for selecting an expert who will have to produce a report and we will have it in the summer of 2003 at the earliest .
The Commission has committed itself to consulting the air transport sector and the Member States on the results of a study on the market system for the allocation of slots before proceeding to a new legislative proposal on this issue .
Finally , we believe that Amendments Nos 2 , 15 , 26 , 38 , 45 , 46 and 50 are either redundant or inconsistent with worldwide practices in the allocation of slots and therefore we cannot accept them .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to say that I agree with what Mr Jarzembowski said in relation to urgency .
Let us hope that the Council can adopt a decision at the next meeting , although I think that will be difficult , given the development of the technical work .
In any event , I would like to thank you for your contributions and your work , with a very special mention for Mr Stockmann , whose work has been tremendous .
I hope that you will support this Commission proposal in the vote tomorrow .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Mr President , I would firstly like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Mastorakis .
I believe that his work has been serious and responsible and that furthermore he has been able to bring together a consensus within the committee which has meant that today we are able to hold a debate and approve during this plenary a report which has been difficult and complicated and which has been drawn up as a result of his work and I believe that this achievement deserves credit .

At the same time , if you will allow me , Mr President , I would also like to congratulate the Vice-President on behalf of my group , since if one thing characterises the work over these years , it is reflected in this report : it has been a challenge which stems from the problems relating to accidents off European coasts and a challenge from the public , and it is work which has resulted in the creation of various safety agencies ( at the moment we are witnessing the creation of the Maritime Safety Agency ) and furthermore it is a shared challenge , supported by the parliamentary committee .

Furthermore , I believe the really positive thing is that , in her work , the Vice-President has the trust of the parliamentary committee and this takes the form - if we look back at events over these three years - of the support she has received for her management and her projects , which in many cases have been controversial and complicated .
As I have said , together with this agency , we are trying to adopt one of the multiple measures proposed by the Commission to respond to a European public demand : safety at sea .
And we now have a challenge ; that that agency should function transparently and efficiently , but that it should not only function in relation to the two important challenges - that of the safety of sea transport , including passenger and coastal shipping , and that of the protection of the marine environment - but also in relation to those small details and areas which are not apparently as essential as the big issues , such as recreational boating - including the issue of jet skis and speed-boats which cause concern amongst the citizens of Europe .
I believe that the agency is able to respond to these questions .
Finally , I believe that this response should be a quick one so that the work of the Commission and the work of Parliament are shown to be connected and capable of responding to the concerns of the European citizens .
Mr President , I would also like to support the rapporteur , in particular his recommendation to the House that we endorse the common position on the establishment of the Maritime Safety Agency , albeit with the important provisos so clearly stated .
I would like to thank the rapporteur , on behalf of the Socialist Group , for the way in which he has skilfully piloted this part of the Erika package through Parliament , keeping all sides together .
The fact that we have a better product at the end of the process than we did at the beginning is a tribute to his skill in particular .
This is the final part of the Erika package so we also ought to thank the Commissioner , who has been working relentlessly to ensure that disasters like the Erika and so many others in EU waters in recent years do not occur again .
We did have many new laws in the 80s and 90s , but they were not fully implemented or complied with .
I hope that this new EU initiative , the Maritime Safety Agency , will coordinate , monitor and enforce maritime law .
I hope it will come up with fresh proposals where necessary , but in an open and transparent way .
We all hope that it will work with us in the European Parliament to make our seas safer and protect our coastal environment .
For too long in Europe , the laws of the sea were more appropriate to the 19th than the 21st century .
I hope that by agreeing to endorse the Commissioner 's recommendation and the common position we can help modernise EU maritime safety and have EU safety laws that we can all be proud of , but of course the proof will be when we no longer have terrible maritime disasters .
You can never have 100 % safety , but this proposal will do a lot to make our seas safer , save lives and protect our coastal environment .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am extremely happy to be attending this debate today .
I would firstly like to thank Mr Mastorakis for his magnificent work .
As he pointed out , we are coming to the end of the negotiation , since Amendments Nos 2 , 4 and 5 are accepted by the Commission , because they clearly improve the text we received from the Council .
And not only are they supported by the Commission , but this morning the relevant group in the Council has expressed its support and willingness to incorporate and accept them .
We can therefore conclude this negotiation , the approval of this legislative text , if tomorrow Parliament supports the text with these amendments , which would then be approved by the Council at its next meeting .

I would like to say that , as Mr Ripoll y Martnez de Bedoya and Mr Watts pointed out a moment ago , we have been debating maritime safety for a year and a half now .
We have confronted challenges and we have cooperated in order to prevent a repetition of horrendous events such as the sinking of the Erika , which not only endanger human lives , but which also pollute the sea with terrible consequences for the inhabitants of coastal areas and for flora and fauna and environmental protection .
Of the six initiatives which made up the Erika I and Erika II packages , this is the fifth .
The sixth initiative , the only one we are yet to deal with , the most essential , the increase in the guarantee of the level of support and the guarantee relating to oil pollution is being debated at the moment within the International Maritime Organisation , and let us hope that a decision will be achieved which will allow for an international solution , since the maritime sector is an international one , and which does not oblige us to turn to a European initiative .
An international solution would be much more positive .
If this is achieved , as we hope it will be , within the International Maritime Organisation , it would be the last initiative for the Erika I and Erika II packages and we would have concluded our work .
In this regard , I would like to thank all of you and in particular the various rapporteurs who have been involved in the different proposals - the five of them - which we have debated and worked on , but also the whole House and particularly the services of the Commission , of the TREN Directorate-General , since it is thanks to their effort , their work , their professionalism and the speed with which they have responded that we have got this far .
I would also like to thank the Council for having responded for once to what the citizens are asking us for : that we provide a framework for greater safety and greater protection for the maritime sector in general and for pollution caused by the dumping of oil in particular .
Such a tough reality has allowed us to move ahead on other initiatives which will improve maritime safety and benefit maritime traffic and therefore the maritime sector as a whole .
Thank you very much .
I believe we will now very possibly be able to conclude the Erika package and the agency will be implemented as soon as possible , but , as you know , ladies and gentlemen , it is not us who decide the headquarters , but we hope that the next European Council will come to an agreement and finally tell us where it will be , and the sooner the better , since it is very urgent .
Thank you very much , Mr Mastorakis .
Thank you very much , Mr President .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Vote on request for urgent procedure
Mr President , I hope that the House will not accept this request for urgency .
I was rapporteur for the legal basis issue when this report originally came before the committee and this House .
At that time it was proposed to create a common market organisation for ethyl alcohol alone .
In committee that was amended to cover synthetic as well as agriculturally originating ethyl alcohol .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , after studying it carefully , came to the view and reported back that there was no satisfactory legal basis that could be devised for that proposal .
On that account the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development proposed to this House , and the proposal was accepted , that the project be withdrawn for reconsideration by the Commission .
Instead there was very quick reconsideration , and a substantial change .
The Legal Affairs Committee , having had a look at it last week , concluded that the same objection concerning the legal basis applies because there is still an attempt , under Article 37 , to bring together agricultural and synthetic ethyl alcohol .
This is unsatisfactory .
Where a serious question has been raised about the legal basis , the committee responsible , upon considering a new solution to the problem , should surely once again ask for the legal basis issue to be properly looked at , not rush it through under urgent procedure .
With regard to the speech by Mr MacCormick , I would refer you to Rule 63 ( 4 ) on the verification of the legal basis .
Your comments will be taken into account in the vote on the content .
( Parliament approved the request for urgent procedure )
Mr President , I wish , on behalf of my group and also in consultation with all the shadow rapporteurs and with the coordinators of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , to ask that my two reports on the rules on participation in the Framework Programme and the Euratom Programme and on dissemination of their results should be adjourned to the July part-session .
Yesterday evening we succeeded , after intensive work , in reaching an agreement with the Council .
It was not possible to have this agreement formally voted on in the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , and so I now ask for consideration of both reports to be adjourned .
The next item is the joint debate on :
the Commission statement on the visit by the EU troika to Algeria and the signature of the EU-Algeria agreement ;
and the report ( A5-0175 / 2002 ) by Mr Morillon and Mr Cohn-Bendit , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on relations between the European Union and the Arab Maghreb Union : a privileged partnership ( 2001 / 2027 ( INI ) ) .
Mr President , the signing of the association agreement in Valencia on 22 April will give a new framework and new impetus to our relations with Algeria .
The Commission encouraged Parliament to give its approval to this agreement as quickly as possible .
The Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy has already had a first exchange of views on this agreement .
The Commission shares most of the views expressed during this debate , especially as far as the human rights situation is concerned .
In particular the issues of missing persons and access by certain human rights organisations to Algeria are worrying .
The troika , headed by Mr Pique , met last week in Algiers with Algerian authorities , and in particular with President Bouteflika and Mr Belkhadem , Minister for Foreign Affairs .

As Mr Pique has indicated , the political dialogue was rich , free and fruitful .
It was the first troika visit since the signature of the association agreement , which opens a new chapter in our bilateral relations .
The possibility of negotiating an interim agreement was considered , although there is no agreement on this for the moment .
The presidency expressed our satisfaction on the establishment of regular political dialogue , which will be reinforced when the association agreement enters into force .
It was recognised that the recent parliamentary elections constituted substantial progress in the strengthening of the democratic process in Algeria .
The issue of human rights and missing persons was tackled , but unfortunately , taking into account the brevity of the meeting , too briefly .
The Commission recalled that a list of missing persons was transmitted to the Algerian authorities and that the Commission was still waiting for a response from the Algerian Government .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I admit that I am a little surprised by the Commission statement on the troika visit ; perhaps I will have the opportunity , in the second half of my speech , to describe the situation in Algeria .
General Morillon and myself are presenting a joint report on EU / Maghreb Arab Union relations .
Mr Morillon , who is currently contesting an election campaign , is unfortunately unable to be here today , but his colleague , Mr Galeote Quecedo , will be standing in for him .
The aim of the report is to define the nature and the structure of EU / Maghreb Arab Union relations .
By this , I do mean Maghreb , and not the individual countries of Arab Maghreb .
That is the fundamental idea behind the report .
Although we state there is a need to draw up reports on the situation of and relations with the individual countries , such as Morocco , Tunisia , Algeria , Mauritania or other Maghreb countries , our original idea was to try to see if we could move forward relations between the South Mediterranean as a whole , as a possible collective subject , and the North Mediterranean , in other words , the European Union .
I am aware that some Members were not or are not entirely in agreement with the position that has been adopted . Although we have not discussed the specific situation in certain countries in this report , this is not because we believe that this would be the wrong approach , but because we feel that this approach is not suited to the structure of our report .
Our essential aim is to force the hand , as it were , of the Maghreb countries so that they create a Maghreb Union , in other words , so that they succeed in developing a form of cooperation and that they present themselves as Maghreb to the people of Europe .
That is why we want , for example , the assessment of the association agreements of each country to be carried out within the framework of a structure that is common to the European Union and the Maghreb Union , in other words , a joint delegation , and that Members of Parliament also take part in this assessment and not simply governments or the Commission .
As you know , Article 2 of the association agreements stipulates respect for human rights .
To some extent , Article 2 is a phantom clause .
It exists , but we do not really know how to apply it .
To the best of my knowledge , there has , so far , been no genuine dialogue , no genuine assessment of the progress made in developing freedoms in the region , nor any debate in Parliament .
What we want , first of all , is an initial debate on the development of democracy within the Maghreb countries , and secondly , a debate with the European Union on secularity .
In my view , the main problem of all the Maghreb countries relates to the fact that , in the name of the fight against terrorism and against religious fundamentalism , increasing numbers of laws and government measures have been adopted whose ultimate effect is to suppress these freedoms .
The idea of the report is to establish a structure , to create a Maghreb Union , as a whole , and to form an alliance between the collective of the Maghreb Union and that of the European Union .
I would like to add some of my own thoughts on Algeria .
It is still hard to believe that a troika has visited Algeria , and is discussing a situation where 45 % of the population did not even participate in elections ; where , in Algiers , this figure was not even 25 % ; where , in a region like Kabylia , the participation level was barely 2 % . It is still hard to believe that the troika is telling us that yes , Sir , everything is going well , that democratic change has begun in Algeria .
Algeria is experiencing economic crisis , Algeria is experiencing political crisis , it is experiencing democratic crisis , and the European Union must really ask itself whether it has chosen the right time to sign an association agreement that does not tackle any of these problems .
Mr President , I naturally could not start without acknowledging my colleague and friend , Philippe Morillon , who , as Mr Cohn-Bendit has said , cannot be here today as a result of electoral obligations in his country .
We in my group are very pleased to congratulate Philippe Morillon because we think he does almost everything well , and I am therefore going to sing the praises of the two rapporteurs who have reached an agreement on a text which has won the almost unanimous support of the parliamentary committee and I hope that there will also be such unanimity in the vote in plenary , because relations between the European Union and the Maghreb and the impetus we are generally trying to give to the Barcelona process undoubtedly require a generalised political will , as we saw with the Valencia Ministerial Summit , since this process will no doubt meet with difficulties along the way .
One of the keys to the success of this report has been the consensus reached by the rapporteurs in order to provide the report with a strategic vision of this relationship , thereby preventing - as Mr Cohn-Bendit has just said - getting bogged down in the debate on the internal situation of any one country in the region and I therefore call on the different parliamentary groups to ensure that we maintain this consensus and do not accept the amendments presented on certain specific countries , which the European Parliament will no doubt have to give its opinion on , but there will be other opportunities to do so .
Furthermore , in the cases of Morocco , Algeria and Tunisia there are various reports under discussion in other places .
Like the rapporteurs , my group believes that this is not the place to begin this debate .
On the other hand , I am glad that there have been amendments on three issues I consider to be essential to the report .
The first is the commitment to the fight against human trafficking , for which the European Union must provide countries of origin with incentives , using association agreements and its policy of cooperation in order to combat the mafias which promote illegal immigration .
Secondly , and in parallel , we must also commit ourselves to the development of those countries and therefore the fact that the European Parliament has not missed the opportunity in this report to promote the creation of a specific financial body for the Euro-Mediterranean area also seems to me to be worthy of praise .
Finally , I believe it to be essential that we develop a parliamentary dimension for this Euro-Mediterranean relationship by creating a joint parliamentary assembly similar to the one which exists with the ACP countries .
I hope we will be practical and that this formula will be applied in the debate next week in Bari .
And here in this House I hope we conform to our duty of mutual loyalty which the rapporteurs have given an example of and that their work therefore receives the support of the whole House .
Mr President , our group attaches great importance to this report , which comes after Valencia and follows the Esteve report , which received huge consensus in this House .
It also informs the Commission and the Council of the European Parliament 's desire to make the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership a political , strategic priority for the Union , and the Maghreb dimension of this partnership must be fostered and supported .
Mr Cohn-Bendit is right : we need to progress from a bilateral to a multilateral vision of this relationship .
Moreover , there are positive signs coming from the countries which have resumed contact and cooperation after many years ; the desire for cooperation is clear from the fact that a meeting of Arab Mahhreb Union Foreign Ministers was held last January and that it has been decided to hold a meeting of these countries ' Heads of State in Algiers on 21 and 22 June next .
This signal must therefore be sustained , not just as regards regional free trade but also as regards social issues , the management of complex phenomena such as immigration and the development of human rights and the rule of law in these countries .
In this regard , I would point out that there is a desire on the part of these countries to cooperate in the management of immigration policy , and this is important for us if we want to protect the Union 's external borders , but we cannot , as Europeans , focus solely on this aspect : we must also be open to discussions with these countries on how and under what conditions managed , lawful immigration is possible .
Often , however , European governments ' policies run counter to these principles , and that could place us in a position of conflict with these countries too .

Then , as regards human rights , I will not repeat what Mr Cohn-Bendit said - with which our group fully agrees - about using Article 2 to introduce dialogue and evaluation with a view to advancing the development of the rights of the people and institutions which enforce it .
As regards Algeria , I too am a little disappointed by the Commissioner 's words .
I myself had the opportunity to be in Algeria during the recent elections with a Parliamentary delegation and I would warn that the situation in Kabylia should not be underestimated , for the rift is deep .
Similarly , we need to encourage greater openness on the part of this country for its attitude towards other countries is still too closed and lacks transparency .
I feel that we should pursue this objective through the association agreement , but dialogue on these issues is a requirement of the association agreement .

Mr President , I would firstly like to congratulate Mr Cohn-Bendit and Mr Morillon because the working approach proposed in this report reflects the approach drawn up in the resolution on the Euro-Mediterranean Ministerial Conference in Valencia .
Therefore , we will do everything possible to ensure that the consensus approach will allow this report to be effective .
I am going to refer directly to the issue of human rights , as Mrs Napoletano did previously .
It is especially appropriate that today 's debate on Algeria , proposed by the Liberal Group , is taking place so soon after the elections that a delegation from Parliament attended .
I must also say that I was surprised by the Commissioner 's comments on human rights in relation to the visit of the troika , a visit which furthermore took place after the elections ; I would like to remind you that our visit took place before the elections .
The Committee for Information on Algeria is at work and will publish its conclusions at the appropriate time , in expectation of the work on the report on ratification which is being prepared by Mr Obiols i Germ .
I would like to point out that the almost complete lack of participation in the elections in Kabilia , the very low turn-out in Algeria as a whole and the fact that the majority of the population has not been involved and that there have been significant complaints about human rights is extremely worrying .
In this regard , I would like to insist once again that in our resolution on the Valencia Conference , we express our unanimous concern at the human rights situation , we defend the need for the situation not to worsen in certain countries with which we have signed association agreements - and the conditions are worsening - and we propose the establishment of mechanisms for applying the democratic clause .
If we do not move in this direction , our credibility will hit rock-bottom .


Therefore , Mr President , I insist that the report by Mr Morillon and Mr Cohn-Bendit moves in the right direction ; we will try to persuade them to support our amendments , at least the general ones , not those relating to specific countries .
If over the coming months we are not effective in our defence of human rights , through mechanisms and instruments rather than through declarations , I do not believe we will be moving in the right direction .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the two rapporteurs , Mr Morillon and Mr Cohn-Bendit , on their work .

I believe we should not forget the special situation currently affecting relations between the European Union and the Arab Maghreb ; the economic association agreements are leading to a genuine unofficial enlargement towards the South and must bring us closer together on such important issues as immigration .
The Maghreb representatives are constantly telling us that they will do nothing about immigration until the European Union offers them clear compensations .
Neither must we forget potentially explosive situations such as the Western Sahara , which is impeding the creation of the Maghreb Arab Union , which is so important if the economic and political union of the Maghreb and its relations with the European Union are really going to be what they should be .
Mr President , I too have just returned from Algeria , having been a member of the parliamentary delegation . I wish to use my speaking time to describe the expectation and hope that many Algerians have placed in relations with Europe and to describe their thoughts and demands as well .
Today , Algeria has , of course , passed a milestone , shall we say , by holding elections , in which the absolute majority was gained by the so-called new FLN .
First and foremost , however , Algeria is a country with disastrous social conditions in which hundreds of thousands of families are struggling for survival . Eighty per cent of the country 's population consists of young people , whose sole future prospect is unemployment .
An additional concern is that the acceleration of the liberalisation process and our future privatisations risk making the situation worse .
This social situation is , without doubt , connected to the record level of non-participation in the last elections .
The Algeria of today is defined by the citizens ' movement in Kabylia , formed in spring 2001 to condemn the repression and killing of 115 young people , is still active in Algeria .
It is defined by the women 's collective , by the lawyers who are defending more than 150 of the movement 's militants who have been detained , some for more than two months .
Algeria is also defined by remarkable aspirations to construct a society which reconciles its identity , fundamental freedoms and development which will benefit all people .
The future of Algeria certainly does not lie in repressing democratic aspirations , in restricting the freedom of the press . Instead , it lies in taking into account the often courageous action of many different associations which defend , for example , women 's rights , which call for the family code to be repealed , which care for children who have been scarred by violence , or which defend human rights .
Yes , we must revive formal EU-Algerian relations , since the Algerian people have almost single-handedly been coping with an explosion of terrorist extremism for a decade now , whereas other countries only realised the extent of the danger after 11 September .
A great deal of criticism and also many expectations have been expressed by our Algerian counterparts , originating in particular from associations , independent trade unions , students and the Kabyle movement , regarding the lack of prior consultation in Algeria and also the content of the association agreement .
With regard to the latter , Algeria must , first and foremost , respect its international commitments on freedom but there is also the question of the social consequences of opening-up the borders and markets and of a policy that , it is claimed , is entirely liberal , at a time when the Union is presenting itself as a fortress .
Lastly , it would , without doubt , be tragic if the genuine democratic potential that exists in Algerian society continues to be wasted , or even stifled .
The Algerian authorities , as well as the European Union , must listen to these aspirations .
I support what my fellow Members have said with regard to the Union ; namely , how can the troika that visited Algiers some days ago openly bring up the question of human rights , which is a positive step , and also welcome the organisation of elections , which caused a general uproar among many Algerians ?
Given that these elections were boycotted by several democratic parties and by an entire region , Kabylia , I feel that we should , at least , be slightly dubious .
It is true , the economic and social situation of the Maghreb people is explosive and the measures introduced by the partnership to defuse the situation have fizzled out !
I would like to end by warning the European Parliament against taking any decision contrary to international law which , since 1991 , has been calling for a referendum on self-determination in Western Sahara .
Parliament has so far resisted giving in to the politics of the fait accompli and any deviation or change of position is not likely to be of help to the Arab Maghreb Union .

Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am one of the Members whom Mr Cohn-Bendit referred to , who does not share the approach taken , although I do congratulate Mr Cohn-Bendit and General Morillon , who is unfortunately not here with us this morning , for the efforts that they have made to try to develop , using this strategic concept of ' Maghreb integration ' , a possible key to relations between the European Union and Maghreb .
I do not believe in this solution , because I think that it is impossible to promote integration mechanisms between such different countries , some of which are fundamentally anti-democratic , several of which are becoming increasingly so .
I wholeheartedly support the criticism of the Commission expressed by Mr Cohn-Bendit and other Members on the question of Algeria .
The question of Tunisia still remains .
I think that the problem faced by the European Union today is that of strengthening democratic opposition in these countries .
We cannot be seen to be demanding with regard to the extremely poor countries of Central or Western Africa , and totally indulgent , as we are , with Tunisia led by President Ben '  vie ' - you are aware that he has changed his name and is no longer President Ben Ali , but President Ben '  vie ' [ for life ] .
This is the result of a referendum in which 99 % of voters voted in favour of this change to the Constitution .
It is absolutely intolerable !
I would like to thank Mrs Napoletano , because we have at least managed to ensure that the Commission undertakes to no longer admit defeat by the local governments in the democratisation programmes .
I think that this reform is fundamental and we will closely monitor the way in which the Commission implements this .
I have taken careful note of the comments made by Mr Galeote Quecedo and other Members .
Specific reports must at once be drafted on each country , particularly Algeria and Tunisia .
Mr Cohn-Bendit undertook to do this in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy .
I note that the Group of the European People 's Party agrees with the position adopted .
Mr Esteve 's comments lead me to believe that he also agrees with this .
I therefore feel that the calendar of the Committee on Foreign Affairs must include the reports on each of these countries which , I reiterate , differ greatly from one another , because most of them have very little democracy .
Mr President , in a recent survey in Morocco , 82 % of secondary school students expressed their desire to emigrate to Europe .
Last year , more than 100 000 Maghreb citizens tried to enter the European Union illegally .
The differences in economic growth and wealth and the democratic differential between the European Union and the Maghreb is increasing .
The gulf is widening .
Furthermore , the most recent political processes in the European Union are demonstrating the extent to which this tragedy of the mass exodus of population leads to greater social and political upheaval , with the risk that this may lead to a growth in populism and the extreme right .
We do not have much time left to reverse this trend and it seems to me that neither the Council nor the Commission realise how extremely serious the problems relating to the development prospects of the Maghreb and the countries of the South and East of the Mediterranean in general are .
There is not much time left , perhaps a decade , but not much more .
This Parliament had expressed the view that Euro-Mediterranean policy should be the top priority of the European Union 's external policy .
Given the way things are developing , perhaps we should reach the conclusion that the European Union 's policy on the Maghreb and Euro-Mediterranean relations should also be one of our main internal priorities .
Mr President , the European Union 's foreign policy in the globalised world we are living in must not recognise borders , but the neighbouring countries must receive special attention , both those of the East and those of the Mediterranean , and in particular the Maghreb countries , whose relations with the European Union are the subject of today 's report .
I must therefore thank the rapporteurs for having included in their reports one of my amendments , which relates to another working group within the Euro-Mediterranean Inter-Parliamentary Forum , in addition to the one dealing with the situation in the Western Sahara .
That group must deal with the problem of migration , especially that which originates from Africa , where Morocco plays a decisive role , because , as well as economic dialogue , we need political , social and cultural dialogue .
Commissioner , in relation to Algeria , I am concerned about Kabilia and the future of the Berbers .

Mr President , I would firstly like to congratulate Mr Morillon and Mr Cohn-Bendit on their excellent report , which has tried to incorporate everybody 's contributions .
However , despite the work done , our group cannot vote in favour of the report because certain elements we consider to be important are lacking and this could be corrected .
One of them relates to the respect the European Parliament must show for international law .
The European Parliament draws up laws and directives and therefore its relationship with the UN must be one of respect and support .
We are therefore concerned about the fact that a crucial issue such as the holding of a self-determination referendum for the Saharaoui people is not suitably dealt with in this report .
This would mean guaranteeing and promoting greater democratic respect in that region , both for the countries of the Maghreb and in their relations with the European Union .
We are therefore presenting an amendment in this regard .
The second issue , which is also very important , and which is partly included in the report , is the recognition that our influence and participation in the economic development of the Maghreb is contradictory .
We are investing and increasing trade and , nevertheless , the consequence of that investment is that the rationalisation of the countryside , and that of trade and services , is creating more unemployment and depriving young people of their future prospects , which is leading to an increase in emigration , which is horrendous but understandable .
We believe that the fact that this report does not adequately deal with this crucial phenomenon is a shortcoming which must be corrected , together with others which relate to improving democratic conditions , as other speakers have already said .
Mr President , cooperation between the European Union and the Maghreb countries must be based on a number of basic principles .
However , I feel that we have the duty , first and foremost , to point out the report 's serious omission to mention the religious persecution of Christians and Jews , who are not free to practise their faith publicly in these countries .
There has recently been an extremely serious incident in these very countries in which a Jewish religious building was damaged , and this should have been mentioned .
Moreover , we cannot continue to maintain the populist stance that opening up our borders is a way to help these countries in future .
Exactly the opposite is true : if anything , the solution is to set up effective measures in fields such as small and medium-sized enterprise and European craft trades in these countries , but such measures are not receiving support .
Therefore , we oppose the indiscriminate opening up of our borders to immigration but we would like , if we may , to stress a fundamental point , namely that the Maghreb countries must undertake to take back the illegal immigrants which the Member States are labouring to repatriate .
Mr President , of course , like all the previous speakers , and particularly the rapporteurs , I am in favour of a strengthened Euro-Mediterranean partnership .
This partnership is of interest both to the countries bordering the Mediterranean and to the whole of the European Union .
And I feel that we should focus , first and foremost , on our relations with the Arab Maghreb Union .
The Maghreb Union remains a pious hope , however , with the creation of this Union encountering a series of obstacles which , unfortunately , have not yet been overcome .
In a few days ' time , the meeting of the AMU Heads of State will be held in Algiers and I would like to highlight one of the obstacles which continues to sour relations between Algeria and Morocco .
I wish to discuss the conflict in Western Sahara and the future of the Western Saharan people .
The rapporteurs quite rightly touched upon this .
As chair of the ad hoc delegation sent on behalf of Parliament to this region , to Tinduf and El-Ayun , I cannot stress enough that we must find a political solution , it is a matter of urgency .
The fate of thousands of Western Saharan men , women and children is at stake , people who , for 26 years , have been living in extremely harsh conditions and are awaiting a solution that recognises their rights and their dignity .
To resolve the situation , a good-will agreement must firstly be reached between the main countries that are directly involved , namely Algeria and Morocco .
I sincerely hope that the meeting between the AMU Heads of State will enable progress to be made in this area .
Mr President , as some of the previous speakers have pointed out , and as the rapporteurs for the report also observe in recital G , the present conflict concerning Western Sahara remains an obstacle to further regional integration .
It cannot be emphasised enough that this 27-year-old conflict is a major problem , and not only for parties directly involved .
What , therefore , I in actual fact miss in the report is a considered opinion discussing the peace plan in actual fact adopted in 1991 by all the parties directly involved in the conflict .
Along with this , there is a more detailed agreement signed by the parties , that is to say Morocco and Polisario , in 1997 in Houston .
Instead , the rejected third way , or what is termed James Baker 's framework agreement , is talked of and continued with , instead of a conclusion being reached as to what we are to do to implement the peace agreement adopted by the parties .
That , I think , is a major shortcoming .
Mr President , I wish to begin , very briefly , by expressing my agreement with what Mrs Lalumire has said , because I believe that the issue of the Western Sahara must be looked at before any report on the Arab Maghreb Union can be considered .
In any event , with regard to the report - and I offer my congratulations to both rapporteurs - I wish to highlight some points that have been made and some omissions .
Amongst the points that have been made , I would highlight in particular the value attached to the political dimension ; with regard to the omissions , I would mention in particular the insufficient value attached to something that could be extremely important and which concerns the Agadir declaration - and also the Valencia declaration - which enabled a significant partnership effort to be made in the field of Justice And Home Affairs , and consequently , for there to be a support base for combating terrorism and trafficking in human beings .
Although economic issues are of undeniable importance , the political value attached to this partnership is , despite everything , and I repeat , in terms of resolving the problem of Western Sahara , a fundamental aspect , which must be emphasised .
Mr President , I would like to ask for your forgiveness since the Convention on the future of Europe is going to change things , as it is going to mean many meetings and much effort , but we will get there if we make that effort and if we are willing to talk , and that is what I wanted to do , by saying the following :
We all have an interest in there being a constructive relationship between the European Union and the Arab Maghreb Union , but surely that constructive relationship must be based on a whole range of aspects , including political ones .
If the Union wishes to act correctly on an international level , that action must be based on conflict prevention and crisis management and regrettably there is an historic conflict in the Maghreb region involving several countries and peoples which has not gone away : the Sahara conflict .

The positive thing about the report presented by Mr Morillon and Mr Cohn-Bendit is firstly that it acknowledges the existence of that conflict , something which the European Union had not done for many years .
This conflict was not on the Union 's agenda .
This conflict must now appear on that agenda as a priority so that we can contribute , on the basis of international law , to the quest for a fair and negotiated solution which safeguards the rights of the peoples , beginning with the Saharaoui people 's right to self-determination and so that we can thereby put an end to an issue which causes great instability in terms of the future of the Arab Maghreb Union and the countries it consists of .
In this respect , the situation is still regrettably deadlocked and it falls to the European Union to apply pressure so that it ceases to be so , and to apply pressure in a good sense , because it would benefit the region and would benefit Europe .
Mr President , the intentions set out in this resolution appear , at least on the surface , to be good .
In fact , the meaning of this document is , as usual , elusive .
In reality , Europe says a lot but does very little , simply because , deep down , it attaches little importance to its relationship with the Maghreb .
This situation arises from the distribution of power in Europe : this European Union , which is dominated by the northern countries - and , what is more , the list of speakers this morning shows this very clearly - is somewhat indifferent towards the Mediterranean .
It could also be due to the fact that , for certain Atlantic interests , it is important that the Mediterranean does not become an autonomous framework for cooperation .
We talk about it , but we almost always talk about it from the point of view of human rights .
That is a way of not talking about it and , what is more , I would point out in passing , allowing ourselves to be used by an opposition which is never asked to justify itself with regard to democracy .
This being the case , our Maghreb neighbours need not fear : France will do what Europe does not .
France will do it because of its history , its natural inclination , its interest , and also because it naturally cooperates with the Maghreb countries as part of the French-speaking community and also , in quite a broad context , as part of the community of French-speaking culture .
I do not think that Europe 's lack of concern about the Mediterranean matters much .
In fact , it is better for it not to be concerned , for France will implement a policy dictated by the historical and geographical context , even if , for now , its politics and Eurocentric perspective tend to somewhat hinder its actions in this field .
Mr President , the Commission endorses the excellent report by Mr Morillon and Mr Cohn-Bendit and the accompanying resolution .
Regional development cooperation with a grouping such as the Arab Maghreb Union is entirely in keeping with the policy guidelines formulated by the Euro-Mediterranean foreign ministers at their summit in Valencia on 22 and 23 April .
Thanks to seven newly signed association agreements , North-South cooperation between the EU and its Mediterranean partners now has a proper legal and economic framework .
An agreement will be signed with Lebanon on 17 June and negotiations with Syria are continuing .
Once these are finalised , the whole set of association agreements between the EU and Barcelona Process partners will be completed .
But there is something more we have to do if we want to put this on a really solid footing .
We have to persuade our partners to engage in South-South cooperation .
That point was made again at Valencia .
It was made in the decisions on trade taken by the Barcelona Process trade ministers when they met in Toledo on 19 March .
The same issues were also raised at the meeting of the industry ministers which I attended a week later .
This decision sets out to facilitate trade and investment amongst the countries of the southern Mediterranean .
Working parties will look in detail at how this closer regional cooperation will function .
From a more general political point of view , the Commission welcomes more frequent meetings between the Arab Maghreb Union countries and looks forward to an AMU summit in the near future .
There is another initiative that the Commission wants to encourage : the Agadir Declaration of 8 May 2001 in which four Arab countries - Morocco , Tunisia , Egypt and Jordan - proposed the setting up of a free trade area .
The Commission hopes that other countries in the region will join this initiative .
In addition to political support the Commission is willing to provide technical assistance , not just for the AMU but also for the Agadir Declaration .
There are two additional points I would like to make on the report .
As far as democracy and human rights are concerned , the Commission obviously shares the view put forward in the draft resolution on the importance of respecting the provisions of the association agreement .
In this respect , sustained action is needed by the EU institutions to improve the situation .
The Commission is currently planning programmes in Algeria and Tunisia through MEDA and the European initiative for democracy and human rights , and will continue to do so independently .
With regard to financial cooperation the Commission is fully aware of the importance of covering the regional dimension .
Ten per cent of funds available under the MEDA programme will be earmarked for regional measures .
Some of these resources could be dedicated to fund intra-Maghreb cooperation .
I will pass on the message from the debate to Mr Patten , who is responsible for this dossier .
Unfortunately he is on mission today .
Thank you very much , Mr Liikanen .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
The next item is the recommendation for second reading of the report ( A5-0180 / 2002 ) by Mrs Roth-Behrendt , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council directive amending Council Directive 76 / 768 / EEC on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to cosmetic products ( 15073 / 1 / 2001 - C5-0072 / 2002 - 2000 / 0077 ( COD ) )
Mr President , I hope we will manage today to conclude a legislative process that was first discussed in Parliament a number of years ago .
This legislation is , of course , concerned with the protection of health , and we all naturally want cosmetic products - soaps , shampoos , perfumes - to be healthy , which means not presenting any hazard to the people who use them .
All Members of this House have a natural interest in making the European cosmetics industry competitive and keeping it that way .
We have , of course , always borne in mind that jobs are tied in with the manufacture of cosmetics and that these jobs deserve to be safeguarded .
Presenting as rapporteur the committee 's second reading to Parliament today , I can tell you that the committee adopted it by 44 votes in favour , with two abstentions , that is to say , with a very , very large majority right across all the political groups .
That is the way we want it .
What do we want to achieve here today ?
We want this second reading to alter the Council 's Common Position , which is poor , feeble , and far from forward-looking .
The Ministers of the Member States , assembled in Council , have missed their chance to set a course and also to hear what their peoples want .
What , then , do the people of Europe want ?
If you were to conduct a survey , it is likely that you would , in many countries , hear very diverse opinions .
Most , though , would agree that there is a sufficient choice of soaps , deodorants , perfumes , and lipsticks .
We do not need hundreds and thousands of them if animals have to undergo lengthy torture to produce them .
So let there be a stop to animal experiments in the field of cosmetics .
You would certainly find an overwhelming majority of the public in favour of that , and in Parliament as well .
Right , we said in the committee second reading , let there be no more animal experiments in the field of cosmetics .
We also go even further and say that , from a certain point , sales of cosmetics tested on animals must cease .
We are convinced that this is the only way that we will step up pressure in favour of alternative methods of testing and on the search for tests in which animals are not tortured , in which animals do not have to suffer .
What do we want in addition to that ?
We want perfumed ingredients that bring out allergic reactions in people and are recognised by experts as allergenic , to be indicated on labels .
Not in the least do we want to ban them .
We want them to be labelled so that people with allergies can make their choice .
We also want consumers to be better able to ascertain how long cosmetics will last , so that they know , when they open a cosmetic or a sun cream , whether they will be able to use the product next year or whether it will have become harmful to health or have lost its effectiveness .
All groups in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy were very much of one mind on these various proposals .
I hope that , when we vote at noon today , we too will be united in an overwhelming majority that will show the Council how very poor we consider its Common Position to be .
I would have liked the Commission and Commissioner Liikanen to have been a bit more courageous and not waited for an absolute majority at second reading in Parliament to force them to change their mind .
I would have liked the Commission to have demonstrated a bit more flexibility and courage on some points , as , in my experience , Mr Liikanen otherwise usually does .
I hope that we here are at least in agreement that this partnership works .
I would now also like to say something about this partnership .
There is indeed a great deal of disagreement in this House , and some of us still maintain that disagreements are a good thing , in that they make clear to the public the differences between us and the reasons why they should vote for one party or for another .
I must admit that I am , at the moment , more concerned about the matter in hand .
I am very grateful to members of the other groups for their cooperation , which has been extremely fair and thoroughly accommodating .
Looking up at the representatives of the cosmetics industry , who are sitting up in the gallery and waiting with understandable interest to see what is to be decided today , I can only say that I value the largely fair cooperation afforded by the cosmetics industry , who have an important stake in these matters , and I know that constructive cooperation also builds trust .
All the bodies which have played their part so far - Parliament , industry , consumers ' organisations , and also the organisations representing people with allergies - are convinced that Parliament , today at noon , will have a unique chance to at last enact a law that will , in a couple of years , activate legislation that people want and need .
I hope that , at noon today , we will be courageous enough to show this to the Council and the Commission by an overwhelming majority .
My dear colleagues in other groups , you will have my support in doing so .
I hope that I will also have yours .
We will confirm this today and , if necessary , in a conciliation procedure .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the seventh modification of the directive on cosmetic products has once again brought two issues before this Parliament which have been widely debated since the first directive was adopted in 1976 .
The last revision was the sixth , in 1993 .
The issues I am referring to are the prohibition of animal experimentation and the prohibition of the marketing within the European Union of products which have been tested on animals .
The rapporteur , Mrs Roth-Behrendt , has worked hard and seriously , maintaining the coherence of the Commission 's text and improving it , particularly in view of the illogical proposal of lifting the prohibition on marketing .
My group has always supported this amendment and has agreed with the rapporteur that , after so many years of work and unfulfilled expectations in relation to ending animal experimentation , we must deal with this issue once and for all , setting precise timescales , urging and motivating the cosmetics industry to mobilise all its available resources so that , without in any way jeopardising the safety of its products , experiments on animals will be stopped for good as soon as possible .
The Group of the European Peoples ' Party , however , has always believed that full compliance with this directive made it necessary for the rapporteur 's initial proposal to show a degree of flexibility , while allowing for certain exceptions since , although it is true that the majority of cosmetic products offer the consumer complete safety without their ingredients having to be tested on animals , there are certain cases in which scientists have still not been able to find reliable alternative methods for particular products which are not totally superfluous , such as sun products or creams , which provide a degree of protection from sunlight .
In this respect , the work not just of my group but of all the parliamentary groups has focused on the identification of these cases and their incorporation into the text of the directive , and the rapporteur has been highly receptive to this .
Without allowing the cosmetics industry to delay eliminating its animal experimentation practices , the proposal for a directive allows exceptions for very specific tests and for a maximum period of ten years .
Fortunately , I believe that this amendment has the support of the whole of the European Peoples ' Party and that , when it comes to it , it will have the support of the whole House .
I am convinced that a vote in favour by the European Parliament , not just in relation to this amendment , but the whole of the proposal , will finally bring into being regulations which combine animal protection and consumer protection in a balanced and fair manner .
Mr President , I support both the line of the proposals which have come from our colleague Mrs Roth-Behrendt and the objective which many people in Parliament have been trying to achieve for the past ten years .
No other issue has taken Parliament so long to deal with as that of animal testing in the matter of cosmetic products .
So I think the message that should go back to the Member States is that this Parliament believes that , until we get serious , the industry will not get truly serious .
I accept that there are a large number of areas where there is cause for concern in terms of medical research and extremely difficult and serious tests for which no valid alternatives have yet been produced .
But I remain convinced that , unless we are able to send a clear signal by reasserting the position we took at first reading , there will not be that incentive that comes from the clear knowledge that these sanctions are there and will be implemented .
The test ban and the marketing ban have not been complied with .
We cannot afford further delays .
I would say to everyone , including the Member States who tried very hard to bring us a common position that we could accept , we still have to try harder .
The answer is to send a signal at second reading , so that the rapporteur and our colleagues of all parties have the strongest possible negotiating position when we come to one of the most serious processes of conciliation we have ever had in this Parliament .
Mr President , animal testing is carried out on a huge scale across the European Union and the world to ensure that products like chemicals and new medicines and pharmaceuticals are safe for humans to use .
The public has long made clear that it wants an end to animal testing for no better purpose than to ensure the development of yet more vanity products to fill our bathroom shelves , such as all the deodorants , soaps , and hair shampoos to be found on supermarket shelves .
Yet this debate has dragged on year after year with it becoming increasingly difficult for the public 's wish to be turned into practice .
Now we have a classic conflict between the Parliament , which has made it clear that it wants an end to animal testing , and the Council , which has done its best to ensure that no marketing ban is introduced .
We have made it quite clear that an animal testing ban within the European Union alone is insufficient .
It simply means that animals will be tested upon in countries outside the European Union where no proper supervision can be undertaken .
A marketing ban has to be introduced , pressure has to be put on industry to ensure that new alternatives are developed .
The proposals being put forward by the EPP have been particularly helpful .
My group will be supporting Mrs Roth-Behrendt 's call for a marketing ban to be introduced at the earliest moment .
However it is likely that it will be the EPP amendment which goes through today .
That leaves open the option for us all of an ambitious and yet realistic settlement , an agreement between the Parliament and the Council which can end this matter once and for all , putting pressure on the industry but not creating insoluble problems .
I hope that today in the vote later in this plenary we can once and for all put an end to this issue and put an end to unnecessary animal suffering .
Mr President , I support the rapporteur 's position .
It is completely unacceptable to torture animals in order to , supposedly , improve ourselves .
Contrary to what the cosmetics industry states , it is possible to produce and sell safe products whose ingredients have not been tested on animals .
Many companies moved away from these archaic practices years ago and the overwhelming majority of consumers want an immediate ban .
It is unfortunate , therefore , that both the Commission and the Council are still taking the side of the cosmetics industry and those responsible for profit-driven torture of animals .
The proposed ban would apply only to products tested in the EU and would allow companies to export testing to other parts of the world .
This is unacceptable .
We want the practice to stop , not to be relocated .
The Commission 's failure to implement a marketing and test ban - which was meant to come into effect in 1998 - is completely unacceptable , and to argue that a marketing ban would face problems in the WTO is nonsense .
There is a legal precedent .
The adoption of the Dog and Cat Fur Act in the US showed that animal welfare can be a legitimate reason for restrictions .
As far as labelling goes , I am very disappointed that the Council did not adopt Parliament 's recommendation in the first reading that " tested on animals " should be clearly stated on the product label .
The consumer has a right to know this .
In relation to CMR substances , which are allowed in cosmetics , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy reaffirmed its first reading request to ban CMRs in cosmetics unless evaluated and accepted as safe by the Scientific Committee .
In fact , the committee 's position on CMR substances has been strengthened in line with the latest position of the Scientific Committee .
In the light of the fact that the Commission recently banned CMRs in its review of chemical directives but has included it as an exemption , it is ridiculous that a substance can be banned from paint and polish but not from something that is put on your body .
It is completely hypocritical to argue for the continued torture of animals in the interests of safety , whilst at the same time allowing dangerous products .
Mr President , on this issue , we are completely in agreement with the rapporteur , Mrs Roth-Behrendt , and with the decision taken by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
We believe that animal experiments should be restricted to those areas in which they are of vital importance to human health , for example that of medical products .
Obviously , animal experiments must not take place in connection with cosmetic products .
We are therefore in favour both of a total ban on such animal experiments and of a marketing ban .
It must also be realised that an effective ban of this kind in the EU would have a very beneficial effect on the whole of the world market .
It would provide arguments in the global market for completely doing away with animal experiments in this area .
It would show that there are alternatives .
This issue has been discussed for a long time , indeed for too long .
I am amazed at the Commission 's attitude , which must be characterised as antiquated , and at the failure to realise that it is time to take this decision .
A genuine decision in favour of a marketing ban would expedite technical developments leading to alternatives .
That is in itself something positive .
The possibility has been mentioned of a conflict with the WTO .
I think the risk was exaggerated earlier on but , if a decision of this kind is challenged in the WTO , it is obviously a battle in which the European Union must engage , and engage in fully , for it would be an important conflict of principle concerning the right to enable animal and human health to take precedence over the free market .
That is a right one should of course be prepared to fight for .
Mr President , I would like to start by congratulating the rapporteur on her excellent work , although some of the issues she has dealt with have caused some confusion .
With regard to the majority of them , we believe that we cannot make any exception to the fundamental ideals relating to growth and civilisation in which we firmly believe and which Parliament has never failed to uphold .
This applies to animal experimentation , amongst other practices , where continuing to fail to apply a limit , thereby delaying research into alternative methods of experimentation , means failing to encourage research itself and continuing to use practices which are in conflict with those goals of prosperity and civilisation .
The only point in Mrs Roth-Behrendt 's report which I do not understand is the point relating to Amendment No 28 , previously Amendment No 26 , to the Commission text , which contains the list of allergenic substances .
Clearly , the respect to be shown towards animals must also be shown in equal measure to human beings , and it is therefore our responsibility to place a limit on the use of substances with proven allergenic capacity .
Out of the 23 substances listed in the amendment , there are certainly 13 , as the rapporteur rightly points out , with proven allergenic capacity , and it is therefore justified to place a limit on their content in products .
Then there are another 13 whose excessive toxicity has yet to be proved , as the rapporteur implies , moreover , specifying that the Scientific Committee has recommended limits to be placed on their use , purely as a precautionary measure and pending more thorough analysis .
This is an indirect precaution in the sense that there can be absolutely no risk of toxicity - always assuming that their might have been - in the use of these ingredients according to the limits laid down .
The fact is that these last 13 substances include 11 defined as natural essential oils which may as well not be used at all as be used in the quantities laid down , and the concern is therefore not that the quality of the product will suffer but that local farming economies , particularly in the south of Europe and particularly in France and Italy , which produce the basic ingredients - jasmine , citrus fruit in general and bergamot , in particular - will be wiped out .
Our group has always stressed how crucial it is to lay down strict standards in the field of animal welfare that apply right across the European Union .
I believe that all animals are God 's creatures . Accordingly , each animal should be treated by us with respect and not - as is unfortunately often the case these days - used as a disposable item .
I am convinced that we received animals to use as food and - insofar as strictly necessary - to develop and test medicines .
Any other use of animals , or should I say , abuse of animals , is simply unacceptable .
We are therefore in favour of a European ban on the use of animal testing for cosmetic products .
However , unlike the Council , we are of the opinion that a European testing ban alone is not sufficient , because this means that animal tests outside of Europe will simply continue .
Only a testing ban in combination with a European trading ban on cosmetics tested on animals will force the cosmetics industry to look seriously into developing alternative methods .
However , I would like to note in this connection that we must ensure that producers in developing countries are not treated any worse than European producers , particularly as this contravenes the WTO regulations .
It is therefore of major importance for countries outside of Europe to be brought up-to-date in good time in order to be able to comply with the bans .
I would therefore ask you to vote in favour of Mrs Roth-Behrendt 's proposal .
In this way , we send a clear message to the Council that we believe that only in this way can unnecessary and unacceptable animal suffering which accompanies the development and sales of cosmetics be brought to an end .
Let us hope that with this , after years of unnecessary delays , the abuses in this sector will come to an end .
I thank you for your attention .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my dear Mrs Roth-Behrendt , animal experiments in the field of cosmetics need to be done away with , and as quickly as possible .
This House decided that as long ago as 1993 , but at that time we had a weak partner alongside us .
It appears that we still do .
The weak partner in question is the Commission , which has , over recent years , not got a grip on consistently putting these European resolutions across at the WTO and getting our partners there to grasp soon enough that we are ready to go ahead .
We want to force them to take positive action .
That is why , Mr Liikanen - despite the high personal regard I have for you - I find your presentation very disappointing and hope that our next debate will see us at last getting a ban on animal experiments , which as far as I am concerned could be in five or six years ' time .
What is crucial , though , is that , after those five or six years have elapsed , the cut-off point must be reached .
Everyone must be aware that , after five or six years , experiments on animals will be over , apart from those scientifically-justified exceptions that we intend to lay down here and now .
We know that there is an exception to every rule , but exceptions must remain just that and nothing more .
That is why we cannot , in five years ' time , have a new document presented to us and the debate starting all over again from the beginning .
We cannot explain it to our children and nor can we explain it to the animal .
The Commission has enough clout to sort this out at a sufficiently early stage with our WTO partners around the world .
Our experience with leghold traps , and traps with animal skins , is an outstanding demonstration of this .
If we involve our WTO partners in the debate at an early enough stage rather than take them by surprise , a way can very well be found .
Commissioner , I really would like to encourage you to go down this road .
You are in character enough of a man to play the part of an outrider throughout the world .
I very much want to motivate you to do that .
It is dreadful to derive beauty from animal suffering .
Animal tests should only take place as an absolute necessity , and that is not happening in the case of cosmetics .
This is why a ban on both sales and testing should be introduced .
The sooner the better .
It is unfortunate that compromises are required in this respect .
Labelling on all products tested on animals must now become compulsory with immediate effect .
It is of major importance for industry , science and the government to invest more in alternative methods , as far too little use is still being made of current knowledge due to this approach .
The validation procedures must be accelerated .
Forty thousand animals annually are forty thousand animals too many .
The replacement , reduction and refinement of animal tests are a question of civilisation .
Animals are far too beautiful to be treated so dreadfully .
Mr President , I should first of all like to express my appreciation for Mrs Roth-Behrendt , for her sound work and for her perseverance in this debate .
As Mr van den Bos said a moment ago , forty thousand animal tests annually are forty thousand too many .
Twenty-five years ago , the Body Shop launched cosmetics that were not tested on animals .
It has proved for 25 years that it is possible .
This Body Shop policy should now become standard European policy . At the earliest opportunity .
It is beyond me why the Christian-Democrats want to wait for another ten years .
If we really want this , we simply have to say : as soon as possible .
Even if this results in a trade conflict with America or any other partners in the WTO .
A reduction in animal suffering is the express wish of the European people , and we as MEPs must comply with this .
Mr President , the appeal is often made that the United States of America and those countries participating in its unilateral war against terrorism share common values .
What they are is never spoken aloud .
It is nevertheless well known that Bush 's values do not incorporate a high level of commercial ethics .
There are no moral values in the United States that can be used to justify hormone-free food , plant varieties that are not genetically modified or cosmetics that have not been tested on animals .
In this context the Council common position on effecting a marketing ban on animal-tested cosmetics , subject to permission by the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development , is untenable .
At the OECD , decisions are taken on the basis of unanimity and they do not have to be explained .
That makes it possible for the USA to dictate to the EU on the question of values .
It would be more honest to clarify whether a marketing ban on animal-tested cosmetics is incompatible with WTO rules .
If necessary the matter could be referred to the WTO 's dispute settlement procedure where a ban could be upheld without the opposing party being able to dictate the final outcome alone .
The WTO must look into whether world trade is also possible with reference to ethical criteria .
The European Parliament has used the same solid criteria in its desire to ban animal experiments and in its demand elsewhere for a sales ban on animal-tested cosmetics in the EU .
Mr President , this is a debate which is bedevilled with hypocrisy .
We see products on sale claiming to be free from animal testing when the manufacturers know perfectly well that the products may not have been tested on animals , but that the ingredients were .
We see countries like my own , claiming to have banned animal testing , when all they have done is export the problem to countries where animals are even less respected .
What we need and what this report brings us towards is a ban on the marketing of products tested on animals .
Of course , what we need is to ensure that safety is our key criterion .
Human health must not be put at risk by what we are doing .
We must bear in mind the range of products that we are talking about - it is not just the cosmetics that we put on our faces ; it is also the toothpastes , the sunscreens , the baby products , the lens cleansers and so on .
Our aim must be a realistic timetable to phase out products which have been tested on animals by setting a deadline for each of those tests .
We have to reconcile the interests of human health and those of animal welfare , and it can be done .
Our amendments would ban with immediate effect those tests for which alternatives have been validated .
It would set a deadline for each of the others , according to the stage reached in the process of validating an alternative , up to a maximum of five years .
It would acknowledge that for the three tests for which there are as yet no alternatives there would be a maximum of ten years in which to find alternatives , after which those tests would stop too .
We are tired of waiting on this issue .
We have waited five years ; we have waited 1,825 days since this measure should have been brought in .
In that time , we have seen 190,000 animals suffer and be destroyed .
We want to bring that to an end .
We need safe cosmetic products .
We need human health to be ensured and we need animal testing to be stopped .
It is time to bring this issue to a conclusion .
Mr President , I have been most surprised by the arguments from the Council and the Commission suggesting that a marketing ban would be , as they say , " not WTO-secure " , yet the WTO rules in this area are distinctly unclear .
It is just as likely that a marketing ban will prove to be " WTO-secure " as it will " WTO-insecure " .
The point is this : the arguments about WTO rules are purely hypothetical .
It is not entirely appropriate in my view to move from the arguments of substance for and against a marketing ban to a much more convoluted and esoteric debate about WTO law .
A more honest approach - the approach advocated by this Parliament - is to adopt a marketing ban as soon as possible , and then deal with the WTO aspects separately in the unlikely event that our laws are successfully challenged in the WTO .
That would be a better approach , both right in principle and right in practice .
Commissioner , today I have to accuse you of hostility to industry .
What do you actually think will happen to European industry now ?
First we are told that , yes , the end will be in 1998 , then it is 2000 , next 2002 , and now you come along with a presentation and have absolutely nothing to say .
How on earth do you think industrialists work ?
Such a thing could only occur to a functionary who has never had to put even a brass farthing into his own industry .
The potential has been there for ages for European industry to have a whole new boom in cosmetics .
It is you who have prevented it !
In 1996 , four million people signed up ; they were artists and beautiful women who like using cosmetics .
Now you come along and tell us that , in the European Union , we do not want to torture animals any more ; instead , we will do it just over the border .
This Parliament , the artists , the beautiful women - how stupid do you think we are ?
What do you take us for ?
Do you really think we are the sort of racists and xenophobes who will not have dumb beasts tormented here in the European Union , but will let it happen to dogs in Hungary or Poland ?
That strikes me as monstrous , and as an insult to the four million people who signed their names to protest against such things .
You know , there is a fine saying to the effect that ' the day will come when men will look upon the murder of animals as they now look upon the murder of men . '
That was not said by some crazy animal rights activist , but by Leonardo da Vinci , perhaps the greatest artist who ever lived .
Never again , Commissioner , will you be referred to in the same sentence as Leonardo da Vinci .
You are certainly not a great artist , you are certainly not sensitive , but I do think you might have some idea of what we are talking about today .
I would like to thank Mrs Roth-Behrendt for what she has achieved , and especially also Mrs Christina Garca-Orcoyen .
An alliance the like of which you rarely come across , and I think that you , Commissioner , should be afraid of them .
Mr President , Commissioner , I wish first to congratulate the rapporteur on her excellent work , at both first and second readings .
This report formalised proposals on issues on which the Commission proposal was not sufficiently wide-ranging or ambitious and the common position has once again failed to take up some of these proposals .
I therefore feel that there are three matters to which Parliament must draw the attention of both the Commission and the Council .
Firstly , the need to ban all potentially carcinogenic or toxic substances in cosmetic products ; secondly , a ban on the use of fragrances in products specifically designed for children , given the risks of allergic reaction potentially associated with these fragrances ; and , thirdly , the hottest topic of this debate ; testing products on animals .
In my view , both the Council and the Commission 's positions are unacceptable .
On the one hand , the Commission is taking a step backwards with regard to previous legislation ; in other words , when faced with non-compliance with previous legislation , the Commission prefers to stop talking about a marketing ban .
Where the Council is concerned , a step forwards has been taken , because it has referred to the OECD the regulation of a matter that falls to the European Union to define .
I do not know whether this recourse to the OECD is just another symptom of the intergovernmental shift that has been affecting the Council of late and I therefore believe that the rapporteur 's position is the most appropriate one : we must ban testing on animals in Europe , we must move towards a ban on the marketing of these products and towards alternative methods .
Mr President , I shall endeavour to confine my comments to one point which I feel is important and which has to do with the facility to use animal testing to check certain products where there is no alternative method available .
In brief , we need to make sure we vote in favour of the amendments which allow alternative methods to be used , especially for toxicity and reproduction , for which there are currently no satisfactory alternative tests .
For the rest , I too am in complete agreement with the rapporteur that , where there are alternative methods which allow animal testing to be avoided , we should use these alternative in vitro methods .
Consequently , what I and my fellow Members who tabled this amendment are trying to do is to allow alternative methods to be used , but not in cases in which there is no alternative to animal testing .
I must point out that the first priority is human health and then , of course , respect and protection for animals .
I hope that Parliament will vote in favour of these amendments which give us this facility until such time as these tests can be replaced by alternative in vitro methods .
I must reiterate and stress that , as there are no satisfactory in vitro methods available , it would be irresponsible and absurd to do away with every facility for which there is , as yet , no alternative method .
Mr President , I agree with all the speakers so far .
It is unacceptable that when we are making such enormous scientific advances we still accept the infliction of pain on small animals in order to find out whether a new face cream is safe .
I would like to express my strong support for the report .
The rapporteur has struck the right compromise : the ban would not be immediate but could come into force in five years , and that means that , in effect , we have given the companies concerned at least 15 years ' notice since we first started discussing this about ten years ago .
I also support the idea that we should demonstrate our own responsibility - a concept which is foreign to the Greens - by introducing a marketing ban as tests are developed where at present there are no alternatives available , even though we then have to set a deadline for these tests , perhaps ten years ahead .
Parliament 's report will give the search for alternatives a new urgency .
I have two questions to the Commission and I hope that when Mr Liikanen answers he will address himself specifically to my points on Amendments Nos 21 and 28 .
Mr Nistic and Mr Nobilia raised this earlier on .
I am very concerned that , on the labelling of fragrances , aromas and essential oils , Amendments Nos 21 and 28 involve the introduction of unnecessary requirements which may have a very unfortunate effect on the composition of products , their continued availability and indeed the viability of some of the smaller firms that make them .
The rapporteur proposes a very comprehensive system of labelling when perfumes and aromas are present in products , even in tiny amounts .
In fact , although this is designed to protect the few consumers who have allergies to certain fragrances , the proposal is unlikely to provide a significant public health benefit .
There may be no safe fragrance for some allergic individuals .
The best they can do , as they well know , is to steer clear of products with fragrances in them altogether .
The rapporteur is reacting to representations by the European Consumer Bureau , which says it is putting the case for allergy sufferers and clearly sees the issue as part of its war on chemicals .
I have to say that I have received no representations from allergy sufferers on this point .
The European Flavour and Fragrance Association points out that the amendments will saddle consumers with products carrying references to up to 50 ingredients in 11 languages .
This is stupid and unnecessary .
Furthermore , there is a danger that some essential oils would be removed from formulations , thus damaging the economic interests of some countries , including some very poor countries .
These amendments are a bad and unnecessary deal for consumers and the industry .
I hope that the rapporteur will consider withdrawing them and that the Commission and the Council will reject them .
Mr President , I thank you for giving me an opportunity at the end of the debate to express my gratitude for the way it has gone .
It has been a very lively debate , characterised by emotion and level-headedness , and touching on various points .
For that I am very grateful to the Members of this House who have spoken .
I am grateful to Mrs Flemming for making me aware of what Leonardo da Vinci said , and I have been constantly trying to think up points of similarity between him and Mr Liikanen , who , when he responds , will perhaps astonish us by telling us that the two of them have much in common and that he , in the depths of his heart , actually has great sympathy with Parliament 's proposal .
I am very grateful to all the Members who have supported me and a similar number of whom will , I hope , support the proposals when we vote at noon today .
Should cosmetic amendments - and ' cosmetic ' is the appropriate word - be necessary , I am convinced that we will have to make them in the course of the conciliation procedure .
I would like to briefly address the points made by Mr Nobilia and , at the end , Mrs Jackson .
I have to tell Mrs Jackson that I could not withdraw the amendments even if I wanted to , because the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy had adopted them with 44 votes in their favour .
It has therefore now become the Committee 's position and not just my own , and I have to make a true and faithful report of that to Parliament .
I would like to say in addition that I am a lawyer rather than a natural scientist , and so I have done something very simple .
I have borrowed the position of the Scientific Committee on Cosmetology , composed of European Union scientists , who have established that 26 substances result in allergic reactions , 13 of them to a severe degree .
That labels should indicate the presence of these substances I find the most utterly obvious thing in the world .
We have labels for nuts in chocolate and everything else for people who suffer from allergies , and we have to have labels for this as well .
The aromatic oils industry having belatedly woken up to this , I can well understand why , three days before the vote , it was trying to influence us .
I do not want to ban its products , but I do want the substances listed , in one language rather than in eleven , and with their chemical names , in the list of ingredients , which is , incidentally , what the Scientific Committee on Cosmetics proposed .
It is my conviction that we owe that to the European Union 's consumers .
Mr President , on behalf of the Commission I would like to thank Mrs Roth-Behrendt and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy for this report and congratulate them on the impressive work they have done .
The wish expressed by Parliament in its opinion for the first reading to improve consumer protection has , to a large extent , been taken into account in the common position .
That said , I am aware that Parliament 's assessment might be different and I fully respect it , as has been confirmed here today .
The Commission and Council welcome in particular the proposals relating to some categories of products , such as products for children or intimate hygiene or the extension of the minimum durability date requirement .
They would be of clear benefit to consumers .
The Commission shares Parliament 's concerns on the use of substances classified as carcinogenic , mutagenic or toxic for reproduction ( CMR ) .
The cosmetics directive already regulates the use of CMR substances in a sectoral manner .
However , to find a consistent and sustainable solution for the substances specific provisions have been introduced to strengthen the legal framework , while complying with the key principle of risk assessment .
Furthermore , the Commission has proposed new measures on these new substances in its White Paper on the new chemicals policy and we are now working on concrete proposals with my colleague , Mrs Wallstrm .
Regarding the fragrance allergies issue , the Commission and Council welcome the introduction of a labelling system for allergenic fragrance ingredients .
This will improve the current labelling requirements to allow consumers who are sensitive to certain ingredients to avoid products containing them .
As regards the issue of animal testing , we all know how difficult and sensitive it is , especially because it creates a great deal of concern among the public .
We all share the objective to reduce animal pain inflicted during experimentation .
This issue is linked to many other policy areas and we are therefore working in constant and close cooperation with my colleagues , Mr Byrne and Mr Lamy , who are responsible for health and consumer protection and trade issues respectively .

The Council common position compromise has taken these aspects into account in a new global approach .
It leads to a balanced solution offering a genuine benefit to animal welfare , whilst safeguarding consumer health and taking into account the impact of our internal decisions at international level .
We thought that this approach would be a positive step and give a political signal that your concerns have been considered , as it reintroduced a marketing ban .
The proposed solution to ban animal testing within the EU whenever possible and to make mandatory use of all alternative methods at the earliest opportunity seemed an improvement .
It will lead to the management of animal testing within the European Union , thereby answering the criticism of exporting the problem .
Acceptable validated alternative methods are still lacking for a number of key toxicological parameters .
They are necessary for a full health risk assessment of cosmetic ingredients to ensure a high level of consumer protection .
It is impossible to predict when all the necessary alternative methods might be available .
Finally , the European Union is bound to ensure compliance with its international obligations , but an essential objective is to provide the highest possible level of safety .
A total ban on all animal testing would endanger the safety of cosmetics and therefore human health .
The marketing ban , linked to the acceptance at OECD level and excluding any cut-off date , reduces the risk of a challenge under the disputes settlement system of WTO .
The European Union , with the strong support of the European Parliament , is seeking to promote considerations relating to the welfare of animals with the WTO .
However , this proposal has so far found very little support among the WTO members .
Some colleagues have argued that the EU should implement such a ban and see whether it is challenged by other WTO members and then if necessary consider the measure in the light of WTO opposition .
I put the question to my colleagues who are responsible for WTO relations and their reply is as follows : Such a course of action has a political cost .
We would reinforce the suspicion already widespread among developing countries that , regardless of their commitments in the WTO agreements , developed countries intend to use their trade power to impose their own ethical priorities and values on others . To provoke a WTO case under those circumstances might , therefore , be counterproductive , increasing the polarisation between developing and developed countries and reducing the chances of success of the EU 's effort to bring such matters as animal welfare and environmental and social considerations into the WTO discussions .
That is the opinion of my colleagues who are responsible for this field in WTO relations .
I am convinced that further work , in close cooperation between Parliament and the Council and Commission , will finally lead to a balanced solution that genuinely benefits animal welfare while safeguarding consumer health and our international commitments .
Mr Jackson put two detailed questions on Amendments Nos 21 and 28 .
On the second part of Amendment No 28 , we could accept in principle the listing of these recognised fragrance allergens in Annex 3 , according to the suggested modalities , but it should be in the form of a Commission directive .
The Commission would reject the first part .
The proposed amendment to Annex 3 has to be implemented via a Commission directive adapting technical progress adopted under the comitology procedure .
As far as Amendment No 21 on fragrance listing is concerned , this amendment requires a full ingredient listing , including perfume composition .
Given the large number of ingredients in fragrance compositions , indicating all the fragrance ingredients on the labelling would neither be feasible nor helpful to consumers or dermatologists and would be disproportionate to the anticipated risks .
Furthermore this deletion would remove the legal basis for requesting that fragrances with potential allergenic effects be indicated as requested in Amendment No 26 , which has been introduced in the common position .
In conclusion , the Commission can accept in principle Amendment No 1 , first part , Amendment No 5 , first part , Amendment No 27 , second part and Amendment No 28 , second part .
However , the Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 1 , second part , Amendments Nos 2 to 5 , second part , Amendments Nos 6 to 27 , first part , Amendment No 28 , first part , and Amendments Nos 29 to 33 .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0141 / 2002 ) , by Mr Nistic , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the Council common position for adopting standards of quality and safety for the collection , testing , processing , storage and distribution of human blood and blood components ( 14402 / 1 / 2001 - C5-0069 / 2002 - 2000 / 0323 ( COD ) )
Mr President , I would like to express my immense satisfaction at the adoption in committee on 23 April last of the directive setting quality and safety standards for blood , essentially without any significant shift from Parliament 's position and amendments .
At last , I feel that a directive can be adopted at second reading which provides the greatest possible guarantees , particularly for patients and consumers , of the quality and safety of blood and its components in order to avoid infections and complications such as those which have caused so many scandals and disasters in the past .
The adoption of a new European directive laying down uniform quality standards for blood will , at last , allow the free movement of blood and its components throughout the countries of the European Union and the removal of unwanted restrictions on the movement of donors from one country to another .
There will have to be high quality and safety standards for all the stages of the transfusion process , from donation to testing by means of specific , updated laboratory tests , to the collection , processing , storage , distribution and use of human blood and blood components .
As I am sure you will all remember , the point of the directive which was most critical and most disputed in our committee and in the House concerned what are known as ' voluntary unpaid donations ' .
In my opinion , the common position adopted by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy resolves all the disputes over this point .
Indeed , Article 4 states , according to the principle of subsidiarity , ' This directive shall not prevent a Member State from maintaining or introducing ... more stringent protective measures .... In particular , a Member State may introduce requirements for voluntary , unpaid donations , including the restriction of imports of blood and blood components ' .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy deleted the clause ' provided that the provisions of Article 30 of the Treaty are met ' .
A new amendment has now been tabled by the socialists to the effect that all the Member States may prohibit or restrict imports of blood and blood components to secure a high level of protection of health and to achieve the objectives laid down in Article 19 ( 1 ) , provided that the conditions laid down by the Treaty are met .
This seems to me to be a good , acceptable compromise .
With regard to voluntary and unpaid donations , Article 19 of the common position lays down a number of specific provisions , including , in particular ( Paragraph 1 ) that Member States are to encourage voluntary and unpaid donations and ensure that blood is in so far as possible provided from such donations .
I feel that this is a very balanced provision and this position has already been endorsed in committee .
Article 19 ( 2 ) lays down in general terms that the Member States are to inform the other Member States and the Commission of the actions taken by them to achieve the objective set out in Paragraph 1 .
In this regard , I would like to table an oral amendment requiring the Member States to provide this information every three years instead of every two years , for this tallies with the text of a subsequent article .
In addition , still on the subject of voluntary unpaid donations , some of the Members called for the Council of Europe definition to be included in the text , particularly in Article 3 .
I broadly support the Council of Europe definition but I feel that it is sufficient for reference to be made to it in recital 23 , precisely as it is currently worded , to the effect that this definition ' should ' - not ' must ' be taken into account by the Member States .
I therefore oppose both Amendment No 7 and Amendment No 19 , which seek to include a literal , rigid definition of ' voluntary and unpaid donation ' .
Indeed , I feel that some flexibility is necessary in order to encourage donors .
Commissioner , each Member State has a different attitude , different traditions and a different culture when it comes to the definition of ' unpaid ' , which I feel must be wholly respected .
It is not for Europe to impose rigid definition criteria on the individual Member States .
The important thing is to have enough donors to achieve the most important objective , which is to avoid a shortage of blood and blood components .
Another point of controversy concerned the responsible person .
In my opinion , there should be a compromise amendment giving Member States the freedom to choose the type of qualification required of the responsible person , in line with the principle of subsidiarity .
In conclusion , I hope that this directive will , at last , see the light of day and be adopted .
On my own behalf , I should first of all like to thank Mr Bowis for letting me go first , because I am having to receive a visitors ' group , a choir , that will be opening the Dutch week shortly .
This is why I should like to leave at 11 a.m.
Mr President , it is not the first time that a very emotional and very passionate debate is taking place on the subject of the supply of blood .
The opinions on this subject are diverse , even between my good friend , Mr Nistic , and myself .
We do however agree on one thing , namely that the safety of the supply of blood must be paramount because too many people rely on blood products .
Patient organisations - and I would quote haemophiliac associations - were right to get involved in the debate , but their opinions are also diverse .
Moreover , these different opinions run parallel with whether or not a Member State is self-sufficient in the organisation of the supply of blood and blood production .
I come from a Member State where self-sufficiency is paramount , and the voluntary , unpaid donation , the so-called ' gratis principle ' , underlies the organisation of our supply of blood .
I am not able , or prepared , to impose our principle on other countries , and I am talking to Mr Nistic when I say this .
He asked for subsidiarity a moment ago .
This should not , and cannot , entail the undermining of our principle of voluntary ' gratis ' self-sufficiency .
For this reason , I would ask Mr Nistic to bring up for discussion the principles that were laid down at first reading in Parliament and confirmed at second reading by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
This means that we need to make a positive recommendation on the agreements in the framework of the trilogue , involving Mr Lund , Mr Nistic and others , namely in order to continue to enable the Dutch people , the northern Member States , to maintain their own organisation , which is also the gist of Amendment No 19 .
Mr Nistic , I am prepared to withdraw my support for Amendment No 7 if you can assure me , in the framework of this subsidiarity , that Amendment No 19 will also be supported , including by Members whose countries operate a different system .
Please allow me to comment on a second amendment .
We will support Amendment No 20 , Mr Lund 's compromise to replace Amendment No 10 , which enables a Member State to continue to determine its own organisation and its own blood policy .
This is also backed by Mr Nistic . This compromise receives my unqualified support , for I think it is an improvement on the original amendment which I had tabled on Amendment No 10 .
I should like to urge all of you once again to support Amendment No 19 .
Mr President , I am sorry that my giving way to Mrs Oomen-Ruijten seems to have caused her some anguish but I do not think she is any need of any blood products .
This is a very welcome report and I congratulate our rapporteur .
The safety of blood , as we all know , is paramount .
Some of our Member States have had horror stories to remind them of that .
But the supply of blood is also paramount for those whose lives depend on it .
Our preference is for unremunerated donation - that is the British practice and that is what we want to see - but , in practice , Europe imports nearly 50 % of its plasma and plasma products .
I am not talking about the standard blood transfusion service that comes around to your church hall and you pop in for half an hour , have a cup of tea , and go back to work .
I am talking about plasma donation , where you have to travel some distance to fixed machinery and it takes half a day .
We have to import some of those products and a lot of them come from the United States , where many of the products are remunerated .
Research shows that remunerated blood is perfectly safe in itself .
The key , of course , is the screening of blood products wherever they come from .
The hyper-immune plasma products are nearly all imported into the European Union and 2,166,367 people in the European Union depend on them : some 400 thousand in Britain , 400 thousand in France , 100 thousand in the Netherlands , 40 thousand in Finland and so on .
These are people with haemophilia , primary immune deficiency , albumen tetanus needs , acquired deficiencies , auto-immune diseases and Rhesus negative pregnant women .
Without supplies , their health and their lives can be at risk .
Of course we must encourage unremunerated donation .
That is our custom and practice but in a world of BSE and CJD , we cannot be purists .
Otherwise we are putting the lives of our fellow citizens at risk .
Mr President , I had really prepared myself for making a positive speech about higher quality European blood products , but I have to say that the way in which Mr Nistic has acted as rapporteur on this matter is beneath contempt .
As late as last week , we made an agreement with Mr Nistic while the Commission and the Council were present , and this agreement led to our compromising by tabling Amendment No 19 through which the definition of unpaid blood donation is transferred to the recitals .
This was a compromise , even though Mr Nistic is now shaking his head .
What is happening in this case is simply dishonest .
What Mr Nistic is doing is beneath all contempt , and I should therefore like to say that , in connection with the vote later today , you should be prepared for our requesting a postponement .
I will not tolerate this approach .
It is not the way to treat fellow MEPs in Parliament .
Both the Commission and the Council , whose presidency was represented at the meeting in question , accepted this draft compromise , as did Mr Nistic on behalf of his group and as rapporteur .
To come here to the second reading in Parliament and , in spite of everything , state an unwillingness to stand by the agreement we had entered into is therefore quite extraordinary .
That is in any case the last agreement I enter into with Mr Nistic and , as I say , we shall do what we can to have the vote on this matter postponed so that we can have it debated in detail with the leaders of the Group of the Europe People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats and with the coordinator of that group in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
What has happened in this matter is simply awful , and we shall not tolerate it .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Nistic , for his cooperation throughout the process of putting this report together .
I would like to add to Mr Lund 's comments that what I find unacceptable is the fact that a compromise discussed between two groups , without the participation of the shadow rapporteurs , at least , of the other , so-called smaller groups , is being presented as a parliamentary compromise .
Having said that , the liberal group , which I am representing here , considers that the common position adopted by the Council is an excellent compromise .
It takes equal account of the concerns expressed by blood donors , in particular with regard to ethical requirements in the field of donations , and by patients , who are demanding that products derived from plasma be available as needed throughout Europe , as has been amply illustrated by Mr Bowis .
In other words , any amendment whose effect might be to threaten this balance would appear to be dangerous , and I would add , in particular , that we believe fighting over the obligation for donations to be entirely without remuneration is a mistake , as making voluntary donations the sole method means favouring one national collection system over another , which would be completely counter to the Treaties .
Why must we be forced to choose between the German mixed system , for example , the monopoly of the Red Cross in Belgium , or even the French system , which , since the tragic contaminated blood affair , has set up an effective blood monitoring system which many Member States now use as a model ?
That is not the key issue .
The most important thing , and we would stress this , is to promote the highest possible quality and safety standards for donations of blood and blood components , and it is not by extolling the virtues of obligatorily entirely unpaid donations , I repeat , or by proposing assimilation - thus far scientifically unfounded on grounds of both ethics and quality , as stated by Amendments Nos 7 and 10 adopted in committee and Amendment No 26 - that we will be laying down proper foundations for the future of the blood sector in Europe and providing a practical , sustainable solution to the question of self-sufficiency .
The liberal group will therefore vote against these amendments .
Yes , of course you must listen to voluntary blood donors .
Of course their contribution is priceless .
But you must also listen to patients when they tell you that no one with haemophilia or primary immune deficiency will inject plasma products that are untreated or of uncertain quality just because they come from voluntary donors .
The message we must send here and now to donors and recipients is one of generosity and solidarity .
We believe it is unproductive to set their points of view against each other .
The main threat to the blood sector and the lives of patients lies in the lack of medicinal products derived from plasma .
It is in accepting this reality and accepting all healthy donors without excluding anybody that the battle for self-sufficiency will one day be won in Europe .
Mr Nistic , you have asked to speak on a personal matter , I would ask you , in the light of Rule 122 , to wait until the end of the debate , because Rule 122 states that all personal statements shall be heard at the end of the discussion .
Mr President , I am pleased that Mr Nistic has included many of our amendments .
There are , however , some gaps , requiring amendments to be tabled with a view to ensuring the maximum level of safety of blood products .
We therefore consider that all undesirable effects and incidents relating to any stage of the blood donation and transfusion process must be reported , no matter how serious they are .
We also consider that it is genuinely essential , in the interests of quality and patient information , for a medical examination to be carried out on all blood donors before blood is taken .
Secondly , the question of remuneration for blood donations is fundamental .
Most European countries have a system of voluntary , unpaid blood donations .
We cannot accept any challenges to this principle , and we believe it should be extended to the whole of the European Union .
From an ethical point of view , we cannot defend the idea of selling blood or , indeed , any other component of the body .
The human body is not a commodity .
In this respect , we find it extremely shocking that companies can make a profit from free blood donations .
The remuneration of donations could be counter-productive in terms of quality .
Donors motivated by financial gain might be led to deny any health problems they may have , which could have tragic consequences - as in China - for their own health and for the health of recipients .
I am not denying the risks in terms of blood supplies , but I think we can motivate potential donors by means other than money .
It is in order to ensure that the objectives of this directive , the quality and safety of human blood , are achieved that I am calling on my fellow Members to vote for our amendments .
Mr President , in 2001 , 55 % of the European Union 's blood products originated from donors who were remunerated for their effort .
Of the plasma used to supply the EU market , 73 % originates from people who receive remuneration for donating it .
It is only through these donors that full supplies of plasma products can be kept up .
Secure supplies of blood products save lives and must therefore be given absolute priority .
The Common Position is a good basis for this .
A ban on remunerated donation is not feasible in terms of health care provision .
I can see nothing immoral in this - quite the opposite .
I remember my own student days , when we students derived part of our income from donating plasma .
Mr President , Commissioner , this is the second reading of a very important directive , a directive which concerns our strategy on public health and the safety of European citizens .
The European Parliament has examined this directive setting standards of quality and safety for blood and blood products very closely , because we need to use strict scientific criteria to describe the terms and conditions which must be met in order to safeguard the health of both donors and recipients of blood and blood products to the maximum .
Incidents such as we have seen in the past in the European Union , where people have lost their lives due to contaminated blood , must not be allowed to happen again .
I am delighted that the European Commission adopted a series of important amendments at first reading ; however , it also needs to look favourably on another series which it rejected at first reading , but which has been re-tabled and re-adopted in the Committee on the Environment .
I should like , if I may , to comment on a number of them .
I consider that patients who are due to undergo a blood transfusion have an inviolable right to be informed by those responsible of any possible adverse reactions or health risks .
Of course , it goes without saying that the confidentiality of personal data is assured because third parties will not have access to them .
I disagree with the European Commission 's proposal in Article 9 as it is currently worded .
The person responsible for the establishment must be not only a doctor , but one specialised in blood donation , because complications or side effects which require medical care or action often occur during blood donation .
I should also like to mention an ethical matter .
Under the Treaties and the Charter of Fundamental Rights , the human body and its organs cannot be treated as commodities .
Consequently , I agree with the principle of voluntary , unpaid donation because I believe that , apart from the ethical implications , this impacts directly on the quality and safety of blood .
Finally , it would be an oversight on my part if I failed to thank the rapporteur for his excellent work .
Mr President , in many EU countries - including my own - a lot of work still needs to be done to restore full confidence in the blood transfusion and blood products services generally after a period of tragic lapses in safety .
This directive will go a long way and is extremely important because of that .
I will come straight to the point I have difficulty with , and I support completely what colleagues - in particular Mr Bowis - have said .
I cannot understand why blood from a remunerated source must necessarily be banned in Europe .
Quite frankly , the biggest threat to our hundreds of thousands of patients in the EU who need blood and blood products is the lack of an adequate supply .
The supply must be safe but , by definition , a voluntary patient who might have HIV is no safer than a person with no health problems and who is paid .
It comes down to the proper screening and treatment of the product regardless of the source .
We must not become emotional about this issue .
I wish that all blood and blood products came from voluntary , unpaid sources .
It is the ethos in my own country , and I would like to encourage it .
We must encourage the public to donate blood .
There is a scarcity of donations in my own country and many others .
We are 50 % dependent on imports into the EU .
Self-sufficiency has to be a goal .
However , to even consider , by definition or otherwise , banning all products that come from remunerated donors is a retrograde step .
I am not alone in saying that .
The voluntary organisations that look after the interests of patients who need these products are pleading with us in this Parliament and the EU not to ban all sources of paid donations .
We must encourage the ethos of voluntary donation , but we cannot ban paid donations .
If the patients - not the pharmaceutical or blood companies - are asking us , we should listen to them and respond to them .
With the greatest of respect , it would be arrogant on our part not to do so .
Mr President , blood safety is an important issue for citizens across the European Union .
There have been far too many scare stories and accidents across the EU involving blood and blood components .
This directive setting standards of quality and safety of collection is absolutely vital .
With EU citizens travelling more and more and visiting other EU Member States , we must ensure that when any unfortunate accident happens , whether on holiday or at work , the people are safe in the knowledge about the quality and safety of the transfusion that is going into their bodies .
Quality and safety are the watchwords , that is why in principle I support voluntary donation .
This has been the topic , as we have heard , of a very heated debate and I feel that the rapporteur has given a strong sense of the feeling that voluntary donations are the preferred option in the EU .
However , in the United Kingdom there is a special case to be made .
Due to the impact of CJD , known as mad cow disease , we have to import our plasma products from outside the Member State .
Most of these products come from the United States of America as there are not enough sources in the other Member States and , sadly , the products have to come from paid sources .
This is a difficult issue but one where the United Kingdom has a particular problem .
The United Kingdom Government has been left with no alternative than to take plasma products from paid sources to avoid putting United Kingdom citizens ' lives at risk .
In conclusion , I welcome this directive and its objectives , I welcome the principle of voluntary donation and I look forward to seeing EU citizens benefiting from the quality and safety of blood and blood components .
Mr President , right at the outset it has to be said that my colleague , Mr Nistic , as rapporteur , has done some excellent work in his improvement of the articles on the issue of safety in this directive .
It is of the utmost importance for all EU citizens that the single market in blood and blood products that has been set as an objective cannot work without reliable safety standards .
At the same time , however , it must be said that we have managed to reach agreement on how levels of safety can still be substantially increased by making unremunerated blood donation a fundamental principle .
The Council of Europe has undertaken some important work to increase safety with regard to blood donations and promote the principle of non-remuneration .
This would not prohibit the payment of travel expenses and compensation for lost working time , which is important for donors of plasma in particular , who often have to travel to another area and give up a lot of their time .
It is a good principle for the EU too , but if we are just going to be satisfied with making recommendations to Member States regarding practices in the manner of the Council of Europe we shall have lost something essential in our role as legislator . If , on the other hand , we give Member States the right to refuse imports of blood and blood products that have been donated for payment from second and third countries we shall at the same time be weakening the basis of the original aim of the whole directive , the creation of a single market .
Community legislation is generally of a high quality and easily manages to control even the small details of human life - too small , one is tempted to say .
One cannot help but wonder why this particular directive was unable to distinguish ordinary blood donations from others , such as plasma donations .
In the case of the former , we could have introduced an absolute ban on remuneration without any need for exceptions and , regarding the latter , we could have permitted remuneration as long as the shortage of plasma and other special products make it necessary .
I shall wait for the Commission to submit a new proposal in which this important detail can be corrected .
Mr President , Commissioner , I wish to congratulate Mr Nistic on his excellent work and say that , throughout Europe , the issue in question is to resolve the extraordinarily difficult situation involving blood .
The European public feels that the discrepancies between the Member States ' legislation provide no guarantees of safety given the increasing circulation and import of blood products , on the one hand ; on the other , they feel equally unsafe due to the events that have taken place in various countries in recent years .
What we are dealing with here , therefore , is not so much the issue of price , of whether or not donations of blood should be remunerated . It is rather a question of whether we can guarantee levels of safety and of not forgetting the importance of the issue of blood for Europe 's citizens .
Various leaks have taken place recently at the heart of this debate and I am sorry that the issue of whether or not donations of blood should be remunerated has been given centre stage .
With regard to this issue , I would say that the rapporteur is right and that we should stick to the common position since , on the one hand , it does not ban remuneration , which is essential in some cases in order to overcome shortages , but , on the other , encourages voluntary donations and even allows some Member States to go further by defining more rigid rules that could even prevent the import of blood products that do not adhere to these rules .
However , once again , Mr President , what is at stake is safety and finding a solution to the problem of blood shortages .
Mr President , people who suffer from the bleeding disease of haemophilia are gravely concerned , as , if payment for blood donation is actually banned , there may be serious difficulties with the supply of blood products .
Indeed , some people could even die .
Half of all the plasmatic clotting factors currently used in the European Union comes from remunerated donors ; either they have made their donation in the EU or their plasma has been imported .
It can readily be imagined what a threat it would be to patients if new legislation meant that the supply of these products were to be halved .
There is at present no evidence that medicinal products from unpaid donors are in any way safer than those from donors who have been paid .
The fact is that the medicinal products authorities in Europe have been checking the safety and effectiveness of all plasma products in the European Union and this has not led them to see the payment of donors as a problem .
There is something else .
Contrary to prior expectations , the provision of genetically manufactured Factor 8 - which is only one of the blood clotting factors - has been constantly beset with problems .
That precombinant synthetic blood clotting factors would bring with them a boundless range of low-priced compounds , as the pharmaceutical industry originally asserted , has quite simply not , to date , been demonstrated to be true .
The products have become more expensive and also hard to obtain .
It is a cause of dismay that between 400 000 and 500 000 people around the world are dependent on clotting factor compounds ; only 10 % of them are provided for to the standard of the industrialised countries of the West .
Of the world 's haemophiliacs , 80 % have no supplies .
If we now dispense with remuneration , the position of these people - who do not live in the European Union - could get much , much worse .
Mr President , Commissioner , the report Mr Nistic has presented is an excellent one , the content of which I fully endorse .
I do not want Mr Lund 's statement to give a false impression .
There is a need for this directive to achieve uniformity across the Member States in matters affecting the safety and quality of blood and blood plasma .
Both in terms of infection and the maintenance of supplies , the protection of patients has the highest priority .
Two things , therefore , must be safeguarded as a matter of fundamental principle : blood quality and the availability of sufficient blood and blood plasma in the European Union .
I will go on record as supporting the Council 's Common Position , which enhances the safety of blood and blood components and , at the same time , puts us on course to achieve maximum availability of lifesaving drugs .
Plasma is needed in the manufacture of drugs which are essential to life , for example the clotting agents 7 and 8 for haemophiliacs and immunoglobulins to prevent infections in patients with congenital weaknesses of the immune system .
Any bottleneck would put many patients ' health at risk , something that we as politicians certainly cannot justify .
Voluntary and unpaid blood donation is a basic principle and so let it remain .
The payment of expenses to plasma donors in the EU cannot , however , be excluded for the future .
Almost 50 % of the human blood and blood plasma needed in the European Union has to be imported , mainly from the USA .
The directive must not prohibit the import of plasma originating from paid donors either .
The EMEA study published at the end of last week clearly shows those blood products from paid and unpaid donors are without doubt equally safe .
There is therefore no reason to make unpaid donation mandatory on safety grounds , which would inevitably block supplies even of medicinal products manufactured from blood plasma .
This makes Amendments Nos 7 , 19 and 20 unacceptable .
Mr Nistic has asked to make a personal statement under Rule 122 of the Rules of Procedure .
Mr President , I have taken the floor briefly for personal reasons and I would like Dr Lund , to whom this appeal is addressed , to be so kind as to listen to me .
In the first place , after a long university career and coming from a region in the south of Italy , I consider myself to be a man of honour , of the highest intellectual and moral integrity , and I always work for the general good of the patient .
Secondly , as a neurologist , my brief diagnosis is that Mr Lund may have suffered temporary minor loss of memory regarding our agreement .
I repeat : I agree to include the definition of ' unpaid voluntary donation ' in recital 23 , but I consider , as I said in the meeting attended by the Commission and the Council , that , ultimately , this should be taken into account by the individual Member States .
If Mr Lund agrees with me on this point - and I feel the important thing is this - I would leave his proposal totally unchanged but I would conclude with an oral amendment at the end to the effect that ' this should be taken into account by the single Member States ' .
I feel that , in this way , Mr Lund , we who have worked together with great enthusiasm and commitment with both your and my group , might resolve an issue which is extremely important to both the donors ' and the patients ' associations .
Mr President , I shall merely make the one observation , to the effect that I stand by every single word I said in my speech .
I am very pleased that , with the position he and the Commission have adopted on the amendments , Commissioner Byrne has confirmed the agreement entered into with regard to Amendment No 19 .
I understand that it is an agreement by which Mr Nistic still does not wish to stand .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
The next item is the report ( A5-0139 / 2002 ) by Mrs Kla , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the indication of the ingredients present in foodstuffs [ COM ( 2001 ) 433 - C5-0404 / 2001 - 2001 / 0199 ( COD ) ]
Mr President , Commissioner Byrne , ladies and gentlemen , we are now going about the amending of Directive 2013 / EC on the indication of the ingredients present in foodstuffs , which is a significant step towards maximising consumer protection in the states of Europe .
The fundamental change in eating habits and the resultant transformation of the way food is produced and processed - for who , after all , still washes their own vegetables or still cooks according to basic recipes ? - mean that ready-produced food constitutes an increasing part of our diet .
There must be a political response to this in the form of new rules to improve consumer safety .
People with allergic reactions to certain ingredients must also be enabled to recognise with certainty from the packaging when substances dangerous to them are present .
Already , 8 % of adults in the European Union , and 3 % of children , suffer from allergies , the effects of which can range from respiratory illnesses to life-threatening symptoms .
Only the avoidance of the foods that are hazardous to them can give these people a high degree of security , and so there is an urgent need for notification of ingredients that trigger allergies .
In labelling , there is a need to strike a balance between practical and clear identification on the one hand and the consumers ' justified demand for complete information on the other .
The Commission proposal provides a good basis for doing this .
What is particularly important from the consumers ' point of view is to tighten up on the exceptions to the requirement for labelling , with the dropping of the 25 % rule deserving particular mention .
But the completely new and most attention-grabbing thing in the amendment of the directive is , for me , the list of allergenic substances based on the Codex Alimentarius .
This report proposes for the first time that the presence of allergenic substances must always , and without exception , be indicated .
This list of allergenic substances must , though , be constantly monitored so that current scientific knowledge can be incorporated .
Parliament must act together with the European Food Safety Authority and the Commission to find a way to keep this list constantly up to date .
As I see it , this means that it must be possible to add new substances , but it must also be possible , in the light of new knowledge , to delete others .
I therefore strongly urge support for my amendment on the continuous monitoring of the list .
The interpretation of this list , to be found in Annex III , requires detailed guidelines .
What , for example , is meant when nuts are mentioned ?
What products are meant by the reference to crustaceans ?
Does that include snails ?
Having dropped the 25 % rule , the Commission proposes minor derogations to the requirement for labelling , these being in the order of 5 % and 2 % .
These apply , on the one hand , to foodstuffs on which there are already Community regulations , such as chocolate , sauce and mustard preparations and to foodstuffs such as milk , that do not require a list of ingredients .
An exception is made for mixtures of spices or herbs constituting less than 2 % of the finished product .
Seasonal variations in supply make it particularly important for small and medium-sized enterprises to be enabled to react speedily to changes in market conditions by means of the use of the clause with the phrase ' contains ....... and / or ............. ' .
Contrary to what some critics have said , all the concessions I have referred to do not mean that consumer protection is being weakened , but constitute a sensible arrangement and an alternative to the 25 % rule , which has been dropped .
This does not affect the fundamental requirement that the presence of all allergenic substances be indicated on the label .
I have gone into labelling in great depth and also got to grips with its practical implementation .
In all this , we must not forget that labelling must not disorient the consumer , but must be clear , distinct , and , in the final analysis , legible .
Taken as a whole , the Commission proposal improves consumer protection in the European Union and offers consumers greater transparency and more information .
Current difficulties , in particular , mean that it sends an important signal to the people of Europe .
Let me conclude by thanking most warmly all those who have helped and supported me .
I would be delighted if the amendments I have put forward were to meet with the approval of a large majority of Members of this House .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , here we are again , with farmers demonstrating because we are dealing with food issues .
I believe it to be important that we should keep fighting to win consumers ' trust , and it is particularly with regard to foodstuffs that more precise labelling is vitally necessary .
In my capacity as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , I would like first to thank our rapporteur , Mrs Kla , for her fine cooperation .
Even though , when discussions started , we approached issues of detail from slightly different angles , as a whole we took the same line , so that the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy complemented each other very well , something which I do think should be mentioned and appreciated at this time .
As a whole , the Commission proposal amounted to a welcome advance in the labelling of foodstuffs , but no doubt there is nothing so good that it cannot be improved .
That was a task for us here in Parliament .
The existing rule that all food ingredients - including constituent parts of compound foodstuffs - must be enumerated in the so-called list of ingredients on the label did indeed provide for derogations .
Mrs Kla has addressed the question of the so-called 25 % rule .
We often hear it said by way of justification for this that labels were made too all-inclusive by the large number of constituents listed on them , thereby ending up being unreadable , which was no doubt a bit extreme .
The Commission itself made reference to the absence of uncertainty in Member States where this rule did not apply .
No doubt the 25 % rule was problematic mainly in that consumers could not know , when buying processed foods , whether they contained substances that might trigger allergies , in that even very small proportions of these were significant to the consumer .
I do think that this context makes it clear that an even closer look needs to be taken at the difference in Amendments Nos 7 and 12 , and consideration given either before or after the adoption of the directive as to whether this scientific basis for the inclusion of allergenic substances is the right one .
Mr President , I wish to congratulate the rapporteur on an excellent example of where a substantial and sensible proposal from the Commission has been further improved in our committee .
In my remarks , I want to follow Mr Schnellhardt .
I believe that it was right for our committee to go further than the Commission , after the abolition of the 25 % rule , by also taking an axe to some of the exceptions and exemptions which had been suggested by the Commission .
I wish to say something about the many people who correspond with us about allergies .
For anyone suffering from an allergy , it is no good saying that it is only an insignificant percentage of people who have it .
If you have an allergy , it is 100 % for you and we need to be certain that the labelling concerned gives due warning .
There is one area where we are not for the first time facing sustained opposition .
Mr Schnellhardt just mentioned alcoholic products .
Amendment No 1 which I moved in the committee and which was carried , would indeed make certain that there could be a single committee responsible for the labelling of products for alcoholic beverages .
I believe that is important and something which has been strenuously resisted over the years by the wine lobby .
We are not saying that the specialist committees should not be involved in this , nor that there should not be a dialogue .
Sooner or later , we have to tackle , within this general issue of allergies and labelling , the issue of a special interest which has always stood in the way of accurate labelling of some products and of applying the same provisions to all products .
I do not believe that we can go on with that and my personal view is that now is the time .
I would recommend - although there is a free vote in my group - that we vote in favour of Amendment No 1 and that we start to label wine in the same way as we label other products .
Mr President , firstly I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Kla , and the members of the committee for all their hard work on this particular dossier .
The question of food labelling is of great importance , as many people have said this morning .
Our legislation must satisfy the legitimate demands of consumers .
After all , what could be more reasonable than wanting to know what foods are made up of , in order to make informed decisions in the face of an increasingly wide range of foods from which to choose .
But even more important for a sadly ever-growing number of consumers , those who suffer from food allergies or intolerances , is information about the presence of certain ingredients for health reasons .
It is therefore essential that labelling legislation not only ensures that all consumers receive comprehensive information , but also addresses the very real problem of adverse reactions to food .
These are the objectives of the proposal we are discussing here today and I am pleased to note that in general it has attracted a broad consensus of support .
In view of this , our discussions can focus mainly on the most appropriate means of achieving the objectives .
Labelling issues are often more complex than they at first appear .
For example , some flavourings are spice mixtures containing dozens of ingredients .
Is it necessary , or even desirable , to list them all ?
I believe not , except in the case of substances derived from ingredients which can cause allergies or intolerances .
To encapsulate the problem , just how precise does food labelling need to be ?
It is absolutely essential to avoid an excessive amount of information which would be difficult for consumers to take on board .
Quantity cannot be allowed to cloud quality and clarity .
Our proposal aims , therefore , to provide information that is sufficiently complete whilst guarding against the omission of any ingredients which might cause allergies or intolerances .
At the same time , the obligation to provide detailed labelling must be accompanied by procedures enabling manufacturers to satisfy this obligation without excessive technical difficulties .
It was with these considerations in mind that we examined the proposed amendments before us today .
As the list is relatively short , I will comment on them all .
Amendment No 1 would abolish the possibility of having technical implementing rules adopted for the special case of alcoholic drinks under the sectoral management committee procedure .
However , specific labelling provisions are in force for certain alcoholic drinks - wines , for example .
This amendment would create inconsistency with existing legislation and therefore I cannot accept it .
Amendment No 2 would add mixtures of mushrooms to other mixtures , fruit and vegetables , which can be labelled without having to satisfy the rule of descending order of weight and specifies that this option would only apply in the case of mixtures whose proportions may vary .
I accept that this point is valid and I therefore accept this amendment .
Amendment No 3 would abolish the possibility of flexibility in the labelling of ingredients used in small quantities - under 5 % of the finished product .
Thus it would remove , firstly , the possibility of not strictly respecting the descending order of weight in the list of ingredients and , secondly , the possibility of using the expression " and / or " in the case of ingredients which are interchangeable according to availability .
Amendment No 13 would abolish only the first possibility .
However , these provisions which allow for some flexibility of labelling presentation are technically justified , given the obligation to list all ingredients , including those used in very small quantities .
I cannot , therefore , accept these amendments .
Amendment No 4 would abolish a requirement for an explanation as regards repetition where ingredients are used several times in the preparation of a product .
This amendment provides for simplification and can be accepted .
Therefore Amendment No 14 , which would abolish the whole provision , cannot be accepted .
Amendment No 5 aims to remove the provision of not requiring the indication of the composition of compound ingredients used in small quantities - under 5 % of the finished product - where the composition in question is covered by current Community legislation which gives the composition corresponding to the trade name .
This derogation would not , however , apply in either additives or allergens .
The aim of this derogation is to avoid making a list of ingredients unnecessarily long , while remaining consistent with the objectives of the proposal .
I cannot accept its removal and must therefore reject the amendment .
Amendment No 6 aims chiefly to abolish the derogation from labelling provided for in the proposal for ingredients which make up preparations of sauces and mustards constituting less than 5 % of the foodstuffs .
This derogation is also designed to avoid making the list of ingredients excessively long .
The amendment would remove the advantage of keeping lists shorter .
I cannot , therefore , accept Amendment No 6 .
Amendment No 7 comprises two distinct elements .
First , it would exempt processing aids derived from allergenic ingredients from the requirement to be indicated on the label , on the grounds that these substances are eliminated during the manufacturing process .
However , residues may be present in the finished product and may cause allergic reactions , even where mere residues or traces of allergens are present .
This part of Amendment No 7 is therefore not acceptable .
Second , it would make the European Food Safety Authority responsible for establishing criteria for updating the annex and for revising it every two years .
There is an ambiguity here , because amendment of the annex - which will be necessary - has to be done by the legislator , having consulted the authority on the scientific aspects .
We can accept the principle of regular revision of the list annexed to the proposal but the amendment as it is currently worded is not acceptable .
Neither is Amendment No 12 on the same issue .
The purpose of Amendments Nos 8 , 9 and 10 is to add ingredients to the list in the annex .
However , the list proposed by the Commission remains valid and should only be supplemented later on the basis of objective scientific criteria .
With a view to subsequent updating of the list the Commission is consulting the Scientific Committee for Food and has made provisions for a rapid procedure to update the list .
These amendments are therefore not acceptable .
Finally , I can agree on the principle that , as requested in Amendment No 11 , an interpretative guideline for Annex III ( a ) would have to be laid down , but only if this is necessary .
My view is that this annex should be drawn up in such a way that no further interpretation guideline would be needed .
I cannot , therefore , accept the current wording of this amendment .
That concludes the summary of the Commission view of the proposed amendments .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
Mr President , just very quickly , can you confirm that the French football team has contracted Legionella ?
You are more familiar with the Rules than I am , Mr Corbett .
I am not sure under which Rule you rose to make your point .
I cannot confirm that but I can confirm they will be taking an early return trip to France .
The next item is the vote .
Recommendation for second reading , in the form of a letter on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council regulation amending Council Regulation ( EC ) No 577 / 98 on the organisation of a labour force sample survey in the Community ( 6241 / 1 / 2002 - C5-0181 / 2002 - 2001 / 0127 ( COD ) ) ( null )
( The President declared the common position adopted )
Recommendation for second reading ( A5-0194 / 2002 ) by Emmanouil Bakopoulos , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the Council common position with a view to the adoption of a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending for the nineteenth time Council Directive 76 / 769 / EEC relating to restrictions on the marketing and use of certain dangerous substances and preparations ( azocolourants ) ( 15079 / 1 / 01 - C5-0071 / 2002 - 1999 / 0269 ( COD ) )
Mr President , I would like firstly to express my thanks to Members for their interest in this proposal and especially to Mr Bakopoulos , the rapporteur for his constructive work .
This is an important directive as it would introduce a ban on certain colourants for textiles and leather articles as there are colourants that have been shown to pose risks to human health .
It is a far-reaching proposal as it covers the marketing and use of a large number of textiles and leather articles .
The proposed directive will also encourage the marketing and use of alternative colourants .
I can understand that Members have concerns going beyond the proposed directive with regard to material other than textiles or leather and I would like to address those concerns .
The Commission 's approach is to identify articles containing the dangerous substances that have clearly been shown on the basis of sufficient data to pose risks .
Currently the Commission has no information that these colourants are present in toys made of materials other than textiles or leather .
However , toys containing dangerous substances or preparations are already banned by the toys directive .
Furthermore , within this framework the Commission is actively considering the risks posed by such substances in toys .
Against this background , the Commission is unable to accept Amendments Nos 1 to 4 .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I request that a vote now be taken on the legislative proposal as well , as it would make no sense to return it to the committee .
Mr President , I have been presented with a table that sets out the position with regard to the attitude of the Commission and I can present that table to you in due course .
Mr President , I expected nothing else of the Commission .
No doubt it will take a very unambiguous vote in this House to convince them of the need to overcome their lethargy !
Mr President , at the initiative of our rapporteur , Mr Nistic , there have been informal negotiations with the Council and the Commission on this matter , which is a very sensitive one for many in Parliament and for many of the Member States .
Last week , we reached an understanding and an agreement as to how this matter could be resolved without a protracted and very difficult debate in the Conciliation Committee . During the debate in Parliament this morning , it was that agreement and that understanding - which it had been possible for both the Commission and the Council to accept and which had been reached on this issue specifically relating to unpaid blood donation - that our rapporteur ran away from .
I would therefore ask that we postpone the vote and see if we cannot solve this matter and so avoid a host of more or less ill thought-out oral amendments .
You have made a formal proposal .
I will follow the due procedure .
Mr President , I am in favour of an amendment to Amendment No 19 , an oral amendment - in this way , all the positions would be respected - ending with the words : ' this should be taken into account by Member States ' .
In this case , I would be in favour of the amendment and it would therefore be a good compromise agreement .
Mr Lund , does this compromise allow you to withdraw your request , or do you wish to maintain your request for postponement ?
Mr President , I should like to stand by my request to postpone the vote .
This matter has proceeded in a quite unsatisfactory way , and I am pleased that , as late as this morning , Commissioner Byrne confirmed my reading of the matter and the agreement which Mr Nistic ran away from this morning .
We must have time to discover how we are to resolve this matter .
I should still like us to solve it in such a way that we avoid a protracted debate in the Conciliation Committee of an extremely difficult matter .
A framework decision is legally binding upon the Member States . It is not , however , covered by the codecision procedure , and democratic control by the European Parliament is limited .
Legislation of this kind must be covered by a democratic decision-making process .
Serious organised crime must be fought by means that are effective but in ways that accord with the rule of law .
For a country like Sweden , which has no constitutional court , the rule of law aspect is especially sensitive .
The absence of a constitutional court means that people obviously have little opportunity to check up on what is , or is not , constitutional .
Such control by the courts is also missing at European level .
The Swedish Christian Democrats have today voted in favour of the Marinho report .
To succeed in the fight against crime , simplification of the legal cooperation between the Member States is required if matters are to be dealt with more quickly .
It is therefore important to be able promptly and efficiently to implement a decision to freeze property or evidence prior to an impending court case , even if such assets or evidence are to be found in a Member State other than that in which the decision is made .
At the same time , it is necessary fully to guarantee the legal rights of everyone involved and not to be in too much of a hurry to make such an important change to the legal system .
We consequently believe that it is wisest initially to have a limited area of application for the framework decision .
Only once it has been possible to evaluate experience of this cooperation will it be appropriate to discuss whether legal cooperation can be taken further and intensified and , if so , to what extent .
The framework decision nonetheless has scope for the Council to add other types of crime at a later stage , which is why I voted against Amendments Nos 11 , 12 and 18 .
- ( FR ) The new Rule 6a ( 13 ) of the Rules of Procedure , as adopted following the Duff report , states : ' The [ competent ] committee [ of the European Parliament ] , after consulting the Member States , may draw up an indicative list of the authorities of the Member States which are competent to present a request for waiving the immunity of a Member ' .
As I said yesterday , this convoluted wording has but one objective : to avoid clearly recognising a national competence which is a hindrance to the European Parliament .
To avoid admitting this , the text begins by saying that the European Parliament has the right to draw up a list .
As this right is pure fabrication , it is quickly added that the list is ' indicative ' .
Thirdly , as this cramping of the European Parliament 's style is still not appreciated , it is specified that the Member States are to be ' consulted ' , which appears to mean that they do not decide .
What is more , we do not know what they are consulted on either : whether it is the principle of the list or its content .
This is one of the methods traditionally used by the European institutions to take over national competences : they begin by completely confusing the issue , then they say that the situation is too complicated and that , in order to simplify it , competence must be transferred to Brussels .
. ( NL ) Parliamentary immunity appears to be very important to many MEPs , for it is constantly being discussed in this Parliament .
MEPs are subject to the national rules of their Member States , and these differ considerably .
In one country , this means that during their mandate , MEPs cannot be prosecuted without their own cooperation or without the decision to lift their immunity for punishable offences , and that they are therefore put at an advantage compared to other citizens .
This benefits criminals who want to protect themselves .
In other countries , like the Netherlands , this merely means that an MEP cannot be prosecuted on the grounds of statements made in the parliamentary debate or in questions as an MEP .
For the time being , I am in favour of this restricted definition of immunity , for it ensures that MEPs and their electorate are , and remain , on an equal footing , without the MEPs being hindered in their work .
I can understand that there is more need for immunity in states where attempts have often been made to seriously hamper MEPs , who are considered political enemies , in their work by constantly instituting legal proceedings against them .
But let us keep this to a minimum and not extend it to separate European law .
Mr President , each year in Europe alone 38,000 animals are routinely killed after being used to test the development of new cosmetic products .
For nearly ten years the EU has had a ban on the sale of products tested on animals but we have yet to implement this .
There is no reason why we should not do so , especially in cases where scientifically validated alternatives to animal testing are available .
The Commission proposal to now replace this sales ban with a mere test ban is totally unacceptable and of great concern in view of massive public demand to end the use of animal testing for cosmetics .
The test ban alone only serves to export the problem as cosmetics tested on animals in countries outside the EU will continue to be sold in the EU .
Only a sales and test ban will remove such products from our shelves .
This will not compromise the safety of cosmetics , as products sold in the EU must fulfil legal safety requirements .
We need to speed up the development of alternative testing .
Mr President , in common with the majority of European Union citizens , I believe that the use of live animals in cosmetic testing is an unnecessary and unacceptable practice and must be banned .
Over 8,000 ingredients have already been cleared for use in cosmetics .
How many more new products do we need ?
What is going to provide the incentive for commercial companies to develop alternative testing methods ?
The answer is , firstly , a marketing ban on new animal-tested cosmetics five years after adoption of the legislation , as the report that we adopted in the Environment Committee states .
This is clearly not now against WTO rules .
Secondly , a complete test ban , with a definite date by which it will come into force .
I believe anything less than this to be insufficient and unsatisfactory and I know my constituents share that view .
Banning cosmetic testing will not mean that consumers will be sold unsafe products , but will mean an end to a great deal of animal suffering .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am delighted that we have today shown such unanimity with regard to the Roth-Berendt Report .
I hope that our great strength of conviction will also turn out to have had an effect on the Commission .
I am in favour both of banning testing on animals and the marketing of the products tested .
I believe that the transitional periods have been extended too far .
It is for this reason that I would have preferred even shorter transitional periods .
I would like to take this opportunity to point out that this sort of trade in animals is going on , and only a couple of days ago , in the South Tyrol , the part of Upper Italy that I come from , a transaction of this kind was thwarted .
We were able to block the convoy and rescue the animals .
We know that that is not the solution .
The solution is regulation by the law .
I hope that we will put such legislation into effect as soon as possible .
Our contribution to it has now been made .
. ( NL ) Unfortunately , tests using certain substances to establish how animals become ill , suffer and die formed a normal part of scientific and industrial progress , but luckily these are increasingly less common these days .
The discussion now merely revolves around whether animal tests can be avoided altogether when they concern purely medical matters .
It is disgraceful that tests of this kind should still be used for luxury purposes , such as the production of cosmetics .
It is these days generally acknowledged that this should be stamped out as a matter of urgency .
Despite this , this development has been hampered by the fear that companies that carry out animal tests will move outside the EU territory and that their products will subsequently be imported , because cross-border trade is currently uncontrolled .
Mrs Roth-Berendt proved very resourceful in finding solutions to the fact that the Council continues to denounce an import ban .
She now refers to the public opinion and demands labelling , allowing the consumer to establish whether animal tests have preceded the marketing of the product .
In addition , she is trying to reduce the number of animal tests faster and more drastically and avoid the addition of substances that smell pleasantly but make people ill .
Given the opposition by the Council to date , this is the best solution .
- ( FR ) Today we have voted on a important issue .
Eight thousand ingredients have already been tested and are available for use in industry , and I believe it was essential to reject cosmetic testing on animals .
Some have put forward the public health argument in opposition to the amendments prohibiting these tests , but it must be reiterated that on no account can the results of tests carried out on animals automatically be considered valid for human beings .
This is a genetic and scientific fact which would have serious consequences in just ten or twenty years .
I am saying this not just as an animal lover but out of respect for living creatures .
The fundamental question is , in fact , how much we are capable of sacrificing to the myths of eternal life , eternal beauty and eternal youth .
This is essentially a philosophical and humanistic question which is currently one of a number of concerns our people want politicians to address .
The debates on globalisation , large corporations and their profits and the respect for and dignity of all human beings reflect similar concerns .
. ( PT ) The amendments that have been tabled consolidate amendments to the Regulation currently in force that clarify ideas , establish criteria for allocating slots and their legal nature and the possibility of slot transfers , they adopt international concepts of facilitated and coordinated airports , replacing previous designations of coordinated and entirely coordinated airports .
Nevertheless , I must point out that , by replacing these with the titles of facilitator and coordinator , the first appears to have a consultative rather than a regulatory role , and so we could ask whether the operation of these facilitated airports will be effective , specifically in terms of the distribution of slots .
Since this proposal would lead to only really congested or ' coordinated ' airports having clear legal regulation , the laws will only apply in a small number of situations , which could be a step backwards in the slot allocation system .
Given the successive food crises we have experienced , the 25 % rule on the labelling of foodstuffs should be abolished and consumers suffering from allergies should be given full information on the foodstuffs they buy .
Similarly , I believe the derogations on preparations of sauces and mustards constituting less than 5 % of the finished product should be discontinued .
Certain exceptions , however , should be retained , such as the role of the expert committees responsible for the various drinks .
These committees must continue to lay down the rules on labelling .
Certain alcoholic drinks , such as wine , must obey specific rules on labelling .
Additives and technological adjuvants whose presence cannot be proved in the finished product should not be labelled .
I welcome the fact that the scientific criteria for inclusion in the list of ingredients in Annex III are fully taken into consideration and that this list is revised and updated biennially .
We consider the implementation of the directive to be important .
That is why we are excluding prior assessment by the Food Authority of the scientific criteria that determine the inclusion of the ingredients in the Annex .
- ( EL ) ? he text of the decision on social inclusion following the vote on the amendments is a far cry from the original text of the Figueiredo report approved by the Committee on Employment .
Not only have references to the disastrous results of liberalisation , competition policy , agricultural and fisheries policy , the stability pact and the need for welfare benefits , social protection and redistribution of resources and opportunities been removed , it now states that employment is a right and opportunity for those who want to work , with temporary work seen as the only opportunity for many of those who are unwilling to look for or unable to find permanent employment .
In other words , the unemployed who do not want to work are responsible for unemployment !
The way the vote went again shows the European Parliament in its true colours , unable to ditch its role as the bastion of big business and the policy of the ruling classes .
That is why the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece voted against the report , even though it retained a few positive points , including those I referred to in my intervention yesterday ( free , compulsory education for 12 years ) .
. ( PT ) The amendments tabled during the vote on my report on social inclusion weakened its substance on significant points .
In fact , of the 19 amendments tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , 12 of those that were approved sought to remove important aspects of the real strategy that needs to be developed to effectively promote social inclusion and to include the negative approach of defending temporary work , which runs counter to the promise and the idea of full employment .
The removal of the points dealing with the following issues is particularly significant :
the importance of social transfers , notably old-age pensions , without which 41 % of the European Union 's population would be at risk of living in poverty ; and other social transfers without which , even if old-age pensions were maintained , the percentage would still be 26 % of the population as opposed to the 18 % currently in that position ;
an assessment of the impact of monetary policies , including the Stability Pact , on social matters such as employment , poverty and social exclusion , equal rights and opportunities , and so on .
Finally , it should be noted that other PPE-DE amendments were rejected , which has enabled important aspects of the report to be preserved .
Hence my abstention from the final vote .
We are basically well disposed towards the European Union .
As Swedish Liberals , we view European integration as an opportunity to achieve solutions to cross-border problems relating , for example , to the environment , trade , movement across borders , human rights and conflict management .
Social integration is an important part of the development of Europe .
Social integration is an important aspect of the fight against poverty and social exclusion , which is why we are of course in favour of it .
Because subsidiarity is something we defend and to which we adhere as one of our most important principles , we see no reason to harmonise the area to which the report relates .
Social integration is an example of an area that is not directly cross-border in nature , and the points dealt with by the report can better be taken into consideration at Member State level .
- ( FR ) In the next series of National Action Plans for social inclusion , in 2003 , it is essential to recommend that the Member States give high priority to those living in persistent poverty .
The report describes the current situation and , I regret to remind you , we have 60 million poor people in the European Union , and this is unacceptable .
At the Lisbon Summit , the fifteen Member States undertook to eradicate poverty by 2010 .
The Treaty of Nice confirmed this commitment .
This report acts as a springboard to reinforce the policies and programmes of the European Union and confirms that the fight against poverty is still a major issue .
We have succeeded in adopting the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Now we need to bring it to life .
Article 1 of the Charter , which emphasises the dignity of every human being , is key .
The dignity of all those living in poverty is injured and , to us , that is unacceptable .
We must establish a proactive policy for schooling , for public services , for housing and for employment .
Most importantly , we must anticipate the risks of exclusion and do something to protect the most vulnerable groups : the structural changes within our Union could create further risks of discrimination and spark off a fresh wave of racism and xenophobia .
- ( FR ) The aim of the report by Mr Morillon and Mr Cohn-Bendit is to bear witness to a firm commitment by Parliament to an active , effective Euro-Mediterranean policy .
In this respect , it outlines ideas worthy of study .
First , the desire to enter into discussions with our partners in the Arab Maghreb Union ( AMU ) is , at last , translated into an approach that goes beyond the purely trade level to which the relationship between the two shores of the Mediterranean has thus far been limited .
We should be glad that the emphasis has , at last , been placed on entering into political and cultural rather than just economic exchange .
In the same vein , the involvement of our southern partners in the definition of a common immigration policy is long overdue .
This policy , which is often referred to but never established , is becoming urgent .
Although the willingness that the report seems to express is overdue , it nonetheless represents a positive development in attitudes within the European Union .
I would also like to commend the co-rapporteurs ' intention not to set themselves up as role models : we all have as much to give as we have to receive , and there are few areas in which this humility is as necessary as in North-South cooperation .
This intention , however laudable , is , unfortunately , contradicted in the text of the report itself .
( Intervention cut short pursuant to Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
. ( NL ) Europe has often interfered with North West Africa in a negative way .
Up until 50 years or so ago , those countries formed the colonial property of France , Spain and Italy , and particularly in Algeria , independence was preceded by a lengthy and devastating war .
This past has contributed to the fact that violence and poverty in those countries still play an important role .
In Tunisia , an authoritarian state emerges without any right to opposition ; in Algeria , the army plays an important role and the large Berber population feel like second-rate citizens ; in Morocco , the situation is politically speaking slightly better but many try to join their families who have been in the EU for a long time , and in the Western Sahara , the agreed referendum on independence has still not been held .
Much like the USA is separated from a much poorer Mexico by the Rio Grande and a fence , Europe is kept separate from northern Africa by the Mediterranean .
Many inhabitants of the Maghreb countries look for Europe 's higher standard of living or have reason to flee an oppressive regime .
I concur with the view of the Green-Conservative coalition of rapporteurs that it would be preferable to make an economic migration superfluous by providing incomes and employment in their own countries , but that need not lead to support for the leaders of a unified Maghreb .
I see Mr Fatuzzo is present .
Would he like to give an explanation as to why he gives no explanation today ?
Mr President , I am preparing myself in case , on Wednesday , the House should adopt Amendment No 74 to the Rules of Procedure , which radically reduces Mr Fatuzzo 's opportunities for delivering explanations of vote .
I am in training in case the House , in its wisdom , decides that it would be better for me to speak less .
Mr Fatuzzo , it would have been a pity to let the opportunity pass .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
( The sitting was suspended at 12.51 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

The next item is a recommendation ( A5-0212 / 2002 ) by Mr Gil-Robles Gil-Delgado , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on the draft Council decision amending the Act concerning the election of representatives of the European Parliament , annexed to Council decision 76 / 787 / ECSC , EEC , Euratom of 20 September 1976 [ 8964 / 2002 - C5-0225 / 2002 - 2002 / 0807 ( AVC ) ] .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the draft Council Decision which is before the House today marks the culmination of a long process .
A moment ago we were arguing about whether it was 25 years or 30 years .
Either way it has been a long process .
Since 1960 , when the draft convention on election to Parliament by universal suffrage was adopted , our House has produced five reports which have ended up deadlocked within the Council .
At last the Spanish Presidency has achieved a laborious agreement within the Council .
We must celebrate this and congratulate the presidency on this delicate manoeuvring .
This text includes the majority of the proposals the European Parliament had made in the Anastasopoulos report .
Specifically , it introduces the principle of proportional representation with each Member State having a choice about the type of preferential list it wishes , the incompatibility of the status of a Member of a national parliament with that of a Member of the European Parliament , with exceptions for the United Kingdom and Ireland until the 2009 elections , the power of each Member State to set the ceiling for the electoral expenses of candidates and the power of each Member State to create territorial constituencies which do not affect in a general sense the proportional nature of the elections .
It also brings the 1976 Act into line with the changes introduced by the successive Treaties in the institutions and bodies of the Union and an intelligent solution is found for compliance with the ' Matthews ' judgment on the vote of the electorate of Gibraltar .
It is true that Parliament 's other proposals have not been included , such as the single constituency for the whole of the European Union , the movement of elections to the month of May and the objective of parity between men and women on electoral lists .
Some people will therefore say that this is a minimal agreement , but the rapporteur believes that it is better to take a step forward towards a more homogenous electoral system , than to remain in the blind alley we were trapped in .
This is how the European Union has acted , moving forward prudently , sometimes excessively so , but moving forward nonetheless , like tortoises , slowly but surely .
Of course the assent does not mean renouncing Parliament 's positions .
The rapporteur has opted to re-state them in the recitals , improved by the contributions of the members of the committee , whom I would like to warmly and expressly thank for their cooperation .
These are not purely rhetorical demands .
The draft Decision lays down that the Act would be subject to a new review before 2009 , by which time Parliament 's demands could be incorporated .
For all these reasons , I would ask you to support the assent in favour of the draft Decision .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I will end by mentioning a proposal by President Delors , which could be a shot in the arm for the European elections : it simply consists of doing at Union level what is done in the Member States , that is , that the head of the electoral cartel should be proposed by the President of the Commission .
The vote would therefore leave behind the realms of abstract notions and purely national references and give the Union a public face .
I have included this proposal in the recitals , with the support of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , because I strongly believe that it is time that the citizens understood who they are voting for and why .
Madam President , this is a truly historic event : the first modification of the 1976 Act .
President Gil Robles , whom I would like to congratulate as rapporteur for this parliamentary assent , has said that many drafts have become deadlocked .
I remember how a distinguished British Conservative , Edmund Burk , said that Spain was like a whale washed up on the shores of Europe ( or something like that , I am quoting from memory ) .
Therefore , I am very pleased that it is the Spanish Presidency that has managed to break the deadlock on this issue and that in 2002 , under the Spanish Presidency , we will have the first reform of the Electoral Act .
I believe this is one of the few cases in which the European Parliament is called upon to issue an assent , that is to say , to vote yes or no , and , furthermore , so that this assent may have legal results , there must be an absolute majority in the House .
This was the conflict the European Parliament was faced with : what to do .
As the rapporteur said , it is true that not all of the aspirations of the European Parliament contained in its previous report , drawn up by our friend and former colleague , Mr Georgios Anastasopoulos , have been taken into account .
It is also true that it was necessary to adapt this Electoral Act to the various and successive modifications of the Treaties .
And it is also the case that we had to comply with a mandate and resolve an issue which stemmed from a judgment of a Court - in this case the Strasbourg Court - and therefore adapt our electoral system to the judgment in the Matthews case .
That is what is being done .
Like the rapporteur , I believe that most of the considerations expressed by the European Parliament on these issues , in its previous report , since the Treaty of Amsterdam modified the uniform electoral system in accordance with the general principles of electoral law , appear in the spirit and the letter of the text before us today .
The Group of the European Peoples ' Party is therefore going to vote in favour , and it is true that there will be time to accommodate other requests from the European Parliament in the future .

The historic nature of this moment , however , does not end there , because the Group of the European Peoples ' Party is going to support an amendment presented by Mr Bonde - a very unusual thing in this Parliament - because we think it is a good amendment , an amendment in which Mr Bonde says and maintains that those Members of Parliament elected in the territory of a State represent the whole of the electorate , something which , by the way - and this brings me back to what I said at the beginning - was also advocated by Edmund Burk in his comments to the voters of Bristol in 1794 .

Madam President , I would therefore like to say that my group will vote in favour of this assent which Mr Gil Robles has drawn up with such skill and dexterity .
Madam President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur for his work .
He is wise to recommend that Parliament gives its assent to the position that the Council has adopted .
This is one of the only areas under the Treaty where it is the Parliament and not the Commission which has the right of initiative .
We took this initiative some years ago , the Council has acted on our text , and indeed incorporated most of the essential elements that we wished to see incorporated into the uniform electoral system , or at least the common principles for the system .
Our argument that proportional representation should be obligatory in every Member State is accepted .
I come from the last Member State to have introduced proportional representation for European elections and am glad that this will now be recognised as a principle to be applied across all Member States .
It also recognises that so that not everything is done at the level of highly centralised national lists , regional constituencies , which are closer to the people , should be possible , especially in the larger Member States .
The report also recommends that we bring to an end , although this will be phased in , the dual mandate whereby Members sit both in the European Parliament and in their national parliament .
That is an attempt to do two full-time jobs at once : it is no longer feasible , it is no longer tenable and it is right to phase it out .
All in all , we can approve this text although it is not fully satisfactory in every respect , but that is part of the give and take of the European Union , part of the process of accommodation that we go through and we can accept it .
My group will therefore be voting for the report by Mr Gil-Robles .
We have a problem , however , with recital D. This recital begins by stating that we regret that the single European constituency , which Parliament proposed , will not be introduced .
The problem here is that Parliament did not propose that , Parliament said that it was something that could be examined for the future , as of the 2009 elections .
The text even says that we regret that it is not to be introduced in time for the next European elections , when we did not even envisage it as a possibility for the next European elections .
If we are serious as a parliament , even those amongst us who support the idea of 10 % of the seats being elected in this way , we should take this particular recital out of the text because it actually contradicts the facts and our proposals .
We will be doing ourselves no good by regretting that the Council did not approve something which we did not even propose .
With that small reservation , I can support the text and my group will be voting in favour of the rest of it .
Madam President , as previous speakers have said , it has proved to be an extraordinarily controversial process to get this far , especially for the British who have only now agreed to bring in a fair voting system , without which , it must be said , I would unlikely to be speaking here this afternoon .
The British also accept that they have a responsibility to ensure that the citizens of Gibraltar can be represented in this place .
I trust that the participation of Gibraltar within the European political system will soften some of the nationalistic tensions we have seen in that part of the Union .
Several States have quite properly conceded the end of the dual mandate .
This practice is contrary to the constitutional principle of the separation of powers and impairs Parliament 's efficiency .
So I congratulate the rapporteur and the Belgian and Spanish presidencies for brokering the agreement .
I look forward to a further review of the uniform electoral procedure , by which time I trust that the Convention will have established the argument for regional seats in the larger States as well as for some element of a transnational list .
Madam President , in the opinion of my group , although the rapporteur 's resolution is indisputably satisfactory , the Council text is mediocre .
It is true that we have made progress with regard to Gibraltar , and I am pleased for our British and Spanish friends , as well as for the people of Gibraltar .
That said , however , how can the citizens understand that we have European political families when some Members of this Parliament are not elected transnationally ?
What is more , how can we explain that a very flexible mandate incompatibility system will preserve overlaps between the offices of members of a national parliament and Members of the European Parliament for a long time to come ?
Lastly , how can we explain to the female half of the human race that European electoral law says nothing about gender equality ?
I am glad to say that these points are included in the rapporteur 's resolution , but we are quite aware that these are only recitals and that the Council and the Member States can do with them as they will .
I would like to draw the attention of the Council to one point : territorial division .
It is said , in French at least , that this will not affect the essentially proportional nature of the voting system .
The word ' essentially ' is interesting , firstly because it was not translated into all languages ; some Council versions even omitted the adverb .
Moreover , what is meant by ' essentially ' ?
This concept means that in effect , by chopping up the electoral territory , we may well end up with lists of two or three MEPs in a constituency , meaning that the electoral threshold will become 20 or 30 % .
This will certainly simplify debates in this Chamber tremendously , but to the detriment of representativeness .
There is no point to proportionality unless it guarantees that citizens are properly represented .
That is why we are trying to combat this threshold effect in the recitals that have been adopted , and I would like to thank officially our rapporteur and the Committee on Constitutional Affairs while hoping that the Council will come round to this position .
That is why my group has not yet decided whether to vote to endorse this mediocre text .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in my group there are different views about how the system for elections to the European Parliament should be developed , and so the group 's members will certainly cast their votes in different ways on the report .
My personal view is that the compromise achieved in Council is , as a whole , acceptable , representing as it does a move towards a more homogeneous European electoral system .
The ruling on the incompatibility of membership of the European Parliament and of a national parliament simultaneously was long overdue .
What is particularly heartening is that Gibraltarian citizens can at last take part in European elections .
I very much hope that the citizens of the candidate countries will be able to vote in the 2004 elections and that the accession negotiations will not be delayed .
I am concerned , though , about my government 's present activities and I call upon it not to jeopardise the timetable for enlargement .
I wish to address four issues on which my group takes the view that there is an urgent need to change electoral law .
Firstly , we reject minimum thresholds as being undemocratic , putting smaller parties at a disadvantage and hampering political pluralism .
Secondly , it is high time that the right to vote in European elections at last ceased to be restricted to EU citizens .
It is incomprehensible that people from third countries who have been living and working in our Member States for many years , are still denied the right to vote and stand for election .
Why do we not , at last , make an advance towards integration here , especially in view of the menacing increase in hostility towards foreigners in our Member States ?
Thirdly , the voting age needs to be reduced .
At the end of April , the Council of the European Youth Forum addressed itself to the Convention , calling for the age for voting and standing for office to be reduced to 16 .
I support this demand by young people and hope that the Youth Convention in July will also put all its weight behind it .
Fourthly , the recitals refer to the equality of men and women as being a problem , and rightly so .
I believe it is not acceptable that women make up only some 30 % of the Members of this House .
It is for the political parties to put men and women on an equal footing by revising their own rules for drawing up the list of candidates .
Madam President , Mr Gil-Robles Gil-Delgado , ladies and gentlemen , this report does not seem to me to be very appropriate as , although , strictly speaking , there is no uniform electoral procedure , the European elections have nonetheless been organised on very widely accepted common principles since 1999 .
Why , therefore , produce yet another report on a matter that has been discussed numerous times , except to try to re-launch an integration process that seems even more doomed than ever .
We could talk at length about the grounds for a move that arbitrarily imposes proportional representation and , even more controversially , the territorialisation of constituencies in the more populous Member States , by means of Community law .
I would like to emphasise that there is nothing , except reasoning that is as simplistic as it is erroneous , to suggest that this measure would bring the elected closer to the electorate or this being one of the desired objectives , that it would increase participation in European elections .
Single or regionalised constituencies , proportional or majority voting : since 1979 , every permutation has been tried , to no avail .
We must therefore accept that tinkering with the electoral laws will not create an artificial feeling of belonging to the European Union or reduce the colossal abstention that affects the legitimacy of Parliament .
Having said that , I would more specifically like to highlight two aspects that I consider unacceptable .
First , the unlikely idea of a single European constituency for the election of 10 % of the seats in Parliament , which I am glad to say was rejected by the Council but which is nonetheless referred to by the rapporteur .
Not only does this proposal run entirely counter to the objective of territorialisation - the single European constituency would distance its Members from their voters , whereas territorialisation aims , on the contrary , to bring them closer - but it also ignores Article 189 of the Treaty on the European Communities .
In effect , while the latter stipulates that Parliament must be composed of representatives of the people of the Member States of the Community , it is being proposed that we elect stateless Members .
The second point with which I thoroughly disagree concerns the reflections on the role of the European political parties , which the rapporteur invites to announce a candidate for the Commission Presidency in future election campaigns .
I note that this initiative constitutes a further violation of the Treaty , which gives the governments of the Member States the power to choose the person they wish to appoint as president of the Commission .
What is more , I believe that this ridiculous idea is dangerous , not to say perverse , as , by usurping a responsibility reserved for the Member States , it introduces a party system , and its inevitable corollary , an Assembly Government , at European level .
The participation of the European parties in voting is something that could possibly be considered , but their involvement in the workings of the Community institutions must be firmly opposed .
That is why , with regret , I cannot echo the compliments addressed to our rapporteur - although my criticism is by no means personal - and I therefore conclude that this report must be rejected .
Madam President , as is frequently the case in Parliament , the more we talk about the citizens the more we are thinking only of our own interests .
This draft decision of the Council and the report by Mr Gil-Robles Gil-Delgado make a good impression : utopia , the need for proximity , the idea that we could move towards a European democracy , that we could have someone at the top of the list who would be president of the Commission ; all these ideas are as far from reality as utopia was from the ideas of the contemporaries of Thomas More .
Behind this utopia , there is reality , a raw , pragmatic reality ; it is quite simply the desire of the large European parties to gain a stranglehold over the European Parliament , the desire of the Party of European Socialists and the European People 's Party to appropriate democracy in Europe through territorialisation which , by raising the thresholds , will , in effect , give them a duopoly over European democracy , with the rather spiteful complicity of the Greens , who are hoping to close the gap between themselves and the leading parties in a European constituency .

That is the reality , ladies and gentlemen : the confiscation of European democracy by European political parties which are entirely removed from the political reality of European citizens . This appropriation would be complemented by the funding system which would enable political funds to be reserved for these parties .
What we are witnessing here is a hold-up .
Madam President , the report by Mr Gil-Robles Gil-Delgado proposes that our Assembly endorse the draft decision of the Council on the procedure for European elections and , on this particular point , we agree with the rapporteur .
In effect , this draft , in its current wording , seems to be flexible enough to respect the sovereignty of each country .
On the other hand , assent would go hand in hand with a number of controversial recitals , for example the recital lamenting the fact that the Council draft does not stipulate the possibility of transnational European lists .
On the contrary , we think that these lists would only increase the isolation of the European Parliament from voters in the Member States .
If we have one regret , it is that the Council has forgotten to note that , pursuant to Articles 189 and 190 EC , even in cases where a country creates regional constituencies for the European elections , these Members represent their whole country and not just their constituency , as Mr Mndez de Vigo pointed out earlier .
In any case , this rule is there , since it is enshrined in the Treaty , but we have still submitted an amendment to recall its presence to make sure it is not overlooked .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it is all too true that the procedure for direct elections to the European Parliament has been an almost interminable business since the seventies .
Sensible solutions keep getting tangled up in the institutional undergrowth .
Parliament may well have the right of initiative under the European Treaties , but it is the Council that must come to a decision - a unanimous one .
As long as four years ago , we discharged our obligations with the Anastassopulos report , but the Council of Ministers has taken a very , very long time to do something about its own .
Now it has managed to come up with something , we are glad that we at last have a uniform electoral system in time for the 2004 elections , but I must warmly thank Mr Gil-Robles Gil-Delgado for having raised the matters that Parliament has so long called for , but which have unfortunately not been taken up .
Thus , there is nothing left to us other than to accept or reject the Council proposals ; in other words , it is a case of ' sink or swim ' .
Even though we have to admit that a number of points have been taken on board , matters are as unsatisfactory as ever they were .
This report adds Parliament to the roll of those who have called on the Convention to revise the provisions on EU election law in the Treaty establishing the European Communities .
According to the treaties , Parliament has the right of initiating electoral legislation , and it is not acceptable that it no longer has a part in reaching final decisions .
Matters of such fundamental importance to Parliament require that Parliament be given the full right of codecision .
I can hardly resist saying that the proposed wording concerning the introduction of territorial constituencies , with the protocol on the subject , brings the thorny issue of Great Britain and Gibraltar nearer to a solution .
It is indeed sad that a country like Great Britain , with centuries of experience of Empire and a centuries-old tradition of democracy needs a ruling by the European Court of Human Rights to remind it of its greater responsibilities beyond the bounds of its own territory .
This solution means that the citizens of Gibraltar will at last be able to participate in elections to the European Parliament .
This is certainly a success for democracy in Europe .
Madam President , in the Gil-Robles Gil-Delgado report on the European elections procedure , attention is drawn to a large number of points that are important for an effective , decisive and controllable Europe .
Unfortunately , the actual Council proposal which we need to agree on still contains a number of items that leave room for improvement .
Parliament has in any case expressed its thoughts on the matter .
The European elections have in recent years consistently been typified by a low turn-out .
In my own country , the Netherlands , the turn-out in 1999 was only 30 % .
In other countries , the situation was similarly disappointing .
In order to boost the numbers in 2004 , the elections must in any case become a great deal more exciting and more political .
The citizen must have the sense that by casting their vote , they can leave their mark on European policy and on the solution to the problems that are crying out for European cooperation , including asylum , food safety and the environment .
This should , firstly , be done by allowing Parliament to appoint the President of the European Commission on the basis of the results of the elections .
This is why in the report , all European political parties are urged to make their candidates known for this position well beforehand .
This gives the candidates a human face , makes them known and ultimately , brings the Commission closer to the people .
The day on which the elections are held is also extremely important in connection with identifying with the European project .
Only when we all vote on the same day will the people have the sense that they are voting for one and the same political body .
Most countries already vote on the same day , namely Sunday .
It is regretful that a limited number of countries , including Ireland , the UK and my own country , the Netherlands , do not go to the ballot boxes on the same day as other European Member States - namely Sunday - and that the sense of excitement is thus lost .
The reason is that apparently , we do want to open the supermarkets for commerce on Sundays , but if respect for democracy is at stake , the Netherlands is not interested .
I would therefore make an appeal to put respect for democracy before commercial interests in the Netherlands and go to the ballot box on Sunday .
Finally , I mooted the idea in the Netherlands last week to have the national Commissioner of the European Commission directly elected by referendum .
It is , in my view , an outmoded notion that such an important , politically recognisable figure should be appointed behind closed doors by government representatives .
This is why I call for a referendum that coincides with the Parliament elections in 2004 , where direct votes can be cast for a candidate .
This idea is naturally not only for Dutch purposes , but also for other European countries .
I hope that my fellow MEPs are willing to think this through very carefully , as I believe this to be an interesting idea .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the ten elected Members of the European Free Alliance , the sum total of the regionalist and nationalist Members within the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , have a problem with recital C. It does state that it is possible to establish regional constituencies for elections , whereby , however - and I quote - ' the proportional representation of political families at Member State level must not be undermined ? .
Could I point out that in the Belgian system , Member State level for European elections is totally irrelevant ?
Dutch-speakers and French-speakers go to the ballot boxes in two separate constituencies for elections which are totally unrelated to each other .
In my opinion , recital C is a liberal interpretation of Article 2 of the Council 's draft decision .
Moreover , the different language versions - just read the French , Dutch and English versions - are not identical .
The European Free Alliance is also struggling with the reference to transnational lists in recital D. In our opinion , this practice will lead to an even greater erosion of political diversity in this hemisphere .
Indeed , it is making it even more difficult for smaller political formations to obtain seats at transnational , national and regional level , certainly when this is combined with the 5 % electoral threshold .
This is why the ten MEPs of the European Fee Alliance will not be endorsing the present recommendation by Mr Gil Robles .
Madam President , this report is a technical stage in the Eurocrats ' protracted efforts to develop a political , parliamentary division of the European Union .
These efforts were based on the provisions of the Treaty of Maastricht through which an attempt was made , albeit unsuccessfully in Denmark , to make the electorate and the world around us believe that developing European political parties was an important integration factor .
Through these manoeuvres , aimed at developing a political and parliamentary division , the intention is to create a European political identity .
This political architecture is back to front .
It is like a builder starting with the top floor and building downwards , rather than beginning at ground level .
These efforts are doomed to fail .
They are succeeded by a long list of initiatives regarding European political parties , but politics is not founded on the basis of preconceived resolutions concerning a European construction whose top floor presumably belongs in the stratosphere .
The most recent historical precedent for this form of back-to-front political architecture is the Tower of Babel which , as is well known , did not work out very well , with the construction 's never being finished .

Madam President , Mr Gil-Robles and Mr Mndez de Vigo , sitting side by side , are a physical expression of a profound contradiction , because the spirit of this recommendation thoroughly contradicts the philosophy behind the European Convention .
The Convention is working on the idea of a politically united Europe without internal borders .
Mr Gil-Robles ' recommendation , on the contrary , keeps to the path of the past , that of a European Parliament made up of representatives of the Member States instead of the whole European Community .
This is regrettable because different peoples of Europe , such as my own , that have been divided by the action of the current Member States , will remain separated in the future .
For how long will the French , the Spanish and other such separatists persist in this , may I ask ?
Madam President , when I welcome parties of visitors to Strasbourg , I discover that the majority of these members of the public assume that MEPs are all elected under the same procedure and that we are all paid the same for the work that we do here .
They are all the more surprised to learn that these things are laid down on a national rather than European basis .
Elections to Europe 's Parliament are conducted nationally with 15 different procedures which will be 25 once enlargement has taken place , and although we are doing the same work here , the way we are treated varies widely .
This makes it high time for us to get a European statute on MEPs and their work and , of course , for the procedure for European Parliamentary elections to be standardised to make it representative of Europe as a whole .
I also thank Mr Gil-Robles Gil-Delgado , who has made an important contribution to our next step towards a uniform election system .
I also want to point out the remaining loopholes that the Council has left .
One of them is the absence of Europe-wide lists in European elections .
We are all aware that the last European elections were almost purely national in character , dealing with internal policy disputes and having very little to do with what we are doing here and with what we are here for .
It is only when we have Europe-wide lists that the European parties will make the effort , and will endeavour to mobilise the public without reference to national borders .
This has not been achieved .
We urgently call on the Council to introduce Europe-wide lists when the electoral system is next revised .
I also agree with Mr van den Berg that it is impossible for us to vote from Thursday to Sunday , with the result being announced only after the votes cast on Thursday have been recorded on Sunday evening .
What has been put before us is a first step , and a good one .
The second step must be taken as a matter of urgency .
Madam President , Madam Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , the fathers of Europe at Laeken - there were probably no mothers there - gave the Convention on the future of Europe something more than a year in which to achieve a big success in the process of making Europe more visible , by drafting the text of a new constitutional treaty .
A quite disproportionately small part of the Convention 's work will be devoted to preparing solutions to the issues now raised in the Gil-Robles Gil-Delgado report - a uniform system for elections to Parliament , which will then truly merit the name of ' European ' , solutions under the heading of ' regionalisation ' to the system 's proximity - or lack of it - to the citizens , and to the problem of how to make it possible to use the elections to the European Parliament to reach a decision on how to give Europe a face , that is , by the direct election of the President of the Commission .
There is , alas , nothing of any real substance on the subject of European lists .
Work on these few topics has to date taken the Council and Parliament almost thirty years , not always with much by way of results .
Vive la diffrence is still the watchword for the organising of elections to the European Parliament .
Quite apart from many other aspects , it is precisely this bewildering array of proceedings every fifth June that makes it easy for the European public to regard European elections as unimportant or incomprehensible .
Turnouts of under 50 % are their reaction to this deplorable state of affairs .
What is to be done under such circumstances ?
Do we put a brave face on a bad job , rejoice in small improvements , thank the rapporteur for his good work and await the miracle that the Convention will bring to pass in fifteen months ' time , changing everything and making it better ?
I accept the compromise and join in thanking our rapporteur Mr Gil-Robles Gil-Delgado , and I call on everyone to wish the Convention and its members success in making the impossible possible , giving Europe a comprehensible and workable structure that the citizen can understand , with electoral laws by which the public will know themselves to be challenged to join in deciding what the future of our shared European home should be .
Madam President , I would like to thank our rapporteur for his open-mindedness in drawing up this report .
The assent we are going to give on the amendment of the Act concerning the election of representatives to the European Parliament is part of a strategy of small steps .
A small step is better than nothing but , quite frankly , the text should have been better .
Why are the ideas of mixed voting and of transnational lists combined with proportional lists in a regional context not accepted ?
If we want to establish a European public space , we need to bring to life political parties that have a goal , that of electing the representatives of the peoples of Europe to the European Parliament .
If we want to bring to life the concept of European citizenship , this public space needs to be fed with elected representatives , on a basis of transnational constituencies contributing to the appointment of a Commission president .
With regard to equality , I believe the decision could have been bolder and could have proposed a rule of equality for European elections .
On the matter of privileges and immunity , I regret that this amendment of the Act does not make any progress possible when , indeed , we are experiencing difficulties due to the absence of European rules in this field on a daily basis .
Lastly , I would like us to agree on the designation . We should be referred to as ' European Members of Parliament ' or ' Members of the European Parliament ' , not ' representatives ' or ' Members ' .
All that remains is to hope that this small step will lead to further small steps when the Act is re-examined or within the context of the work of the Convention .
Madam President , the report before the House makes perfect sense if you believe that this Parliament ought to be the legislature of a European Polity .
After all , every other state has a national assembly elected by a uniform method .
But I hope Members will acknowledge that this is not the only legitimate view of the European Union .
Some of us see this Parliament not as a federal assembly , but as a forum wherein the representatives of the peoples of Europe may hold the EU bureaucracy to account .
The role of a Member of the European Parliament is not to be an agent for the European project ; it is to represent the interests of his constituents .
I was elected to speak for south east England in Brussels , not to speak for Brussels in south east England .
That is why I believe that it should be up to each Member State to decide how and when to select its MEPs .
I personally favour a majoritarian first-past-the-post voting system .
But even if I did not , I would still object to any method being imposed by the EU .
Nor is it the business of this House to dictate the gender composition of electoral lists .
It is surely up to each party to decide how many men and women it wants to offer as candidates and up to voters to pass judgment on them .
Above all , I object to the reiteration of this Parliament 's demand for a pan-European top-up list .
This , it seems to me , elevates the dogma of European integration above any practical considerations of accountability or responsiveness .
There can be no European democracy as long as there is no European demos .
We delude ourselves if we believe that this House commands anything like the affinity and identity which national parliaments have built up over the centuries .
This Parliament could perform a useful role scrutinising the budget and holding the Commission to account .
I only wish that the House were more interested in carrying out the functions which it already has , rather than constantly demanding new powers .
Madam President , the Recommendation for which President Gil-Robles is rapporteur is particularly timely given that the European Convention is meeting .
Why ?
For a politically very important reason , I believe : if we want to launch any initiative or send any message to strengthen the democratic legitimacy of the European Parliament , we must do so now .
Every day and every week we are hearing all types of messages which argue that the composition of this House leads to democratic deficit .
It is said for example that the democratic deficit must be overcome by strengthening the national parliaments ' capacity to act within the processes of European construction .
It is even said openly that the citizens believe that the national Members of Parliament truly represent them rather than European ones , forgetting that they both derive their legitimacy from the same source : universal suffrage and the political will of the citizens as expressed through the ballot box .
I therefore believe it very positive that there should be an improved uniform electoral procedure for the election of Members of the European Parliament .
I would also stress issues which I believe to be essential , such as , for example , the proportional system which directly represents the opinion of the citizens and guarantees plurality ; the fact also that parity is asked for - at the moment there are as many female voters as male ones , more even - and the political parties formed on the basis of the will of the citizens , and not only this Parliament , must also show that parity .
Finally - and why not ? - we should insist that the person who is elected , when the time comes , by the European Parliament as President of the Commission , should also be put to the people as a candidate to the European Parliament .
So congratulations .
You have my full support .
Madam President , I will speak very briefly .
I am sorry to have arrived late for this debate , but certain presidency obligations in relation to ministerial enlargement conferences have detained me until very recently .
I do not wish to miss this opportunity to express the Spanish Presidency 's feelings about this achievement in relation to the European Parliament 's electoral procedure .
We have worked hard to achieve it and of course nothing would have been possible without the cooperation and the excellent work of the rapporteur , Mr Gil Robles , and the Committee on Constitutional Affairs .
I believe we are dealing with an historic agreement .
Let us consider that Parliament is deciding on a text which dates from 1976 .
I believe this is a very important step forward .
The Presidency is pleased , because this is a strengthening , a further step - as Mr Carnero said - in the strengthening of the role of the European Parliament as a true representative of the people of Europe .
I believe we should all be pleased and the Spanish Presidency wishes to join in with this important occasion for Parliament and congratulate it and the rapporteur , as well as the Committee on Constitutional Affairs .
Madam President , very briefly , I would like to offer my sincere congratulations to the rapporteur , Mr Gil-Robles , on having completed what he has called this historic report .
While this text originates from 1976 , the reality is that the first initiative of this Parliament dates from 1960 , and the road has therefore been a long and difficult one . However , it appears that a fruitful conclusion has been reached at last with this text .
I would also like to congratulate the Spanish Presidency and the Council on the efforts they have made to bring together a consensus on what is constitutionally a very important agreement which will be decisive for the elections to the European Parliament scheduled for 2004 , which furthermore will be the first elections in which the current candidate countries participate and we hope by then they will be full Members of the Union .
The Commission agrees with the rapporteur that this text contains the most important elements of the draft which Parliament adopted in 1998 , with the excellent report by the former Vice-President of the European Parliament , Mr Anastasopoulos , and we are therefore delighted that what we have seen in the debate today will be adopted tomorrow by Parliament and - I hope - with the greatest possible majority .
I am sure that the broader political issues mentioned during the debate will be discussed and dealt with by the Convention and perhaps that will be the best place to find a definitive solution to them .
Thank you very much , Madam President .
I believe that today 's agreement is an extremely important one in the life of this Parliament and for the future of the construction of Europe .
Thank you , Commissioner De Palacio .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on the results of the preparatory meeting for the Johannesburg Summit , which took place between 27 May and 7 June 2002 in Bali .
Madam President , the Johannesburg Summit constitutes a further step forward in the process begun in Rio de Janeiro aimed at achieving sustainable development at world level .
In Rio , the so-called Agenda 21 was defined , which contains the fundamental objectives to be achieved during this century .
Nevertheless , although important progress has been made , the global environment has continued to deteriorate significantly .
Johannesburg will bring together all the States , all the interested parties , the NGOs , the private sector etc . , to draw up new mechanisms for achieving that objective .
This summit is intended to deal jointly with the economic challenges - development in the sense of pure economic growth - the social challenges - the reduction of poverty , achieving the aims of the United Nations Millennium Declaration - and the environmental challenges .
The understanding is that these three challenges are interrelated .
The results of the Johannesburg Summit are expected to include the following elements : a political declaration which represents a renewed commitment by world leaders to achieve the objectives of the Millennium Declaration and the shortcomings in the application of Agenda 21 , an action programme with fundamental action commitments , voluntary cooperation initiatives which involve all agents , governments , civil society and the private sector in a series of initiatives to implement the action programme .
The European Union is actively working on the six priorities for Johannesburg in the areas of health , water , energy , trade , global public assets and sustainable models for production and consumption .
I will firstly comment on the preparatory work done during the Spanish Presidency .
During this period there have been two preparatory conferences at world level , held in New York : PREPCON 2 and PREPCON 3 , and on 24 May the last preparatory conference began in Bali , PREPCON 4 , which includes the ministerial meeting of 4 to 7 June .
Meanwhile , in Brussels the Community positions have been prepared by means of a process made up of the following stages : the conclusions of the Environment Council of 4 March which were endorsed by the Barcelona European Council , the conclusions approved by the Development Council on 30 May and , finally , the conclusions of the General Affairs Council of 17 June , based on the previous ones and on the results of PREPCON 4 , which will be adopted by the Seville European Council as the European Union 's global position for Johannesburg .
On the level of the fifteen Member States , the debates have focused on the following issues , which must be resolved at the General Affairs Council of 17 June , immediately prior to Seville : firstly the coherence of Community policies , without prejudice to the adaptation of Community policies to the internal and external objectives of sustainable development .
We must prevent the Johannesburg Summit dictating the nature of the reforms of Community policies .
Secondly , the removal of subsidies prejudicial to the environment .
Although chapter 2 , on trade , achieved a formula for compromise , reducing and , where necessary , removing subsidies considered harmful to the environment , there is still no consensus amongst the Member States on the obligatory or automatic nature of the removal of those subsidies .
The Council will also refer to the Swedish initiative of the ombudsman to facilitate exports from the developing countries to the Community market .
A more in-depth study is required before it can be accepted and included at the Johannesburg Summit as a Community initiative .
To this end , the Commission has committed itself to presenting a document in the future to deal with the possible implementation of that initiative .
Financial issues , such as those relating to the possible link between funding and the future initiatives established during the Johannesburg Summit , will also be dealt with , and these financial issues are those which are essential so that the additional official development aid resources , agreed to during the Monterrey Conference , are implemented or allocated to the initiatives established in Johannesburg .
The mobilisation of alternative funding resources , with the intention of combining alternative resources , such as the so-called Tobin tax , with global public assets and the possible extension of the ' Highly-indebted poor countries ' initiative .
Secondly , I will comment on the perspectives in the run-up to the Seville European Council .
The Presidency has done much work in preparing for the Johannesburg Summit .
The European Union must make a very significant contribution to this summit and demonstrate a great capacity for leadership , because we are world standard bearers for sustainable development .
I believe that the ratification by the Union of the Kyoto protocol offers proof of this and furthermore because the international preparation of the summit clearly requires European leadership .
At the moment there is disunity at international level and there is a lack of clarity in the intended objectives for the summit .
PREPCON 3 was disappointing and the new proposed action programme must have greater consensus and must be more specific .
The United States wants to minimise political issues as much as possible and would even like to remove the political declaration and the action programme in order to concentrate on implementation .
Furthermore , the United States ' focus in relation to implementation is innovative : it wants to create new ' transfunds ' which can bring together public and private money , which is rejected by several European partners .
The Presidency believes that the European Union should play a role similar to the one it played in Monterrey : to seek consensus with our main partners .
As soon as possible we must coordinate our efforts with JUSCANZ , the group made up of the USA , Japan and Canada , and with the Group of the 77 .
Maximalism and political confrontation get us nowhere .
Monterrey was a success , because the European Union worked throughout for a consensus , and if practical results were achieved to benefit developing countries , then in Johannesburg we must try to do the same .
If we do not achieve this , the ghost of Durban and the problems during that summit will weigh heavily on Johannesburg .
One-thousand-five-hundred non-governmental organisations are going to participate , some of which are very radical .
Some seem more interested in confrontation than in achieving concrete results which benefit the developing countries .
At the PREPCON 4 in Bali , we have tried to reach consensus on a short action programme with a clear focus .
A political declaration must be very short , very clear and prevent confrontation , and must be aimed at implementation and practical issues .
In this respect , it is important that the European Union has a communication strategy with which to confront the Johannesburg Summit .
We must have a clear vision of what we want in Johannesburg and of how we want to communicate that vision to world public opinion , but above all European public opinion , which , as I said before , has led the way on all these issues .
Finally , the presidency believes that the global pact which we intend to create on the basis of the results of Monterrey , Doha and Johannesburg , must be founded on the principles of democracy , respect for human rights and good government .
The developing countries must respond to the financial efforts of the developed countries by combating corruption and acquiring firm democratic values .
Mr President , the European Commission 's role in the UN Ministerial preparatory conference in Bali , at which I represented the European Commission , was facilitated by the comprehensive reports prepared by Mr Papayannakis and Mr Lannoye and discussed with my colleague , Mr Nielson , at Parliament 's part-session last month .


The Commission agreed with Parliament last month that the preparatory process for the world summit is not going as well as we would like .
This remains our assessment after the Bali meeting .
As we have heard , three documents are being prepared for Johannesburg : an action plan on sustainable development , drawn up under the leadership of the UN-appointed chairman , Dr Salim , secondly a political declaration and thirdly criteria for the launching and monitoring of partnerships to implement the actions and political commitments agreed in Johannesburg .
None of these documents was finalised in Bali , but while the Bali meeting to prepare for Johannesburg was not a breakthrough , it was not a breakdown of the process either .
There was intensive EU coordination throughout the meeting in Bali .
Ministers agreed that the key EU objectives to be achieved were , firstly , the setting of clear targets and time-frames , especially for water , sanitation and energy , secondly the establishment of a clear linkage between the political commitments and targets in the proposed action plan , and their implementation through initiatives or partnerships , and thirdly an agreement on the shift to sustainable patterns of consumption and production .
Some progress was made in these areas in Bali , as well as on issues such as health , Africa , small island states and the environment and some of the differences between delegations were reduced .
However , the meeting was dominated by the developing countries ' insistence on trade and finance issues .
The G 77 group pressed for the creation of a world solidarity or poverty fund based on voluntary contributions from public and private funds .
Whilst it said that it did not wish to reopen agreements reached in launching the trade round in Doha or at the Conference on Financing for Development in Monterey , the G 77 group was seeking signals from the developed countries which could lead to increased market access for developing in addition to least-developed countries and ways of constraining those that have not yet clearly committed increased resources under the Monterrey Consensus to do so .
Since the developed countries have always made it clear that market access questions would have to be discussed in the World Trade Organisation in the context of the Doha development agenda and that there would be no new public funds for development beyond what had been pledged in Monterrey , the positions taken by the G77 representatives , led by Venezuela , inevitably led to an unfortunate standoff between the developing and developed countries .
This blockage in the means of implementation meant that we were unable to achieve the breakthrough we were looking for in Bali .
Whilst useful progress was made in cleaning up the text of the action plan , large parts - including some key EU objectives - have not been agreed .
All these issues will have to be sorted out either in informal meetings or actually at the Johannesburg Summit .
A successful outcome in Johannesburg now depends on finding ways of bridging the gap between the developed and developing countries over trade and finance issues .
The EU position has a lot of appeal for developing countries , not least because it seeks , inter alia , to promote common commitments on increasing trade-related assistance and capacity building beyond pre-Doha levels , to search for innovative ways to encourage trade in sustainable products and to encourage the emulation of the European " Everything but Arms " initiative .
The European Union therefore can , and must , play a constructive role in bringing the parties together .
However , unless a satisfactory solution is found , there is a risk that the Johannesburg meeting will be dominated by acrimony over the issues of trade and finance and the focus on sustainable development risks being lost .
If that happens , the opportunity to make progress with sustainable development could be missed .
Now is the time for leadership .
The South Africans are now in the driving seat and will need our help and support to pull things together in the coming weeks .
The European Union will need to play its part in overcoming differences in the next few weeks .
Future meetings , such as the Seville European Council and the G8 meeting , as well as bilateral contacts , will provide important opportunities for review and discussion by developed countries on how to respond to G77 concerns without reopening the Doha and Monterrey agreements .
We will need to work closely with G77 to re-establish a climate of trust and partnership and explain our globalisation and sustainable development agenda .
In addition to the political context , we will also continue our technical work to build support for our partnership initiatives , which can bring real benefits to developing countries in terms of poverty reduction , health and educational improvements and environmental protection .
Together we must ensure that the European Union plays a leading role in ensuring that the outcome of Johannesburg is ambitious and action-orientated .
The European Parliament is an advocate of sustainable development .
We must bring a sense of urgency to the preparations for Johannesburg in the short time that lies before us .
Madam President , Commissioner , Mr de Miguel , the outcome of the preparatory meeting held in Bali has been a disappointment .
The fact that the various nations proved incapable of overcoming their national self-interest makes us extremely apprehensive about the outcome of the Johannesburg Conference .
There is even a definite feeling in the air , it could be said , that failure is a real possibility .
Given the degradation of the environment and of social conditions that we have been seeing , the Johannesburg Summit is crucial to producing a blueprint for a more harmonious planet .
Failure would not only be unacceptable but also an outrage .
We must build bridges in order to save this Conference , but , and let me state this clearly , in the run-up to Johannesburg many countries are adopting a blocking approach , others a more passive approach and I do not believe I am far off the mark in saying that , objectively , only the European Union is setting off for Johannesburg with the desire to give an ambitious worldwide commitment to sustainable development .
Against this backdrop , and because we cannot waste the kind of opportunity we have not had for ten years and which is unlikely to be repeated in the next ten , the European Union must play a leading role .
This applied to the Kyoto Protocol , and must apply to the Johannesburg Summit .
The EU must demonstrate leadership that results in the definition of concrete policies , timetables and targets in fields such as biodiversity , the ' greening ' of the economy , financing for developing countries , energy , water and trade .
This leadership cannot be underpinned , however , by institutional imbalance , with the Commission and the Council on one side and the European Parliament on the other .
We must learn from the mistakes , but also from the successes of the past .
The role of the European Parliament delegations such as , for example , at the decisive conferences for the Kyoto Protocol , in The Hague , Bonn and in Marrakech , a role , as a matter of fact highlighted by the Commission and the Council , leads us to think that we need to give the European Parliament a more fitting role for this Johannesburg Summit .
Consequently , out of respect for the citizens that we represent here , I believe it is crucial that the European Parliament has the right not only to send a delegation of 25 Members of this House , but also and above all the right to have its representatives participate in the daily European Union coordinating meetings .
The European Parliament does not want to negotiate - we are familiar with the Treaties .
It is not the European Parliament 's task to negotiate , but we do want Parliament , the Commission and the Council to maintain unity in Johannesburg and in order for this to help make the Conference a success , it is essential that Parliament has the right to participate in these European Union coordinating meetings .
Madam President , Commission and Council , the meeting in Bali was scarcely a source of great delight .
In a way , every meeting prior to Johannesburg is the cause of ever increasing depression .
It would have been better if the political leadership we are now beginning to talk about had been assumed in time .
At five minutes to midnight , it is a little late to begin talking about political leadership .
I do not wish to be wise after the event or to confront either the Commission or the Council but , before the Gothenburg Summit last year , we in the European Parliament said , ' Make sure that external relations are included when we devise a sustainability strategy ' , ' Make sure that , when we adopt our own sustainability strategy , Johannesburg is a natural part of this ' and ' Do not delay ' .
Rather than end up in the doldrums we are now experiencing , I should like in a way to have seen the banner kept flying a little higher en route from Gothenburg to Johannesburg .
The Commission has done an excellent job and done as much as it could .
On the other hand , the Council 's enthusiasm in the run-up to Johannesburg has been , to say the least , conspicuous by its absence .
The European Parliament may be talked about as the advocate of good causes , but it is no use our standing here in the Chamber and pleading our own cause when we do not obtain the relationship we need , either with the Council or the Commission , on this issue .
It seems a bit pointless simply to tag along to Johannesburg as a kind of icing on the cake .
We must , in any event , have political influence .
Now , more than ever , do we need political direction .
We need clear timetables for the millennium objective , and we need a clear division of responsibilities .
It is not enough to say that the people of the world need water . Instead , we must talk about who is to arrange for the water to be provided .
It is not enough to say that people must have access to food if we do not say who is to ensure that the food reaches their tables .
Obviously , trade and funding must be part of the picture . These are , in a way , the lynchpins .
We know that they are a part of sustainable development .
What , however , I am looking for , especially on the part of the Council , in the run-up to Johannesburg is commitment , conviction and an ability to see things in context .
We must act as a bridge between the poorest countries and the G77 Group .
That much is obvious .
We must strike up a dialogue .
That is not something we shall do in Johannesburg .
It is something we must work on in the short time that remains before Johannesburg .
Madam President , all too many people in the world are starving , and all too many are living in poverty .
All too many people are affected by deadly diseases such as malaria and AIDS , a fact which threatens the growth and development we all desire .
The way forward is more growth and prosperity in the developing countries - growth and prosperity which must be combined with sustainability .
There are two factors crucial to growth and prosperity .
There is the ability to trade freely across national frontiers - that is to say , free trade - and there is limited state power , free from corruption , in the form of a constitutional state .
It is tariff barriers , and not free trade , which create poverty .
Secrecy creates both poverty and stagnation , and we must therefore secure an agreement that breaks down tariff barriers and that guarantees free trade , as well as developing countries ' free access to the market , and we must begin with ourselves .
We must also require something of the developing countries , however .
We must require , and tighten up our demands for , democracy , sound governance and the observance of human rights .
We must secure international agreements on environmental protection and the fight against deadly diseases .
The developing countries are clear about the fact that , if they are isolated , their opportunities for prosperity will be crushed .
Unfortunately , the rich countries often put obstacles in the way of developing countries ' growth , especially by demanding duties , setting up obstacles to trade under cover of environmental regulations and subsidising their own agricultural production .
In that way , the rich countries bear a large share of the responsibility for the problems of the developing countries .
There is a need for a fundamental change of course .
We need to break down all the tariff barriers and phase out all the obstacles to trade .
Our challenge and task are to get all the rich countries to comply with the UN 's objective whereby 0.7 % of Gross National Product would be granted by way of development aid , but we must go on making demands of the developing countries in terms of economic reforms and better governance .
In Johannesburg , we must take a decisive step in the direction of a global reform programme for freedom and prosperity .
We owe that to the future , and it is something which Parliament and the EU must work for .
Madam President , the meeting in Bali was a failure .
I believe that is a generally-held view .
We must learn from this failure at once .
We have very little time left before Johannesburg .
There is a risk of a concept we do not want , the concept of the privatisation of sustainable development , being imposed at Johannesburg .
Commissioner Wallstrm has just referred to the voluntary partnership agreements with private companies .
I believe we must avoid lapsing into ideology : we must see the partnership agreements as a potentially useful tool to complement the policies , but they must have a political framework and each party must be fully aware of the context in which they are operating .
This , however , must not replace voluntary government policies , although that is clearly what certain parties involved would like , and I am thinking in particular of the United States .
I believe that the European Union , as Commissioner Wallstrm said , must be ambitious in its goals for Johannesburg .
In order to achieve our goals , however , we need allies .
Perhaps we should prioritise dialogue with the countries that expect a lot from us , that is to say the poor countries ; I think , for example , that the G 77 group is one group we must certainly prioritise .
In this respect , I think that two proposals would give very positive political signals to these countries .
The first , as explained by the President-in-Office of the Council , would be to propose that we change the European policies which prevent developing countries and the poorest countries from making progress towards sustainable development or meeting their basic needs .
I am thinking in particular of aid for agricultural exports .
It is unacceptable for us to continue to maintain an aid system for exports which penalises these countries .
We must therefore make a significant gesture in this area .
The second proposal would consist of promoting a legal framework imposing constraints on transnational companies to encourage them to fulfil their environmental , social and economic responsibilities .
It is not acceptable that , while States are constrained by international rules , transnational companies , which are sometimes far wealthier than States , are completely free and unrestricted .
Madam President , I had a speech prepared , but that is not the speech I shall give .
I too was disappointed at what I read and heard of events in Bali .
However , I am also disappointed by what the presidency had to say and I should like to ask a few specific questions :
What are the real problems ?
What was the opposition ?
Who is responsible for the stalemate , or rather the failure of Bali ?
We are talking politics here .
We did not come here to provide a shoulder to cry on .
The Commissioner gave a number of details , but we need far more than that .
Are you going to say anything about the deal between the United States , Canada et al and the petroleum producing countries and how it is stopping renewable sources of energy from taking off ?
Are you at long last going to give us a more political opinion on the increasing unreliability of important partners with whom we are perhaps still hoping to broker agreements in Johannesburg ?
I agree with what Mr Lannoye said about our policies ; they have to change .
Following Bush 's policy towards American farmers , who seriously believes that there can be the tiniest change in Europe towards European farmers ?
We really do need to find reliable allies .
And they really are to be found among the poorest in the world .
We really do have to say something to persuade them .
Leadership succeeds not by what it says but by how it persuades .
So , first , there is the Kyoto and the Cartagena way .
We can continue along this course , even if unreliable partners pull out .
There are huge efforts which can be made both on the question of trade relations and on the question of funding , without overturning what was agreed in Doha and Monterrey .
And even greater efforts can be made , especially with regard to public assistance .
There is the question of administration , what some refer to as gouvernance .
We demand good governance on the part of developing world countries and we are incapable of good governance of the world per se , with institutions , rules , resources , funding , possibly even taxes , which we are quick to reject .
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , the World Conference on Sustainable Development in Johannesburg could provide a unique opportunity for creating sustainable development , economically , socially and in environmental terms , for future generations , but it requires the rich world to sacrifice something in the interests of such development .
It is unfortunate and almost embarrassing that the talks in Bali concerning a global agreement on sustainability in actual fact broke down .
It shows the rich world 's unwillingness to commit itself when it comes to the key issues of globalisation , trade and development .
The rich countries have still not fulfilled the pledge they made in Rio .
The developing countries are therefore justified in expecting these issues to be dealt with .
The developing countries want , and should be given , guarantees that the industrial countries are beginning to phase out state subsidies for agriculture and that the additional aid for the environment and for sustainable development , promised to them in Rio ten years ago , is in fact on the way .
The rich countries have so far been very dismissive , however .
The United States does not wish to make the necessary concessions , and the EU is hesitating .
The EU has staked a certain amount of prestige on making a success of the world summit but , as is clear from the speech by the President-in-Office of the Council , it has quite simply been insufficiently prepared .
The EU must now , at the eleventh hour , go home and prepare itself .
Hopefully , we shall have agreed , in as little as two weeks ' time in Seville , to take entirely practical initiatives .
For Denmark , the world summit will be the first big international event of its EU Presidency and also a test of that presidency .
Access to our markets is the key to the developing countries ' being able to compete successfully , but it is no use the EU 's making unduly strict demands of the developing countries as a condition of free trade , and they must certainly not be used as an excuse for the EU 's and the United States 's maintaining obstacles to trade .
Determined work must be done on bringing the EU together in guaranteeing the world 's poorest countries access to the rich countries ' markets .
The developing countries must be given a pledge of free and fair trade .
As part of this , the EU must necessarily phase out export and production subsidies .
As the country holding the presidency of the EU , Denmark should insist on all countries ' complying with the UN 's objective whereby 0.7 % of Gross National Product is to be donated by way of aid to developing countries .
Mr President , we have to concede , and confess before every summit , that the sustainable development situation has got worse since the last one .
We are running the risk of the public , who play a crucial part in all our environmental decisions and projects , slowly becoming resigned to it .
The European Union 's credibility in Johannesburg will be dependent on what we achieve here , on our ecological requirements and , not least , on the way we vote here throughout the year .
The industrialised states , above all the fifteen EU states , can very definitely be considered rich in economic terms , and if they are not in the lead by miles , we cannot demand that the developing countries make sacrifices .
I believe that what happens at the so-called environmental summits is not as decisive as what we bring to pass in our practical work between the summits and how we get it across to our citizens .
Mr President , the results in Bali were very meagre .
It is clear to me that the whole of this preparatory process has been poorly organised , with poor leadership and , of course , a lack of political will on the part of the majority of players .
What is most notable , I think , is the United States 's lack of interest in common solutions .
This is in extreme contrast to the incredible pressure put on us by the United States precisely to seek common solutions in the fight against terrorism .
I wonder why Washington does not see that these two issues are in some way interrelated .
After Bali , there is every reason to wonder what we are to do now .
Four points strike me as being very important .
I appreciate that the poor countries are looking for more aid , more support and better trade regulations , but I believe it is very important also to realise that more money alone will not lead to sustainable development .
What we have to do - and I believe the EU can adopt a leading role in this area - is to review our own regulations .
We must do away with subsidies that are harmful to the environment , ensure that market prices accurately reflect the full costs , and introduce norms and standards that necessarily make for greater efficiency in the way in which energy and materials are used .
We must also review policy in areas in which we know that we are at present , in actual fact , harming poor countries in particular .
That applies to agricultural , trade and fisheries policies .
Finally , and as Mrs Wallstrm quite rightly pointed out , we must focus on a number of issues .
If I were to choose just one of these , it would be the energy issue .
We know that several billion people at present have no access to modern energy and , as long as that is the case , there can be no development .
If , however , they were to obtain access to energy under conventional conditions , that would lead to major damage to the environment and climate .
The EU will have to adopt a very radical and active approach in this area and ensure that we can develop forms of aid for solving this specific problem .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I do not want right now to join in the weeping and wailing over the fiasco in Bali , and I also propose to leave out the points that have already been addressed .
I would like to draw attention to the core areas which , notably with the Cotonou Agreement , we have resolved to do something about , first among them being the war on poverty .
That means seeing to basic services and health care , providing clean water for all , giving all children basic education , and , if possible , facilitating the participation of adults in educational programmes .
Now that is not an end in itself , but rather something without which , in the final analysis , it is impossible to gain an understanding of the problems that affect every society and everyone 's quality of life .
Those for whom every day is a struggle for survival are not readily going to be won over by lofty objectives .
It is our responsibility to liberate them from the need to spend every day in search of food .
It should be noted in this context that women have a key role to play in all development , and that there must be forceful demands made in Johannesburg for us to help put women in a position to take an active part in the process of development and actively contribute to the improvement of living conditions .
All over the world , it is women who support development processes that lead to changes in civil society .
I would also like to mention the need to facilitate access to global communications in order to make social benefits possible .
In conclusion , I will not conceal my concern at the conduct of the Spanish Presidency , which is evidently aiming to abolish the Development Council .
That would send all the wrong signals to Johannesburg .
The fight against poverty can only be won if we use natural resources in a responsible manner .
More than two billion people are deprived of modern forms of energy and more than one billion people have no clean drinking water .
Agricultural production is on the decline while the number of mouths to be fed is increasing .
Bio-diversity would have been a thousand times greater if man had not interfered with nature , and the link between a polluted environment and health is evident .
Rio 's political framework was sound , but its execution poor .
Over the past ten years , official development aid for nature and the environment even took a serious blow and there is hardly any evidence of good governance .
At the start of this century , the world leaders are given another chance , but Johannesburg can only succeed if specific implementing programmes are drafted with concrete pledges to match .
Whoever declares war on poverty must make peace with nature .
Mr President , many things have been said .
For my part , I am going to concentrate on the energy issues that are really vital .
Today there are two billion people in the world who do not have access to energy .
My question is to Commissioner Wallstrm : I know that the European Union was quite ambitious with regard to a specific objective concerning renewable energy .
Perhaps you could tell us who is opposed to this and how we can make progress in this area .
The European Commission 's lack of consistency over energy as well as farming subsidies is also regrettable .
EUR 300 billion have now been allocated world-wide to nuclear and fossil fuels .
If these subsidies were to be reduced , we would have substantial sums available to support investment in renewable energy and help the two billion people who do not have access to energy .
I wonder if the position adopted by the European Union at Gothenburg to phase out energy subsidies still applies now .
In conclusion , a word to the Spanish Presidency .
If you put as much effort into helping countries that need help to develop enough to support their population as you are into building a wall around Europe , if you channelled this energy into becoming involved once again in the Johannesburg process , then I think your Presidency would be seen in a better light .
Mr President , in the last part-session I stated that Monterrey did not augur well for the Johannesburg Summit .
Now , the Bali preparatory meeting has not only confirmed this but seems to have actually consolidated this sad observation .
Johannesburg , therefore , is at risk of being a total failure , with extremely damaging consequences for the environment , for the poor countries and for the planet as a whole .
We need only bear in mind that around one hundred items on the agenda have still not been agreed on , notably as a result of the intransigent and inflexible position of the United States .
Given this scenario , which we must counter , the issue we need to address today is what the position of the European Union and all the Member States will be ; what position they will be adopting in the preparatory phase of the summit itself .
And , crucially , whether they will fall in line with the unacceptable position of the United States , which is provocatively intransigent , if we consider the recent measures of agricultural protectionism they have adopted ; or whether , instead , they will be prepared to follow on from the Rio Summit , both in the field of practical aid for development and for fighting poverty , and in terms of effectively protecting the environment .
The profound contradictions that became evident in Bali , and which must be overcome , require determination and clear and judicious proposals that do not link trade with development , which seems to be a consequence of the intention to end our own Development Council .
Incidentally , I must say that Johannesburg cannot be seen simply as an extension of Doha and that these measures cannot , of course , consider the environment simply to be a business , as the United States claim .
We must bear in mind that failure in Johannesburg will threaten the reasonable expectations raised in Rio .
The European Union , therefore , has an obligation to commit itself wholeheartedly to adopting a constructive position and strategy , which are already long overdue , given that we only have a few weeks before the summit is to start .
Mr President , Commissioner , regrettably , when we talk about sustainable development , we find it hard to be specific .
The Bali meeting was disappointing and we do indeed have everything to fear for Johannesburg .
A summit like this every ten years should enable us to achieve results , whether with regard to energy , water , economic development , or developing countries.We know what our mistakes are and yet we are not making any progress .
The enthusiasm present at Kyoto has evaporated amid much disappointment .
The rich countries are virtually at a standstill while the developing countries are floundering in their problems , their poverty , their lack of resources .
My impression is that we are appeasing our consciences by talking about sustainable development , but that this is yet another hollow promise .
We all have a responsibility to future generations , and this responsibility is incumbent upon all the States ; it is incumbent upon the Member States of the European Union , which , however , only too often delay the implementation of their decisions indefinitely , for no real reason .
Lastly , I also regret the attitude of the United States with regard to international commitments to safeguarding our planet .
In the context of the fight against terrorism , the United States is asking for increased international cooperation .
We are all in favour of developing this special relationship , and of this cooperation being included in the implementation of the Kyoto Protocol too .
American industry has declared itself to be in favour of this agreement .
It knows that it would be a disadvantage in the long term to remain outside the system .
I would like the United States , under the influence of this cooperation , to be able to take an active role in this fight against poverty , resource protection , energy development and climate change , following the example of Europe and , soon , I hope , Russia and Japan .
Of course , it is up to the European Union to set ambitious objectives , but these must be attainable so that all the parties involved can find the necessary resources .
Local communities should be given the right and the wherewithal to exercise power at their own level , and it would also be beneficial to encourage private initiatives and place more trust in civil society .
Mr President , clearly , after Bali , there is a great danger that the Johannesburg Summit will be nothing but a great media event which calls forth grand declarations of principle but which does not update or practically advance the Rio process .
With regard to this event , it has already been said that the Union will have a delicate , difficult task .
It is being called upon once again to show the leadership that it displayed in reinvigorating the Kyoto Protocol .
In any case , the fight against climate change is indeed the first of the four priorities on which I believe we must focus at Johannesburg , working towards the conclusion of a binding political agreement involving more countries than have already ratified the Protocol .
The second priority is the right to water .
In this area too we must work towards a binding agreement regulating bilateral and multilateral relations and establishing time frames and procedures for providing the billion people who are still without access to water with a minimum level of access to this resource too .
The third priority item is biodiversity and , in particular , the minimum goal of stabilising the existing situation through an agreement ensuring that the world 's genetic heritage is shared by all .
The fourth and last priority , however , is political and institutional in nature : how to establish a United Nations body which has the power to intervene in , monitor and control international environmental undertakings .
I know that there are other major issues on which decisive progress needs to be made , but the real success of Johannesburg will be measured according to the progress made in the four areas I have mentioned .
Mr President , one of the reasons that Bali was so disappointing is that people need incentives to become involved in achieving the goal of sustainable development .
Every failure to reach agreement , such as this , sends out very negative signals .
Action plans should focus on people because development can only be truly sustainable in its widest possible sense if it looks at people 's needs but has respect for different languages and cultures as well as cultural values .
There has to be partnership with developing countries and structures that respect democracy , human rights and good governance - new structures for global governance such as the World Environment Agency .
As we have heard from the other speakers , there is general pessimism about the prospects of success at Johannesburg , so I would like to ask the Commission what the EU strategy in pursuit of sustainable development will be if Johannesburg does not deliver .
Mr President , our hope is that the European Union , through the Council , the Commission and Parliament , will play a leading role at the Johannesburg World Summit , which is to assess the progress made in implementing Agenda 21 , considering that sustainable development and combating poverty are indisputably two priority objectives .
As the leading donor of aid , the European Community must take this opportunity to play its rightful guiding role on the international stage - in the absence of the United States - contributing along with the other international institutions to the success of this event .
However , its success will depend largely on achievable objectives being set .
The recent undertaking to increase development aid will certainly be an important signal for the summit , but it is essential to establish a precise calendar and achievable deadlines without delay , together with an action plan which is realistic as well as ambitious .
It will be crucial , for instance , to proceed along the path of debt cancellation , with due regard for human rights and the principles of good government , encouraging actions such as the adoption by the poor countries of a digitalised computerised complimentary accounting model which will make their accounts transparent and reassure the European taxpayer .
The FAO Summit which opened in Rome yesterday in witness to the renewed commitment towards and interest in the problems affecting the southern hemisphere paints a discouraging picture , an on-going holocaust : someone dies every four seconds .
In 2030 , when there will be 8 billion people , it will make a difference whether we have turned words into actions .
Mr President , I would like to thank the Commission and the Council , and I think we can rely on the Commissioner to take a very strong stand on these important issues .
As she acknowledges , the European Union has a particular and important role to play : as a major donor of aid , as the biggest donor of humanitarian aid in the world and as the biggest trading block in the world .
We have clout and we need to punch our weight in Johannesburg , but I acknowledge that it will be difficult .
Market access is a key issue .
President Museveni , after the Bali meeting , said that talk about sustainability is all very well but that market access is the most important issue .
Ghana also challenged the European Union last week , saying that the Union talks about opening borders and about bringing down barriers , but is clearly protectionist and unfair .
Ghana , of course , is talking about the high tariffs that have to be paid when an attempt is made to introduce processed coffee into the European Union .
Nor can we preach about free trade when we continue to hand out subsidies to our farmers which artificially depress the prices of commodities such as cotton .
We need coherence , we need consistency , we need to have an understanding of what self-reliance actually means , providing a ladder out of poverty , and we also need to understand about creating real global partnerships .
Commissioner , you need alliances in Johannesburg .
The United States is blocking plans to halve the number of people who lack sanitation - two fifths of the population of the planet - while 2.4 billion do not have any sanitation , not even a bucket to use , in a world where that is one of the main causes of disease .
Twenty five per cent of urban Africans have no piped water whatsoever .
The US position is always a very negative one , as it was when I was at the UN Children 's Conference .
The world 's superpower is not prepared to address these imperatives , and I hope that we will make a clear case that we will not meet the millennium development goals unless we take strong action .
Mr President , I am glad to hear that the Spanish Presidency assures us that the Council will play a leadership role at Johannesburg .
However , if it is going to , then it will have to get its act together very fast .
The Commissioner complains that the G-77 is insisting on the Global Solidarity Pact .
But what they wanted was essentially the money that was promised to them ten years ago , which was supposed to pay for the implementation of the Rio agreements agreed then .
No wonder they have no faith in the North , which has not produced that money yet .
On trade , the Commissioner says that if Johannesburg focuses on trade issues we will lose the focus on sustainable development .
The point is that you cannot separate trade and sustainable development .
If people are to have secure access to water , we cannot pressure them into privatising their water supplies under the GATS agreement .
If people are to have secure access to food , we cannot keep dumping agricultural products on their markets .
It seems that it was agricultural subsidies in the EU that yet again broke one of the deals on the table .
There is extraordinary hypocrisy in demanding subsidy reduction and neo-liberal economic policies in the South while practising old-fashioned northern protectionism in the North .
Mr President , the preliminary meeting in Bali does not bode well for the UN Summit on sustainable development in Johannesburg this summer .
I think that Bali was the last opportunity to lay down a number of priorities , as well as a concrete and binding action plan .
But traditional contradictions , such as the gap between North and South and the transatlantic tensions , have quashed these goals .
Yet it all started so promisingly .
Ten years ago in Rio , the environment and development were combined for the first time .
In addition , the need for sustainable development was recognised by all countries . But since then , little has happened with the results of Rio .
The Kyoto Protocol took forever to be established and even now , it depends on Russia whether it will actually enter into force .
The US , the largest polluter , has rejected the Kyoto Protocol because it would harm the American economy , upon which Canada and Australia pulled out as well .
Washington adopted the same attitude in Bali .
It appears that the Bush administration does not want any binding agreements , but favours voluntary , noncommittal agreements from the private sector .
However , global warming and the future of our planet are problems that are too serious to be left to the goodwill of industry .
By the way , what gives the US the right to make demands from developing countries if the US itself flouts all international agreements ?
It is clear that the transatlantic gap is becoming wider .
Kyoto has illustrated that , based on short-sighted political considerations , the Bush administration deems America 's short-term interests more important than the well-being of future generations .
The European Union , on the other hand , has assumed its responsibility in Kyoto and with it , has confirmed its moral leadership .
I hope it will adopt the same consistent and decisive approach in Johannesburg .
Mr President , I would like to start with some good news from the Bali meeting : it was decided there to start a ten-year programme of work relating to sustainable patterns of production and consumption .
Quarrels over diminishing but vital natural resources and decent living space may well be the cause of future conflicts or even wars .
For this reason , natural resources must be brought under sustainable control and growth must be achieved without overexploitation of natural resources .
Unfortunately , as has been said here , the Bali meeting was otherwise a disappointment in many ways .
We are still looking for sufficient levels of commitment to respond to the challenges of the future .
The European Union must also demand full commitment on the part of the Rio + partners to take further steps forward .
The United States of America and the other industrialised countries are obviously primarily responsible , but the European Union must build a bridge to the less developed countries too .
It is the European Union that ultimately has to serve as the motor that will keep development running and help us achieve these much needed steps forward at the forthcoming meeting .
For the European Union to be adequately effective , however , it must be strong internally .
Consequently , all the institutions must speak with one voice .
In two weeks ' time in Seville we shall have the chance to do just this and make the European voice heard .
By the same token , we have to make sure that the European Parliament is effectively involved in the preparation process and coordination .
Mr President , one billion people do not have access to drinking water and three million die every year from diseases caused by poor water quality or lack of water .
There are 800 million starving people in the world and 24 000 people die of hunger every day .
Twenty-eight million people are living with HIV in Sub-Saharan Africa , of whom 2.3 million died of AIDS last year .
These figures are telling and are all too well-known .
The Heads of State and Government , however , are absent from the World Food Summit in Rome this week .
These same ministers were incapable of making specific commitments in Bali .
The World Health Fund is sorely lacking in financial resources .
Worse still , most of the conventions concluded since Rio , ten years ago , are still not being applied .
This , of course , is due to the attitude of the United States Government and the multinationals .
The worst polluters of the planet deny their culpability and refuse to take action with regard to the victims , the countries of the southern hemisphere .
What are we Europeans doing , apart from pontificating as we did at Monterrey ?
How do we think dismissing our development advisers , as was proposed at Seville , will contribute to sustainable development ?
If the Johannesburg Summit fails , the European Union will have to shoulder its responsibility .
Mr President , the results of the preparation of the Johannesburg Conference would not perhaps have been so poor - and the outlook for the Conference so pessimistic - if the parties had been more willing , and above all able , to see beyond their own partial short-term interests and to realise that we are at an extremely important turning point , not only in terms of achieving sustainable development - although this alone would deserve all our efforts - but also of achieving security and governability on a world scale .
In the ten years between Rio and Johannesburg , there has been a fundamental change towards a globalised society in which social and economic inequalities seem closely linked to environmental problems and governability in all countries .
The eradication of poverty is becoming a priority objective in the world because it is the only way we can guarantee security , governance and equality in a globalised world .
After almost thirty years of policies aimed at reconciling economic development , the environment and social well-being , I believe that we have a pretty good knowledge of the range of instruments and measures to be applied in order to achieved balanced growth in a globalised world : transparency and openness of the markets , management of knowledge and innovation , transfer of technologies , the efficiency of our processes and products , the acceptance and application of social and environmental responsibility in all sectors ; these are some of the most important measures .
We need to approach Johannesburg by strengthening the coalition between government , civil society and the production sector , in order to jointly deal with the main challenges of global sustainability and equality .
The European Union has offered clear signs of its desire to lead this process .
I hope that in Johannesburg we will be able - and I include the delegation from the European Parliament here - to defend brave , generous and worthy positions which will show us to be what we aspire to be : leaders in the new world order .
Mr President , I welcome this afternoon 's debate , because if ever a process needed fresh political impetus and initiative this one does .
What Commissioner Wallstrm correctly called a stand-off in her speech this afternoon will not be solved unless the European Union visibly shifts its position towards that of developing countries .
Compromise , yes , but not a compromise which demands increasing environmental goals from the developing countries without offering them trade and economic gains at the same time .
Sustainable development includes development and where is the commitment to that in the EU 's position ?
I welcome the limited promises made by the Commissioner this afternoon as regards seeking the extension of the " Everything but Arms " initiative worldwide , and also by the Spanish Presidency on the Tobin tax and other potential new sources of public finance for development .
But I share colleagues ' view that there is no point in agreeing a commitment to eliminate child labour and then relying on exclusively voluntary agreements with business to achieve this and other legitimate development goals .
I remind the Council and Commission that two weeks ago this Parliament voted for mandatory social and environmental reporting by European enterprises on their global supply chain , as a first step towards establishing a binding framework for corporate accountability .
I ask you to lead that argument in Johannesburg too .
Finally , compromise with the US is one thing .
Allowing the US to exercise a veto on agreement is another .
Today we are left with an implementation plan with no less than 200 sets of brackets representing unresolved issues .
Without stronger leadership from the EU , there can and will be no final agreement .
Mr President , the EU has good reason to be satisfied with progress on sustainable development .
However , resistance to it is now becoming a reality and national and commercial interests are clearly coming into view .
It is more important than ever for the EU to be able to strengthen its partnerships with third countries and other blocs .
To its credit , the Union has especially dedicated itself to slowing down and preventing climate change .
The information necessary for this is still limited , though sufficient to state that there no longer exists any scientific uncertainty that human beings are causing the earth 's climate to become warmer .
Our prominent role , however , means the data we have needs to be coordinated and explored more fully .
For that reason I want , prior to the meeting at Johannesburg , to propose that the EU should establish a special European Climate Change Agency , whose job it would be to support the Community in policy concerning climatic change .
Right now this would be an important signal politically .
The EU must acquire firm scientific support for its work , for example , in matters to do with trade , as our major competitor , the United States of America , is not intending to ratify the Kyoto Protocol .
It would be the task of the European Climate Change Agency to compile data on climatic change and its impact on the environment , the economy and society .
The Agency would have to produce and commission studies and evaluate existing data , and thus act as the much-needed link between scientific research and the political decision-makers .
All this is necessary for the EU 's policy of sustainable development to gain strength and for the EU to hone its role as international leader .
By acting on the best available information the EU can build international partnerships in which selfish national and financial ambitions can be constructively thwarted .
Climatic change is the most serious problem in our history and its most serious threat .
It would be only reasonable to see it also taken seriously in connection with the use of EU resources .
Council . ( ES ) Mr President , I think that this debate has been extraordinarily informative because many things have been said , but they are all things that both the Council and the Commission have fully accepted , because we totally share the widespread disappointment felt by everyone at the outcome of the Bali conference and the concern at the almost insurmountable difficulties facing preparations for the Johannesburg conference .
Nevertheless , I should not like to end this debate on a negative note , having mentioned all the injustices inherent in the distribution of poverty in the world and the enormous problems of world trade and environmental problems and not state that Europe has the capacity for leadership .
I believe the fact that the European Parliament shares this concern inspires the Commission and the Council , who are responsible for representing the position of Europe and its leadership in all these issues that are so close to us and , naturally , so close to our hearts , because they have a major impact on the conscience of European public opinion .
I should like to say that , despite the fact that the outcome of the Bali conference was not very positive , some very important goals and agreements have been achieved during these months of the Spanish Presidency , which have confirmed that the European Union is moving in the right direction .
Let us remember that the European Union ratified the Kyoto Protocol at the beginning of March .
Let us also remember that we achieved a compromise in Monterrey , against all predictions , committing ourselves to providing development aid ; let us also remember that the European Union has , throughout recent years , maintained its leadership in development aid and in defending courageous policies on trade with developing countries such as the ' Everything but arms ' directive .
We do , therefore , have experience and we are fighting for the right idea which , of course , I believe we all share - Parliament , the Council and the Commission - and which is that we have to make an effort to make the world in which we live a better place . This is a very complex world , however , in which , as all honourable Members who have spoken know because you have , of course , considerable knowledge of the dialectic at stake at the moment with regard to Johannesburg , there are great interests and enormous amounts of national self-interest , not only in the developed world , but also in other blocs of countries that have adopted radical positions and which often prevent consensus being reached .
Our thesis has to date consisted of considering that it is better to have a global agreement , even if it is relatively ambitious , than to have no agreement at all .
This is the very reason we were not able to achieve anything positive in Bali but , nevertheless , our desire to conclude an agreement remains intact .
This week the Committee of Permanent Representatives is debating a set of initiatives that the General Affairs Council will consider on Monday 17 June , and which will become guidelines with which the Seville European Council will continue negotiations .
Furthermore , for his part , the President of the Council intends to take this issue to the highest level at the G8 Summit in Kananaskis , in Alberta , Canada , which will take place at the end of June .
The Spanish Presidency will keep up the pressure to the end and the Danish Presidency is also already prepared to take over on 1 July .
Frankly , I believe that we should not be discouraged by the fact that Bali has been a disappointment for us all ; all is not lost and much can still be achieved .
I also genuinely believe that the Council , together with the Commission , is capable of maintaining its position of leadership ; that the Seville European Council will send a clear message to the world about our position and our commitment to the Johannesburg objectives .
Similarly , we will also be working with our partners , particularly within the G8 ; we still have almost three months before Johannesburg opens and we hope we have sufficient experience to be able to impose , with our strength and our leadership , a solution that is acceptable to everyone in that South African city at the beginning of September .
We do not want Johannesburg , as I have said , to be a further disappointment of the type we saw in Durban and we are , therefore , willing to work on this and are doing so with the satisfaction and the relief that we enjoy the political support of this Parliament that has been expressed so forcefully in today 's sitting .
Mr President , honourable Members , I wish first of all to express my thanks for an important debate and for constructive contributions which we shall of course bear in mind in our assessment of Bali and in our preparations for Johannesburg .
Let us remind ourselves of the difficult position from which we are in actual fact starting , with , first of all , a quite different political climate than that which prevailed when the Rio Summit took place .
Now , we are living in a much more polarised world .
The fight against terrorism and the Axis of Evil has meant that the mood in the G77 Group naturally feels completely different .
Expectations of the Bali Summit were incredibly high .
There was a very long wish-list covering every political area imaginable , and a poorly focused political agenda .
Against that background , it is important not to ignore what has been achieved .
We had a whole range of colleagues working very hard to ensure , in fact , that we could ' clear the decks ' and agree on as much as possible in the action plan .
There is also a great deal which has been achieved and on which we have reached decisions .
Nor must we forget the negotiations on climate change , which also collapsed at a certain phase but which could be resumed and made to yield a satisfactory result .
It is hardly surprising that the poor countries are complaining and demanding more of us now , for the experiences in Rio were alarming .
The money needed to pay for the thousands of recommendations decided upon in Rio was never forthcoming .
That is why there has been such poor implementation of all these recommendations .
It is therefore very important that we now prepare ourselves for our role as bridge builders .
I can imagine our having to play that role very actively in Johannesburg .
We need to take more practical measures in precisely those areas mentioned here in the debate .
In spite of everything , none of this is news to the Commission or the Council .
These are areas which we have already discussed and in which we have already done some preparation , but we need to see what progress we can make when it comes to grants , trade , access to our markets and development aid .
We need to describe still more clearly the practical objectives we have put forward with regard , for example , to water and energy issues .
Perhaps we need to supplement our descriptions with calculations of costs and to demonstrate how we are to achieve our objectives successfully .
There is naturally opposition from those who do not wish to go beyond the objectives of the millennium declaration and who do not want to draw up practical timetables , deadlines and practical objectives expressed , for example , in terms of years .
We need to ensure that we can preserve the status of environmental issues in the debate .
We need to rescue the whole concept of ' sustainable development ' .
I naturally appreciate how important it is to link it to trade and development issues and issues of funding , but it is also important to safeguard the whole idea of our being concerned here with a single whole .
It is a question of seeing the whole picture , in which environmental , as well as economic and social , issues have their place .
What , finally , will happen if Johannesburg fails ?
These are not , of course , issues under which it will be possible to draw a line in Johannesburg .
The objectives we draw up for the European Union are ones which , after Johannesburg too , we shall of course have to comply with and continue to work on .
Possible failure there should not prevent us from finalising and implementing the plans we have jointly decided on .
I want to thank you again for this important debate .
In our preparations , we shall bear in mind everything that was said .
I hope that we can count on the support of the European Parliament and that we shall also , hopefully , be able in as active a way as possible to employ the European Parliament 's delegation in the preparations .
The debate is closed .
The next item is the report ( A5-0207 / 2002 ) by Heidi Anneli Hautala , on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Council Directive 76 / 207 / EEC on the implementation of the principle of equal treatment for men and women as regards access to employment , vocational training and promotion , and working conditions ( PE-CONS 3624 / 2002 - C5-0185 / 2002 - 2000 / 0142 ( COD ) )
Mr President , for the first time now , the European Parliament has participated in reforming Community legislation on equality by virtue of the codecision procedure .
I am pleased to inform you all that the European Parliament has genuinely left its mark on this directive , whose purpose it is to prevent any kind of discrimination at work on grounds of sex .
I believe that many will have noticed that it is the European Parliament that has made the most innovative proposals of all , which are now incorporated in this key directive on equality at work .
In response to our demands , employers in the European Union will for the first time now be obliged to take committed action to prevent sexual harassment in the workplace .
The very fact that employers will be obliged to take action is very important as the problem has to be addressed through action and not just by issuing various declarations .
This means that employers that fail in their obligation to create working conditions that pre-empt sexual harassment may also become liable for prosecution by the courts as a result .
In practice this means that structures must be created at the workplace where an employee is guaranteed to receive help when harassment has occurred , and where any such action also has a preventative effect .
In response to a requirement by the European Parliament the directive also includes the idea that equality has to start being promoted at the workplace through concrete planning .
This means that we have created a grassroots instrument that guarantees that employers and employees will , through a united effort , make a survey of areas that are unsatisfactory at their workplace and that they can eliminate them through the same united effort .
In this regard I might say that developments in EU legislation are moving very much in the direction of the Nordic model . These sorts of instruments have been in place for some time now in the Nordic countries , and not just there but also in countries such as Belgium and Italy .

This directive will also afford greater protection from discrimination against mothers and fathers at the workplace .
It is obviously very important that when parents , whether fathers or mothers , return to work from paternity , maternity or parental leave , they can actually be given a job equivalent to the one they did before and can also enjoy all the benefits they would have had while they were away from work .
From this you may have already concluded that fathers and men in general have now been included in the Community legislation on gender equality .
This is also absolutely vital as there is much debate going on in all our Member States about how men can be included in the promotion of equality .
We should also take into account the fact that men can also be victims .
An employer may also discriminate against a father returning to work from parental leave or insisting on his statutory right to work a shorter working day .
This directive now forbids all such discrimination .
It is also very important that under this directive all Member States must establish an authority that is in practice responsible for promoting these developments and which also monitors them .
I would like to say that this will be of particularly great importance for the future Member States in Central and Eastern Europe , where the position of women has become noticeably problematic with the structural changes that have been taking place .
In this way the European Union can also promote concrete improvements in gender equality in the future Member States .
Parliament should feel very pleased with the results of this conciliation process .
We have in practice achieved all our objectives and I might also say that the level of cooperation among the political groups has been quite excellent .
Mr President , more than a year has passed since we gave this proposal to amend the 1976 directive its first reading , a proposal which was referred to the European Parliament in July 2000 ; this means that it has taken us practically two years to reach an agreement with the Council and the Commission on amending a directive that Parliament has been discussing since as early as 1996 , when we received the first proposal to amend the directive .
We had rejected that proposal on the basis of my report , which was debated on 8 March 1999 , and had asked the Commission to table a more robust text .
For once , it is neither the Commission nor the Council that are responsible for this deplorable delay .
The rapporteur lost us a lot of time , firstly by tabling her report late and secondly by overloading it with proposals that had no sound legal foundation , some of which related to other directives .
At conciliation we were able to discard these counterproductive amendments that had been adopted at first and second reading against my group 's wishes .
If people had listened to us then , women would already have been benefiting from the new directive for at least a year now , and it does represent a genuine improvement on the text that has been in force since 1976 , a text which nevertheless has had the great merit of making progress in particular on equal treatment for men and women in the workplace .
I am pleased to note that , thanks to the Treaty of Amsterdam , the positive measures have been safeguarded : the right of women to return to the same job or an equivalent post after maternity leave is essential ; the right of men to the same job guarantee after a period of paternity leave is recognised , if such leave exists in the Member State of which they are nationals , and this is also the case after adoption leave , if it exists in a Member State .
The definitions of sexual harassment , like those of direct and indirect discrimination , are useful and I hope that they will prove to be relatively robust , so as not to cause unnecessary litigation .
I should like to distance myself from Paragraph 9 of Mrs Hautala 's report , because it states that the delegation regrets that the Council was unwilling to prohibit a general exclusion of representatives of one sex from a particular professional activity or professional training .
This general prohibition is enshrined in the existing directive , the article in question , Article 2 Paragraph 1 , being maintained .
It would therefore serve no purpose to repeat it .
I am all the more pleased with the outcome of the conciliation because finally - as I have said - my group 's responsible and reasonable position has prevailed , thanks also to the Council and the Commission , who have done a great deal to talk round some over-excited members of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities , who had not understood that the best is often the enemy of the good .
If Parliament wishes to be taken seriously as a co-legislator then it must not confuse a legal text with a resolution , in which anyone can indulge in wishful thinking and reveal all of their wildest dreams . Above all , we must not forget that a legal text has to have a sound legal base and be possible to implement .
Thank you .
Mr President , this evening , we are discussing conciliation , the outcome of the negotiations on a major proposal for a directive amending the 1976 directive , and we are satisfied , whatever Mrs Lulling says .
She never fails to reiterate her opinion , but if Parliament , Mrs Hautala and the entire Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities had followed Mrs Lulling 's approach , we would not be here today expressing our satisfaction , for hers was without a doubt a minority proposal .
I would , however , like to thank Mrs Hautala because , despite the difficulties of the negotiations , we have succeeded in achieving an excellent result .
Why were the negotiations difficult ?
Because the difference between the Council and Parliament 's positions was considerable .
Mrs Hautala 's approach and the commendable cooperation of all - and I repeat - all the groups , and the willingness shown by Commissioner Diamantopoulou and the Spanish Presidency , whom I would like to thank , to find solutions , mean that the result we have achieved is significant .
Why is it significant ?
Because , three years on from the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam , we can , at last , say that things are starting to change .
The Treaty of Amsterdam was a leap forwards in terms of recognition of the principle of equal opportunities and we now , at last , have a directive which provides specific , accurate definitions of direct and indirect discrimination , a directive which , in addition to providing an important definition of harassment and sexual harassment , recognises without a shadow of doubt that sexual harassment is to be considered direct discrimination and is therefore a punishable offence , a directive which recognises the importance of maternity and paternity leave and adoption and therefore the need and the right of mothers and fathers returning from such leave to be provided with equal or equivalent work , a directive which recognises the need for and compels each Member State to lay down equal and proportionate sanctions , a directive which , moreover , recognises independent bodies and makes companies responsible for producing equal opportunities plans , thus making positive actions under Article 141 possible .

I see this result as significant , Mr President , particularly because the matter is being discussed by the Convention and , on the basis of this result , we will be able to call for a further step forward to be taken in the Convention too .
Mr President , I should like to begin by thanking Mrs Hautala for the huge amount of work she has done on this report , and also the Commission for having made an active contribution to its success .
It is therefore not only out of politeness that I say this but in genuine recognition of the fact that there is someone who has in actual fact been able to make a difference in this area and has demonstrated in practice that an individual MEP too can set a good agenda .
I think that , with this report and the work that has been done , we have passed a milestone in the EU 's journey to equality .
We have , first of all , arrived at a definition of what sexual harassment really is , and that is very useful .
There are a number of countries which really had not adopted a position on this issue before .
We have also obtained a ban on discrimination against women who are pregnant or who have recently given birth and , in certain cases , also against men on paternity leave , if there is national legislation on this subject .
Finally , we have obtained the option of making positive special arrangements in cases where these are required by one or other gender .
All in all , I think the result is splendid .
We now come to the series of commitments assumed by the Member States in connection with this directive , and I want specifically to highlight the equality monitoring bodies , as they are called .
At a recent meeting with the candidate countries , the latter were very much occupied by precisely that issue because they have a lack of data and because it is necessary for them to have means of putting pressure on their own governments with a view to acquiring this data .
I also believe , however , that we have to say that we shall be keeping an eye on this issue in our own countries , because it is something that the Member States can easily avoid tackling .
I have unfortunately experienced a little of this in my own country , but I will not labour that subject any more .
I nonetheless believe that it is up to all of us to keep an eye on this matter so that we are both of help to the candidate countries and assume responsibility ourselves in our own countries .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank Heidi Hautala for the time that she has devoted to this directive and for her work , which shows that she has been equal to this task and has merited the trust placed in her by the members of her committee .
I also wanted to say how glad we are to be taking part in a codecision procedure on equal treatment and women 's rights , which does not happen so very often .
I should like to say that this directive seems to me to mark progress on two extremely important fronts .
The first is that its scope has finally been extended .
All family-related issues , such as maternity leave , adoption and also adoption leave - and God knows how important these are for us - have been recognised .
The presence of the father and the need for the father not to be penalised if he takes leave are recognised .
This is what I would call an extension in favour of family life .
I am very happy that all of this now comes under this directive .
In the same way , all harassment-related matters now enter into the scope of application of this directive .
Here harassment is considered to be discrimination .
We tend to deal with the issue of violence against women from the point of view of moral standards .
Here we deal with it from the point of view of discrimination , so from the point of view of the fight for equality between men and women .
I particularly welcome this and I believe that the efforts we made to draw a distinction between the two definitions of harassment were extremely worthwhile .
I myself had recourse to this new standpoint last week in France , where although our law dates from 1992 it does not really include a definition .
This new definition will therefore be very useful in all of our Member States .
That is why I consider this to be so important .
In addition , there is also the whole dimension of obligation .
If all of these things that we are asking for are to become a reality , we need obligations and not just wishes and desires .
This would appear to me to be fundamental and , since I still have a few seconds left , I will take the liberty of sharing with you a discovery I made today .
If you cross the footbridge and go upstairs , you will find a door with a sign indicating the room set aside for this Parliament 's cleaning staff : the sign shows a woman holding a brush .
I think that we still have a great deal more work to do , because I want there to be equal treatment in domestic services as well as within the large professions that we are trying to represent here .
We will have to break this debate and continue it at 9 p.m. because our agenda indicates that at 5.30 p.m. we move on to the Commission statement .

The next item is the Commission communication on the Green Paper on consumer protection and contamination of food by nitrofen .
Mr President , the Green Paper on consumer protection which was adopted by the Commission in October 2001 put forward a number of options and questions on the future of EU consumer protection policy .
It suggested in particular the idea of adopting a framework directive on fair commercial practices .
It also suggested developing a legal instrument for cooperation between enforcement authorities .
The public consultation launched by the Green Paper received a very wide response from business , consumers and national governments .
The response gives the Commission clear support for developing a proposal for a framework directive .
In particular , a very large majority of the Member States supported this option .
The Council has called on the Commission to follow up the Green Paper as a matter of priority .
However , there was a general feeling amongst those who supported the idea and those who , on balance , did not , that more information , clarification and consultation was needed on the content of a framework directive .
The basic structure of a framework directive outlined in the Green Paper was broadly accepted .
We have therefore decided that the best approach would be to embark on a further round of consultation on the substance of a framework directive before moving on to the stage of making proposals .
The follow-up communication adopted today by the Commission responds to this need for further consultation .
It summarises the results of the consultation , draws policy conclusions and sets out an action plan for further consultation .
For the sake of transparency and in order to structure the debate with the Member States , an outline of a possible framework directive on fair commercial practices is attached to the communication .
This is not intended to be a draft proposal ; rather it is the first in a series of working documents designed to clear the ground and provide some much needed structure and form to what has been up to now a somewhat confused debate .
Let me try and set out what a framework directive would do .
It would set the standards that business will have to meet when dealing with consumers .
Consumers should have the information they need to take informed decisions .
They should be protected from rogue traders who seek to mislead and harass them through dishonest advertising and marketing .
The framework directive will contain a general clause prohibiting unfair commercial practices detrimental to consumers .
The general clause will be supplemented by specific rules covering the various categories of unfair commercial practices both before and after sale .
These categories range from misleading advertising and aggressive marketing methods to failure to provide after-sales customer assistance and effective complaint handling .
A non-exhaustive list of examples could be attached to the directive in order to illustrate the scope of the general clause and how the specific rules work in practice .
My intention is that we develop legislation that focuses on the fundamental issues .
Business should then be left free to apply to the principles of the framework directive in their area of competence through effective codes of conduct .
The Commission could also develop non-binding guidance to reduce the risk of divergent interpretations of the framework directive at national level .
It goes without saying that such guidance cannot change the democratically approved legislation .
The strong role of Parliament in the legislative process will in no way be undermined .
The follow-up communication also provides for the setting up of an expert group .
The main task of this group would be to identify the common ground between national systems and the barriers to the internal market for business and consumers .
It should also seek to identify the level of harmonisation needed to ensure a high level of consumer protection and completion of the internal market with the inclusion of a mutual recognition clause .
I also hope that the group will be able to find simplified solutions to consumer protection problems , although not at the cost of effective protection .
Codes of conduct and the use of guidance both have a role to play here .
I hope we can develop legislation that focuses on the fundamental issues .
It should set benchmarks for the desired outcomes for consumers .
Procedural and prescriptive rules should be avoided where possible to ensure legislation does not become obsolete .
In parallel to the work of the expert group , my services will make arrangements for consultation with stakeholders on the same issues .
We will organise meetings in Brussels for EU organisations .
I hope , therefore , that the follow-up communication will provide a sound basis for moving towards a proposal for a framework directive that can command widespread support and confidence .
Such a directive will be both a genuine boost for competition in the internal market and also demonstrate to EU citizens the practical and useful role the EU can play in their daily lives .
I hope that the proposed method of consultation will enable the Commission to fully understand the different nuances of the national rules on fair trading and build a consensus on a workable framework directive .
The task ahead should not be underestimated .
The encouraging response to the Green Paper , however , gives confidence that we can achieve it .
The consultation showed clear support for the ideas in the Green Paper on enforcement cooperation .
I believe that we now have a clear political mandate to proceed on the basis of a legislative proposal in this area .
In this context , I would like to stress my commitment to producing a proposal on enforcement cooperation in the near future , hopefully before the end of this year .
I regret that Parliament has not yet expressed an opinion on the Green Paper .
However , I should add that I do not see this as a particular problem .
The follow-up communication is itself on a further stage in the consultation process .
It provides a more detailed set of ideas .
I therefore look forward to the European Parliament 's opinion on both the Green Paper and the follow-up communication .
I can assure you that the views of Parliament will play a very important part in the Commission 's deliberations at the legislative stage .
I look forward to discussing this issue with you in greater detail in the months to come .
Mr President , Commissioner , I have a question on the prohibited substances .
It is the case that , in future , certain substances will be banned in the European Union , as they have been in the past .
How will the Commission guarantee in future that these substances will be tested for in the Member States ?
How are products containing these substances to be prevented from getting onto the market , as products containing nitrofen are at present managing to do in Germany ?
They have been banned for some considerable time , during which nitrofen has not once been tested for .
When it was discovered , it was done so fortuitously .
I am not sure whether I have listened to everything with due care , but I thought that the Commissioner was also going to issue a detailed report on the nitrofen problem in Germany .
I missed it .
Is it scheduled for later ?
If so , with the President 's permission , I should like to ask a question on that subject .
I too was of the view that the Commissioner was going to make one statement which included both subjects , but he has not given us his statement on nitrofen at this stage .
I think you should make that statement now , Commissioner , so that colleagues can address the two subjects .
Mr President , I am sorry if I misunderstood the procedure .
I understood I should make a statement in relation to the consumer protection issue , answer questions on that and then move on to this issue .
However , I am of course happy to do it this way .
I am pleased to bring Parliament up to date on the nitrofen contamination in Germany .
This is a very disturbing discovery .
Nitrofen is a herbicide and has been a banned substance in the European Union since 1988 .
It is a probable carcinogen , with teratogenic effects .
Consumers are quite rightly worried that control measures failed to prevent this contamination .
The Commission was first made aware of the contamination on 24 May .
There were three immediate priorities .
First , to establish from the German authorities the source and extent of the contamination ; second , to trace and recall contaminated products ; third , to ensure that the control authorities in the Member States were kept fully informed of developments .
I am satisfied that very good progress has been made in addressing each of these priorities .
The origin of the contamination is now known .
It can be traced to the storage of organic grains in a warehouse that had been used in the past to store pesticides .
I am sure you will share my concern that such an elementary precaution as a thorough cleaning does not appear to have taken place before this very radical change of use was undertaken .
In addition , the contamination was discovered in industry tests in January but was not reported to the responsible authorities until May .
This delay in notification has resulted in the circulation and consumption of contaminated material before the German authorities were in a position to react .
Feedingstuffs from this warehouse were delivered to 90 producers of organic products through a firm that supplies to the organic sector .
The German authorities have taken the necessary measures to block supplies from these producers unless and until they have been checked for the absence of nitrofen .
This tracing exercise included some limited exports of poultrymeat to the Netherlands , Denmark , Belgium and Austria .
The authorities are also in the process of tracing smaller quantities of organic cereals supplied directly from the warehouse to an estimated 20 other producers .
Products from these companies are currently blocked .
The German authorities state that full tracing will be finalised by the end of this week .
This tracing exercise includes a quantity of organic wheat exported to France in January .
There is also evidence of storage of conventional non-organic cereals in this warehouse between 1995 and August 2001 , although not necessarily in the contaminated section .
The authorities are still in the process of verifying this information .
Finally , a quantity of organic lupines was also exported to Denmark .
The Danish authorities have also been notified .
They have traced this product and blocked what remains on the market and the farms concerned .
The German authorities are satisfied that the origin of the contamination is confined to that particular warehouse .
They point out that both organic and conventional produce have been extensively tested and no nitrofen has been found .
The Commission notes the assurances that any remaining contamination is limited and can be contained .
We also note the considerable efforts to trace products and remove them from the market .
Member States have been kept fully informed of this entire process .
A further meeting of the Standing Committee on the Food Chain today took note of the assurances from the German authorities and agreed that there is no need to take additional measures for the moment .
The overall situation obviously remains under close watch .
The standing committee will meet again on Friday to review developments .
In particular it will want to learn of the progress in tracing the estimated 6 % of contaminated produce which remains to be fully traced .
While there is considerable concern in all Member States , especially with the still fresh memories of recent food safety crises , only Belgium has announced national restrictions .
This may be a legacy of the dioxin crisis which has understandably left deep scars in Belgium .
I expect , nonetheless , that the clarifications provided in the standing committee this week will prove sufficient to lift these restrictions .
We must be careful also to focus on the broader picture .
These recent events confirmed for me that our new approach to food safety is going in the right direction .
In particular , the necessity for food traceability from farm to fork and for rapid and transparent exchange of information has been confirmed .
Both are critical to the identification and swift recall of contaminated products .
As always , lessons need to be learned and the Commission is looking at the following issues in particular . How did such contamination occur in the first place when nitrofen has been banned in the EU since 1988 ?
Can we be fully confident that warehouses formerly used to store dangerous substances are safe for food storage ?
Could more be done to ensure that federal authorities are notified immediately of incidents of contamination , allowing them to notify the Commission and other Member States , not just in Germany but in other federal countries as well ?
In particular , what should be done to address the fact that the contamination was known to the laboratories and industry for months before the authorities were informed ?
Similarly , was the rapid alert system notified of these developments as intended ?
These are issues I will now be taking up with the federal authorities in Germany .
A mission of the Food and Veterinary Office will take place shortly to assist in this process .
Previous FVO reports on both residue control measures and controls in the organic food sector in Germany will also be taken fully into account .
I can assure you that Parliament will be kept fully informed of all these developments .
I thank the Commissioner for his statement .
Only in the last two sentences did he mention the role of the Food and Veterinary Office in Dublin .
Since the Bureau has been in existence for some six or seven years , I wonder why it did not find this out sooner .
As the Commissioner stated , the problem involving nitrofen has been around for some five or six years .
If the Food and Veterinary Office in Dublin is indeed supposed to check the inspectors in the Member States , then it is a little late in tracking down this instance of food contamination .
Why is that ?
Can the Commissioner give an explanation for this ?
How often , for example , have inspections taken place and how often do inspections take place in other countries to check on this type of thing and especially on organic production .
As the Commissioner stated , the problems surrounding the contamination of turkey meat in Germany are very reminiscent of those surrounding the dioxin contamination of chickens in Belgium in 1999 .
Then , however , the Commission levelled such heavy criticism at Belgium on account of its provision of information that due to a knee-jerk reaction in many countries inside and outside the EU , the borders closed for practically all Belgian agricultural products , with serious economic consequences .
The Commission immediately introduced an export ban on possibly contaminated products , coupled with a very strict monitoring system .
Commissioner , when I now gauge the Commission 's reaction to what has happened in Germany , then there is a world of difference .
Germany notified too late , far too late , despite the fact that it already knew , which was not the case in Belgium .
We were slightly late , but not that much .
The Commission has been notified , but , unlike the affair in Belgium , no complaints have been lodged against Germany .
No action has been taken , etc .
Do not be surprised therefore that there is a feeling in Belgium that once again , the Commission 's reaction is completely different because a large Member State is involved .
I would therefore like to know why that is , Commissioner , and I would appreciate your thoughts on how you handled this situation .
In answer to Mr Kindermann 's question on how we can ensure that Member States carry out their work properly , first of all it is the primary role of the authorities in the Member States to carry out their functions and to comply with the legislation .
That is a responsibility that is imposed primarily on the Member States themselves .
In addition to that , there is the function of the FVO in ensuring that this work is done .
Their function is to inspect the inspectors .
In carrying out that task , they produce reports which are published on the Internet .
In answer to Mr Mulder , that is what happened in this instance .
The FVO carried out this work .
There were reports on residues in Germany in July 2001 and on controls in the organic sector .
These reports , which found serious weaknesses , are already available on the Internet .
They have been the subject of discussion in the past .
I reiterate to Mr Mulder what I said in answer to Mr Kindermann : the role of the FVO is to inspect the inspectors .
It cannot ensure that every single plant is carrying out its work properly and carefully .
That is a function for the inspectors employed by the Member States themselves .
The third question related to whether Belgium and Germany have been treated unequally .
Discrimination means treating two situations which are the same in a different manner , or treating two different situations in the same way .
In this instance we have two different situations .
They are not comparable in scale .
Large sections of the pig and poultry industry in Belgium were affected at that time .
In Germany an estimated 1 % of the organic sector - itself a niche sector which amounts to only 2 % of overall production - is concerned in this instance .
The German authorities made good progress in tracing and recalling potentially contaminated products .
Unfortunately the scale of the dioxin problem in Belgium made tracing much more difficult .
It is important to recall that , because we have been working together over the last two-and-a-half years , we have put in place safety measures to ensure traceability .
In this instance the legislation did work .
It was not in place to assist those who were in charge of the issues in 1999 .
There was a significant delay in reporting the problems in Belgium , resulting in the risk of dissemination of the dioxin throughout Belgium and other Member States , in circumstances where the level of contamination , particularly of pork and poultry , was very significant - much more widespread than in the present instance .
The handling of the nitrofen contamination has met with general satisfaction in the Member States .
It has been discussed in the standing committee today and will be discussed again on Friday .
Only Belgium considered the EU response to the dioxin crisis unsatisfactory in terms of the EU-wide ban .
Third countries were also threatening measures against all EU exports , in the absence of proof that the problem was confined to Belgium .
Once again , there is a significant difference between the two situations .
My first important decision on assuming office was to lift restrictions on the export of Belgian beef arising from the dioxin crisis .
You will appreciate that this was not a comfortable decision for a new Commissioner for Health and Consumer Protection with responsibility for food safety on his very first day in office .
Nonetheless I took it because I was advised to and the evidence that was put before me supported it .
I was satisfied that the easing of restrictions was justified .
I therefore take very seriously any suggestion that the Commission may have treated two Member States differently merely because one is large and one is small .
I am very sensitive to these issues , not least because of where I come from .
It would be entirely wrong for anyone to think that the Commission 's decisions over the last week were based on anything other than the scientific facts and the advice given to me and the standing committee which led us to conclude that our decisions were the right ones .
I insist that my decision was based solely on objective analysis , completely divorced from any consideration of the size of the Member State involved .
That is my position .
Mr President , Commissioner , all credit to your consistent approach !
It is sometimes helpful in federal systems for their states to be forced to take consistent action in these matters .
I have three questions to put to you .
Firstly , do feedingstuffs not also have to be checked regularly , and not just the foodstuffs that , as it were , result from them ?
Secondly , must this not apply particularly to imports from countries in which sprays containing nitrofen continue to be used or where large stocks of them are still available ?
Thirdly , if you are - as you have hinted - resuming checks for nitrofen , are you working on the assumption that traces of nitrofen will be found in other countries and in the conventional farming sector as well ?
Mr President , Commissioner , I do not normally praise the Commission but , on this occasion , I wish to do so both in view of the Green Paper , or the follow-up to the Green Paper to which you refer , and also in view of the fact that we are soon to have the opportunity to cooperate within the ' enforcement sector ' in the matter of consumer protection .
I wish to put three questions :
Will any sector be excluded from a fair trade directive 's being applied to it ?
We now see that , in spite of our having obtained a financial services directive , there is still a lot to be done .
How will the European Parliament be associated with the group of experts ?
What is to happen concerning the proposal for a regulation on sales promotion measures ?
I also regret that Parliament has still not been able to come up with a response to the Green Paper , but that has quite a lot to do with shortcomings in the way in which Parliament is structured when it comes to dealing with consumer issues .
Mr President , I shall also focus my remarks on the Green Paper communication .
I would like particularly to invite Mr Byrne to confirm to the House that the provisions of last week 's Communication by President Prodi on simplifying and improving the regulatory environment will be applied in full to the extension of his proposal .
I would also particularly like him to confirm that he will be undertaking a full regulatory impact assessment of this wide-ranging proposal and that he has not excluded the possibility of meeting the undoubted requirements he has set out for improving the quality of consumer protection by means other than a directive .
In conclusion could I also invite him to confirm to the House tonight what he said to the Legal Affairs Committee the other week , namely that the sales promotion regulation continues to have his full support and is entirely compatible with the suggested proposals .
I should like to congratulate the Commissioner on the win by his home team in football today .
I want to follow in a similar vein to the previous speaker .
We welcome the proposals in the Green Paper .
However , Commissioner , you will agree that your ideas are progressing very fast in this area .
In the light of the proposals on better government that came out last week , which Mr Harbour mentioned , I want to ask you three specific questions .
What improvements do you intend to make in terms of consultation of all the actors involved - consumers , SMEs , and the government departments that will have to implement any particular laws that emerge from this ?
How do you intend to improve the evaluation of the impact assessment in terms of cost ?
Can you guarantee to make available all consultations on the web so that these will be available for consultation ?
I would like to thank your staff for providing me with previous consultations .
However , it has to be said that they are all in different languages .
I cannot read all of them ; and if there is to be transparency on these issues they need to be available publicly on the web and in languages that people can understand .
Commissioner , your explanation to Mrs Smet is not satisfactory to me .
The crisis has been going on since September .
The German Agriculture Minister has known since 21 May .
This is now almost three weeks ago .
We worked together on the regulation concerning the European Food Safety Authority .
This is the first test for this regulation .
And what does Article 53 of this regulation state ?
That when a serious risk to the health of the public , animals or the environment is established , the Commission must , or can , take a number of measures without delay .
This includes , for example , the suspension of introducing products onto the market .
You have failed to do this , you have reassured us , while I have been given some information that tells me that somewhere , I do not know where , there is 100 tonnes of contaminated wheat .
You claim that there is only one source .
You have the information that there is only one source , while the contamination has been in progress since September , and while we all know that this warehouse in Vorpommern has been in use since October .
So you are not convincing me .
I really have the feeling here that a large Member State has been given preferential treatment compared to a small Member State like mine .
I do not want to enter into the discussion of large and small countries . However , I have two specific questions .
Did I hear the Commissioner correctly when he said that we have actually known since June 2001 from inspectors that nitrofen had been found .
Why did rapid alert not work ?
This is my first question .
My second question concerns the assertion of consumer protection .
In my view , this presupposes strong and independent consumer protection organisations .
Especially in consideration of the nitrofen scandal , this also presupposes additional measures , particularly with a view to new countries joining .
What will the Commissioner do about supporting strong and independent organisations in the candidate countries ?
I would be interested to find out .
Mr President , Commissioner , in one minute nobody should confuse attitude with platitude .
I will be quick , firstly could you come back to this House when you know more about the timescale of the German contamination issue , particularly whether the rapid alert system worked effectively .
There are more similarities with the Belgian case than I think you imply today .
Secondly , would you accept with respect to consumer consultation that you need to be looking at the duty not to trade unfairly and the accumulation of case history in that field , as well as setting out the duty to trade fairly , which in your country and mine , and some others , is a fairly new concept .
Commissioner Byrne stated that the European Parliament had not yet expressed an opinion on the Green Paper on consumer protection , but that he did not see this as a particular problem and that , moreover , the Commission had enough of a political mandate - if I understood correctly - to determine the broad outlines of future consumer policy .
For my part , before asking my question , which will be quite straightforward , I should like to say that at this stage the European Parliament has not given any political mandate to the Commission to determine broad outlines of any kind .
My question is therefore as follows : to what extent does the Commission intend to take account of the European Parliament 's opinion ; is it still worth its even issuing an opinion when clearly the broad outlines have been defined and the major decisions made , whether it be on the choice of a framework directive as the preferred legal instrument or on legal principles , fair commercial practices , mutual recognition , or even to deregulate existing provisions ?
Mr President , that remains the case .
I understand why Members from other countries are displeased .
Let me say as a German that I think what has happened in Germany is a scandal , and our farmers are the ones who are suffering from it .
Mrs Knast , our Minister for Consumer Protection , Food and Agriculture , has done nothing except make announcements at the top of her voice .
Functioning channels of communication need to be created , and very soon .
This has not been achieved .
At the time of the Lannoye report , our group wanted mandatory reporting by the authorities to start at an earlier date .
We asked for 2003 , and 2005 was what we got .
What I want to ask the Commissioner is this : what do you think about that in the aftermath of this scandal ?
Should we not , after all , impose this obligation on the authorities earlier ?
In answer to the first question by Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , the situation here is that there are residue monitoring plans in place at both EU and Member State level .
These plans include banned substances such as nitrofen .
The plans have proven their effectiveness in recent months .
The presence of chloramphenicol , for instance and , indeed , nitrofen were identified by this procedure .
They are both banned substances that were brought to light by the use of this procedure .
Finally , such testing extends to both imported and domestically produced products .
A number of Members raised that point .
Food and feedingstuffs must be safe , irrespective of their origin .
The residue plans from third countries , which are obligatory under EU legislation , are carefully checked to ensure that the necessary controls are in place .
The same issue arises with candidate countries .
We exercise the same degree of care to ensure compliance .
The second question relates to the Green Paper and whether any sectors are going to be excluded .
The financial sector will be excluded and the whole area of food safety legislation will not be covered because it has its own separate legal regime .
Parliament will be involved ; not only will Parliament 's opinion on the original paper be taken into account , but also we await the opinion on this follow-up paper .
So Parliament has an opportunity to present an opinion on both papers .
The reason we moved ahead was not , I can assure you , through any disrespect to Parliament , but because there was a considerable degree of pressure by the Council and others .
Also it was felt that the first paper was not as detailed as people wanted .
I felt that it was useful to make the follow-up paper more detailed to assist Parliament in reaching its conclusions and perhaps providing an even more valuable opinion for me to take into account when we come to draft the final framework directive .
Obviously Parliament will have a full role , as it normally does .
I was then asked whether I would take into account the better regulation communication by President Prodi last week .
I confirm that I will and I also confirm what I said in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market some weeks ago , that I was involved in the work on the sales promotion directive .
My services and I support that .
That piece of legislation is compatible with this communication and with our general plans on unfair trading practices .
Mrs McCarthy is concerned that we are moving very fast .
That is probably true .
However , it is intended to consult fully with stakeholders .
As I said , there will also be provision for stakeholders on all sides to have a role in the operation of the legislation when it becomes operational .
Mr Staes goes back to the point about Belgium and unequal treatment .
I can only repeat what I said earlier .
Neither I nor my services were motivated by any considerations of the size of the Member State .
To Mrs Oomen-Ruijten I can say that we in the European Union have only known about this since 24 May , although private laboratories in Germany have known since January .
We are very unhappy that it took so long to notify the federal authorities .
As I said earlier , this point is being taken up with the federal authorities .
This is an issue of some concern and I know it is a concern in the countries with a federal structure , where sometimes there is perhaps not the same speed of communication between regions or Lnder and the federal authorities .
But I must insist that at European Union level our interlocutor is the federal government and therefore the institutions of the European Union cannot be mollified by responses from Member States with a federal structure that really there is nothing they can do because the problem resides in their Lnder or regions .
That is not a response that we at European Union level can accept .
As regards third countries , I can only repeat what I said earlier in response to Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf .
They are treated in an equivalent manner to Member States .
Mr Whitehead then asked if I would come back again when I have more information .
I am always happy to come back to Parliament with up-to-date information on any issue , particularly an issue of such importance as this .
On the second question , he asks me about the accumulation of case-law and fair trading .
People used to a common law system are often anxious that what we are trying to do here is move closer to a codified system which they would not feel totally happy with .
I addressed this issue before when I was here and I said on that occasion that I am sensitive to this point , both because of where I come from and because of my professional background .
In our thinking on this and in the legislation put in place , we will seek to ensure that existing legal systems in the European Union are fully taken into account .
Mrs Patrie then asked me about the Green Paper .
She may have misunderstood what I said earlier , or I may not have expressed myself very well .
In bringing forward the paper at this time I did not intend any discourtesy to the House in not awaiting the opinion , but it was important for us to add further detail to the first proposal and give Parliament an opportunity to produce an even better opinion on our work in this area .
Finally , in response to Mrs Keppelhoff-Wiechert , I agree that there are problems in Germany and that there were delays .
One of the federal agencies in Germany knew about this for quite some time and failed to inform the federal authorities .
It was not just a question of the Lnder knowing and failing to pass on information .
A federal agency had that information and failed to pass it on .
There is one other issue I have some small concern about , or maybe it is a serious concern .
Very often private laboratories have information on food safety issues .
Under confidentiality clauses , they fail to disclose this information to the relevant authorities .
We have resolved that to some extent with the food law that we passed here a couple of months ago , but unfortunately the requirement and the legal obligation for private laboratories to disclose relevant information to the public authorities will not become operational until 2005 .
This is a problem .
It is something that has to be addressed by Member States , particularly those with a federal structure , to ensure that information available to private laboratories is made available to those who make public health decisions .
We are running 20 minutes late at the present time , Mr Staes , so I will not give the floor to anyone else .
The subject will not go away .
Sometimes Commissioners are very deft at making sure they do not fall into traps .
Sometimes they do fall into traps .
But I am sure that you , of all people , will find ways in which to maintain this subject on the agenda one way or another .
The debate is closed .
The next item is Question Time ( B5-0252 / 2002 ) .
The following questions are addressed to the Commission .
Part I
Question No 3 by Paulo Casaca ( H-0401 / 02 ) :
Subject : Creation of European sugar-refining cartel with Community support
Article 81 ( 1 ) of the Treaty prohibits cartels at European level , notably those having as their object the restriction or distortion of competition within the common market .
However , as the Court of Auditors ' special report No 20 / 2000 , Paragraph 91 , points out , there is no true common market in the sugar sector , and competition between the various sugar-refining enterprises does not exist .
The suspicions raised by the Court of Auditors concerning the creation of an industry cartel with the endorsement of the European institutions are fully confirmed by the movements , or non-movements at international level , within the sugar and cane trade and by sugar prices on the European market .
The Commission 's ban on the sending of sugar consignments to the EU by refineries which do not have agreements with the European cartel amounts to a substantial reinforcement of this cartel 's power .
Can the Commission explain why its services responsible for competition have still not launched any kind of investigation - whether within the Commission or externally - into the European sugar cartel 's long-standing and visible practices of dividing up the markets , price-fixing , and dumping on to territories where no controls apply ?
Does the Commission not consider its own failure to act to be clearly in breach of the Treaty ?
Mr President , contrary to the criticisms levelled at it by Mr Casaca , the Commission is confident that it has fully discharged its responsibilities in the sugar sector , which has been the subject of a number of proceedings regarding competition .
In this regard , the Commission would like to point out that , over almost 30 years , it has collected evidence for a number of cases relating to the sector and has imposed penalties for both cartels at European level and agreements at national level and abuses of dominant position .
All these decisions were subject to the control of the Court of Justice , which confirmed that they were fully justified .
In 2001 , a fresh inquiry was opened following a claim , but the investigation did not yield proof of the alleged facts .
The sugar sector has , moreover , been the subject of specific inquiries in the context of the Regulation on the control of concentrations between undertakings .
On the other hand , as Mr Casaca is aware , over a year ago , the Commission presented an initial reform of the common organisation of the market in the sugar sector .
The objective of this reform was clearly to open the sector up further to competition .
However , the European Parliament and the Council rejected the Commission 's proposals by a large majority .
Nevertheless , the Commission published a call for tenders for the performance of an external study on competition in the sugar sector and on the impact of the common organisation of the market in sugar .
The results of this study should be ready early in 2003 .
Mr President , I am actually astonished to hear the Commission state that there is no cartel operating in the sugar sector .
Commissioner , we do not need studies , surveys or investigations .
I would simply ask you to pick up the telephone and claim to be the owner of a supermarket in your country , telephone another Member State , such as France , Germany or the United Kingdom , and say that you want to buy sugar .
Do this and see what answer you are given .
You will be told that there is no sugar , because the market is completely sewn up by a cartel , with the blessing of the Commission , which fiercely defends this cartel whenever it is under attack , as in the Autonomous Region of the Azores .
These are the facts .
None of your justifications appeared in the report by the Court of Auditors when it stated the same thing and in fact the Commission said only that this situation was due to the nature of the sector .
Mr President , allow me to recall the many occasions on which the Commission has intervened in the sugar sector .
Without claiming to be exhaustive , I should like to remind you that as early as the beginning of the 1970s the Commission adopted a decision penalising no less than sixteen companies for being in breach of Article 81 of the Treaty .
In 1988 the Commission penalised British Sugar for abuse of a dominant position ; in 1997 the Commission also penalised Irish Sugar for abuse of a dominant position .
In 1998 , the Commission penalised a price cartel on the British market in industrial sugar which had lasted for nearly four years .
In 2001 , a complaint was submitted to the Commission stating that sugar producers in one Member State had collectively refused to sell .
Nevertheless , as I have just said , the investigation did not prove that there had been a coordinated refusal to sell .
All of the parties have been informed that proceedings have been closed and the complaint has been withdrawn .
Finally , I should also like to recall that the Commission pays particular attention to these problems when monitoring concentrations .
The Commission finds it regrettable that the European Parliament and the Council should - as I have just mentioned - have rejected the proposals it tabled more than a year ago by a large majority , proposals which specifically sought to introduce more competition in this market .
Question No 1 by Roy Perry ( H-0387 / 02 ) :
Subject : Extension of the 1993 Cable and Satellite Directive
To receive national TV channels by satellite outside their country of origin , it is necessary to obtain either an illegal decoder or a pirate card .
Does the Commission agree that the Cable and Satellite Directive 93 / 83 / EEC
Mr President , the Commission is of the opinion that , within the internal market , citizens should be able to receive television services from other Member States .
It is therefore far from satisfactory that citizens should encounter difficulties in gaining access to programmes broadcast from other Member States via satellite .
Certain rules concerning copyright and rights related to copyright , applicable in particular to cross-border satellite broadcasting , are already laid down in Directive 93 / 83 in order to prevent certain difficulties .
Nonetheless , while preparing the reports on the application of that directive , the Commission has been informed of existing problems and has highlighted them in a document which should be submitted to Parliament before summer .
In that context , the Commission would inform the Member who has tabled this question that it is currently reviewing the various aspects of this issue .
Mr President , I was hoping to be able to congratulate Commissioner Bolkestein on a normally forthright reply , but I listened to that reply and I wonder what I have heard .
" The Commission is reviewing it . "
I am asking the Commission , are they going to do anything about it ?
We have a situation where we believe in the Single Market , where citizens move now in increasing numbers around the continent .
They would like to be able to watch French television in Germany ; they would like to be able to watch British television if they retire to Spain .
The reality is that the Single Market is not working .
I would like to have just a glimmer of a more positive statement from the Commissioner that not only is he going to review this problem , but he is actually going to do something about it and make a positive proposal to the Parliament .
I agree with Mr Perry that the situation at present is highly unsatisfactory .
As far as the broadcasting of television programmes is concerned , the internal market does not exist .
The difficulty is that the possibilities for the Commission are restricted .
The sad fact remains that the directive I referred to earlier , which was adopted in 1993 , does not give the Commission a sufficient legal basis for infringement proceedings which might have been available to the Commission if the legal situation had been different .
Therefore it is not open to the Commission to start the infringement proceedings that I am sure Mr Perry would consider desirable .
So all the Commission can do is carry out the study , which is nearing completion and will be submitted to Parliament as soon as it is ready - before the summer recess - so that Parliament can draw its own conclusions .
Mr Perry is completely right in expressing his serious dissatisfaction with the state of affairs .
The Commission lacks any legal basis for any infringement proceedings that Members of Parliament might want to undertake .
It is an unsatisfactory situation and the Commission is looking into the problem .
Its analysis will come before Parliament as soon as possible .
At the moment this is all I can say .
Obviously Mr Bolkestein is finding this a difficult one to square with his own principles of the Single Market , and I sympathise with him in that .
Clearly , Directive 93 / 83 is unsatisfactory .
Surely therefore the Commission can go back to the Treaty of Rome and the basis of the whole Community .
As I understand it , the Commission 's role is to make sure that the Community operates as a community and in accordance with its founding treaties .
It should therefore work towards the Single Market by bringing forward a new directive which in fact implements the Single Market in television without frontiers .
Mr Purvis ' reasoning is perfectly understandable and logical .
On the other hand , the Commission issued a document on better regulation last week .
The document , as Mr Purvis will know , prescribes a certain level of consultation , in particular as regards consultation with Parliament .
Consultation is best carried out if it is based on a paper that analyses the problem at hand , and that is precisely what the Commission is doing .
I do not want to contradict the wishes of Mr Purvis or any Member of Parliament for a more satisfactory legal basis .
Perhaps , indeed , it may be necessary to reach the same conclusion as Mr Purvis ; but that conclusion should be based on a serious analysis , and my staff and I are engaged in that process .
I repeat that we hope to submit the analysis to Parliament before summer .
We are very grateful to Mr Perry for this question because Parliament has in numerous reports asked for a revision and for the Commission to do something about this .
We had a report on digital television where this same issue was raised .
I cannot say whose name this report bore , I am too humble for that .
So , there were a number of reports where we asked for that as well .
It is ironic that we have a directive called television without frontiers while the copyright and the rules on collection societies are preventing us from doing anything .
I would ask the Commissioner about this review and the study that he is going to undertake : are you also going to look at the differences in operation between cable and satellite that also exist in the directive and are also unsatisfactory ?
In your report will you look at the role the collecting societies for the copyright owners are playing in this field which also prevents the functioning of the internal market ?
May I remark that Mrs Thors is certainly not too humble to mention the title of any directive that she wishes to refer to .
As far as her question is concerned , may I assure her that the document which my services and I are now preparing will discuss all aspects which are germane to the problem , the problem being the lack of an internal market in the case of television .
Mrs Thors is quite right that whilst the directive is called tlvision sans frontires - television without frontiers - it does not provide this .
As I have already said to Mr Perry and Mr Purvis , it is a highly unsatisfactory state of affairs .
Question No 2 by John Joseph McCartin ( H-0395 / 02 ) :
Subject : Cattle growth hormones
In relation to the Commission 's recent statement ( IP / 02 / 604 ) and press coverage on same ( ' new evidence of risk to humans from cattle growth hormones ' ) , can the Commission state specifically what this new evidence shows and elaborate more fully on the type of health risk that could possibly arise , and does the Commission accept that , in the interests of transparency and credibility , the information they give to the public should be much more specific ?
Would it also be true to state that the Commission has found no firm evidence of a specific risk to human health from the use of such hormones ?
The EU Scientific Committee on Veterinary Measures relating to Public Health was asked to review its previous opinions of April 1999 and May 2000 in the light of any new information , including the results of the studies launched by the Commission .
In its opinion of 10 April 2002 the committee confirmed the risks posed by growth-promoting hormones to consumers that it had identified in its earlier opinions .
In particular the committee concluded in its 1999 opinion that for 17-oestradiol there was a substantial body of evidence that it has to be considered as a complete carcinogen and that it exerts both tumour-initiating and tumour-promoting effects .
No safe threshold could be established for any of the six hormones evaluated , and prepubertal children are the group of greatest concern because of their extremely low levels of endogenous production of hormones .
It was also concluded in 1999 that the adverse effects included developmental , neurobiological , genotoxic and carcinogenic effects .
In saying that " no amendments to those opinions are justified " , the scientists confirmed the validity of the previous opinions .
New evidence was reported on the disposition of esters of 17-oestradiol and their accumulation in edible animal body fats .
This evidence needs to be considered in any exposure assessment as well as the consequences of the newly recognised , more complex metabolisms for synthetic hormones such as trenbolone , zeronol and melengestrol acetates .
The possible adverse effects on human health of these residual metabolites require further assessment .
Finally , recent evidence was noted regarding possible adverse environmental effects .
The Commission considers that its approach to consumer protection in this area is fully justified by scientific advice .
The Commission shares the honourable Member 's views concerning the importance of transparency and credibility , which is why the committee 's opinions are immediately published on the website of the Commission 's Directorate-General for Health and Consumer Protection , together with other relevant information on this issue .
I tabled this question not out of concerns about health or trading issues but out of concern for the credibility of the European Commission .
I was in this Parliament when the ban was introduced originally and I voted for a minority report that was proposed by Professor Tom Raftery , an expert on all these matters .
He firmly believed that the motivation behind the proposal to ban these products was political .
As a German Member of Parliament told me : " Professor Raftery is right , but there is a wave of hysteria in Germany so I must vote against him " .
I do not think that a wave of hysteria is sufficient grounds for legislation by the European Commission .
My understanding is that the Commission 's position is not supported by the best scientific evidence from the United Nations , the United States , Canada , New Zealand or Australia .
These people are not noted for putting the health of their own citizens at risk , and they too base their policies on what they regard as sound scientific advice .
I want to ask the Commission if it agrees with me that in the present climate , when the European Commission is being put into a position of banning so many products and processes - even research itself in some instances - it is extremely important that what we do is seen to be soundly based and reliable .
To do anything else will undermine the long-term credibility of the European Commission .
I believe that we are doing that in this case .
I fully agree with the honourable Member 's assessment of the situation in the sense that I believe that it is absolutely essential that the credibility of the Commission and of Parliament and of the institutions of the European Union be maintained in all respects , but particularly in this respect .
I fully agree with that .
However I have to say , at the risk of repeating myself , that the relevant scientific committee has looked at this now on three separate occasions .
They have furnished their opinions on those occasions , most recently within the last couple of months when they took into account the earlier opinions but also all the relevant up-to-date scientific opinion on this particular issue .
They have come to the conclusion that I have presented to you .
I have to say that when I am engaged in the exercise of risk management , I have to follow the advice of the risk assessors , I have to follow the advice of scientific evidence and scientific opinion .
If I fail to do that , or if any of us fails to do that , in my view we are completely lost .
We are then at sea without a compass .
That is why it is important for us to follow closely the advice that we are given .
And I have to reiterate this is the advice that we have been given and that is why we have followed it closely on this issue .
May I make one further point , while I am on my feet : We are at the moment bringing through legislation in relation to this issue which is in response to the opinion of the WTO some years ago where a particular infirmity was found with our position by the WTO .
That related to only one issue , and that was essentially a procedural issue .
That issue has now been addressed in the amending legislation that is before this House and no doubt it will be discussed by you , Mr McCartin , and indeed other Members when this piece of legislation comes before the House on second reading .
Commissioner , a moment ago , we failed to see eye to eye because I felt you were not answering my questions .
This time , however , I have to give you my unqualified support and say to Mr McCartin , who is usually such a congenial man who I work with very well , that the Commission does carry out very serious work in this area .
Following on from the dispute in the World Trade Organisation , the Commission has commissioned scientists to carry out sound work .
Seventeen studies have been submitted , and it is now beyond scientific doubt that the mutagen 17-beta-ostradiol is genotoxic and carcinogenic .
This is an argument in our dispute in the World Trade Organisation .
I would ask Mr McCartin not to cast any doubt , not even among farmers .
It is clear that the six hormones used in the United States are not as healthy as is claimed , and very much harm public health .
I would like to ask the Commissioner whether you believe , based on the scientific information at your disposal , you now have sufficient arguments in order to finally settle the WTO dispute in favour of the European Union ?

I thank Mr Staes for his support on that issue and I also thank him for his description of Mr McCartin as a friendly man , an opinion with which I would fully agree as a fellow countryman .
There is nothing much I can add to that , other than to say that the purpose of the legislation we are proceeding with at the moment is to bring us into conformity with the WTO ruling .
I do not wish to impose conditions on your questions , but I would remind you that this is Question Time and that you are entitled to argue , but this is not Statement Time .
Mr President , I just wanted to say that it should be announced that we have got on to Question No 2 , as otherwise the Members in the House will not be aware that we have already moved on .
Technology has momentarily failed us ; although the information appears on our little screens , it does not appear on the big one .
I must state that I am unable to resolve the problem .
Members sitting in their offices must count on these events occurring .
We shall appoint you defender of Members ' interests .
Question No 4 by Francisca Sauquillo Prez del Arco ( H-0403 / 02 ) :
Subject : Court case in Equatorial Guinea against leaders of the democratic opposition
On 23 May a court case opens in Equatorial Guinea , without the minimum legal guarantees befitting a constitutional state , against various leaders of the democratic opposition , including Plcido Mic , the leader of Convergencia para la Democracia Social ( Social Democrat Alliance ) ; one of the lawyers representing the accused is under house arrest .
This court case yet again demonstrates the lack of any will on the part of the rgime to meet the commitments given to the international community , including the EU , that it would begin the transition to democracy .
In view of Article 5 of the Lom Convention and Article 9 of the Cotonu Agreement , has the Commission provided for any measures to penalise the continuing rejection of democracy by the regime in Equatorial Guinea ?
The Commission and the Member States on the ground have closely monitored the recent trials in Equatorial Guinea and are deeply concerned at the procedural irregularities they observed .
The EU has called on the relevant Guinean authorities to take the necessary measures to have the sentences reviewed to ensure that the fundamental rights of the accused are respected .
As regards cooperation , following a period of suspension from 1992 to 1997 the Commission signed the national indicative programme for the eighth EDF in July 2000 .
The only project approved to date is aimed at supporting democracy , human rights and good governance .
However , it has not yet begun .
The eighth EDF programme specifically provides that the release of other funds devoted to water and sanitation will be conditional upon a positive evaluation of the human rights situation in the country .
The Commission can therefore take measures without resorting to Article 9 of the Cotonou Agreement .
Mr President , many thanks for the answer given by the Commissioner , which stated that irregularities have indeed taken place .
I would say that what we have seen are more than irregularities : the trial was a farce and should be declared null and void .
As the Commissioner knows very well , thanks to the media and to the international observers , the witnesses arrived having been tortured the day before and the trial ended with the leaders of the democratic opposition being sentenced to twenty years in prison .
By acting in this way , the Government of Equatorial Guinea has proven that it fails to meet the minimum requirements of democracy and good governance .
The President of the European Council made a fine statement yesterday expressing his concern , but I do not think this will be enough .
What is needed is for tangible measures to be taken ; the President of that country cannot be allowed to continue travelling freely in Europe .
I would , therefore , like the Commissioner to tell me what tangible actions the Commission foresees taking apart from those he has already mentioned .
I note what the honourable Member has said in her supplementary question .
In particular I am aware that my colleague , Mr Nielson , who is the lead Commissioner on this matter , will fully take into account the issue she has raised .
Mr President , Commissioner , when Mr Obiang , the President of Equatorial Guinea , visited Brussels two years ago and met President Prodi , he gave him commitments to democratisation and to respect human rights , commitments which have been blatantly flouted , something made crystal clear by the trial - if it can be called a trial - that has just taken place .
Furthermore , it is also true that the European Union , only a few months ago , voted in the United Nations Human Rights Commission for a Resolution stating that the regime in Equatorial Guinea was taking steps towards democracy and towards respecting human rights .
I think that what has happened clearly shows that the commitments Mr Obiang gave to Mr Prodi have not been met .


And the issue is this : is Mr Prodi - as President of the Commission - going to speak to Mr Obiang - as President of Equatorial Guinea - to demand explanations as to the degree to which those commitments are being complied with in view of this trial - I repeat , if it can be called a trial - that has taken place ?
I know that contact has been made with the government in question .
Views have been expressed and opinions imparted to them so that the government there is in no doubt as to the views of the European Union relating to this issue .
Before proceeding to the next question and because I share Mr Rbig 's concern , I must clearly state that the corresponding questions do not appear on the screen because the system has broken down .
Members who are now in their offices and who wish to follow this debate should take this into account and come down into the hemicycle .
Question No 5 by Jorge Salvador Hernndez Mollar ( H-0404 / 02 ) :
Subject : Illegal immigration to the EU from Morocco
The Association Agreement with Morocco includes among its areas for priority action the need for dialogue to deal with illegal immigration and the conditions of return and the need to reduce migratory pressure .
The ' action plan for asylum and migration ' for Morocco emphasises that Morocco 's failure to require visas of emigrants crossing its territory facilitates the entry of illegal immigrants into the EU and makes returning them difficult since proofs cannot be supplied .
On 18 September 2000 , the General Affairs Council mandated the Commission to negotiate a general EU-Morocco agreement on the return of immigrants .
Can the Commission state what initiatives for dialogue are under way under the Association Agreement ?
Does it consider it possible to use financial cooperation with Morocco as a lever for ensuring compliance with Title VI of the Agreement ?
Does it believe that pressure can be put in the immediate future on Morocco to make visas compulsory for third-country nationals , as a means of preventing irregular entry into the EU ?
Can it provide information on the state of play as regards negotiation of the above-mentioned agreement on the return of immigrants ?
Can the Commission take steps to ensure that the Member States and the European Parliament are kept informed , now and in the future and on a regular basis , on the progress of the negotiations ?
Part II
As you can see : at the fifty-fifth minute of this Question Time we are on Question 5 and the honourable Member has asked five distinct questions in his question .
I shall respond to them all .
On question 1 , in the framework of the agreement the parties have established a working group on migration and social affairs .
It has met twice so far and migration issues have been discussed in three categories : socio-economic development , support for legal migration and combating illegal migration .
A series of informal thematic meetings on specific issues in these categories is anticipated this year and next year .
In addition , a dialogue to prepare the MEDA-funded projects related to migration has been established .
On question 2 , the Commission continually monitors the implementation of projects and programmes to ensure fulfilment of the said objectives .
The dialogue on migration is making good progress and there are no indications that cooperation will not sustain progress in future .
The Commission will of course take the satisfactory implementation of the association agreement into account when it decides on the allocation of future funds .
On question 3 , the introduction of visas for third country nationals is a measure that the Moroccan authorities will need to consider .
We can discuss that in the dialogue under the association agreement .
If a visa system did help to curb the influx of illegal migrants through Morocco 's southern and eastern borders the Commission could look favourably at supporting Moroccan initiatives for introducing such arrangements .
On question 4 , in September 2000 the Council approved negotiating directives for a Community re-admission agreement with Morocco .
After several high-level meetings last year , the Moroccans eventually agreed to enter into an informal dialogue on re-admission .
The Commission has suggested formal negotiations being launched before the end of next month .
Finally , on question 5 , whenever the Commission is authorised or mandated by the Council to negotiate a Community re-admission agreement with a third country it conducts negotiations in accordance with the relevant directives and in full compliance with the procedures set down in Article 300 of the Treaty .
That makes provision for Parliament to be comprehensively informed about , and consulted on , the final outcome of negotiations .
In addition , of course , the Commission is manifestly ready to inform the relevant parliamentary committees whenever it is invited to do so .
Commissioner , I am grateful for your answer but I want to say this : in the last five-year period , 4 000 Moroccan and sub-Saharan immigrants have died in the waters of the Straits of Gibraltar and off the coasts of the Canary Islands and , unfortunately hundreds of Moroccan minors crossing borders into the Spanish towns of Ceuta and Melilla are causing reception centres to overflow and have furthermore been committing serious attacks on the employees of those centres .
I feel , Commissioner , that Morocco must shoulder its responsibilities and these facts prove that it is not fulfilling its duties .
I therefore ask you again , Commissioner , do you not think , given the gravity of this situation , that the current financial framework of aid to Morocco should be made dependent on its fulfilling its obligations in the field of immigration and of the control of its borders with the European Union ?
I am grateful to the honourable Member as he points out the consequences of efforts to reach the continent of Europe are often terribly tragic , involving large numbers of casualties and deaths .
The pressures on the system in Spain and other countries are self-evident .
There is , however , a dilemma in seeking to use a financial framework for the purposes of moving the Moroccan authorities more in the direction that the honourable Member would want .
I am sure he is conscious of that dilemma and aware that any risk or threat to financial support could weaken the system even further , and that would simply exacerbate the problem we are dealing with .
I can reassure him that the Commission is very actively engaged in trying to ensure that the best standards are set and maintained and will use all its endeavours to that end .
Mr President , with the association agreement that is currently being negotiated with Morocco , this is now the time when this issue is beginning to gather strength and when the agricultural concessions that will be granted are to be discussed .
European farmers are extremely concerned at the negotiating proposal that is being planned by the European Commission or which , at least , has been announced in the press .
The Commission appears to prefer to negotiate over the export of cereals , milk , meat and oilseed rather than to go for a 5 % annual increase , but is echoing Morocco 's calls to reach 217 000 tonnes of the tomato quota , which is something that really concerns European farmers , especially all fruit and vegetable growers .
I should like to ask the Commissioner whether what has been written in the press is true or whether the Commission 's idea is that this burden of proof should be divided equally among all European countries and that it should not always be the farming sector that foots the bill for the association agreement being negotiated with Morocco .
I have the feeling , Mrs Redondo Jimnez , that we are talking about illegal immigration .
I am not going to interfere , however .
The Commissioner is , of course , entitled to answer the question if he wishes .
As you point out , Mr President , the question raised by the honourable Member is not the question that has been tabled .
I can assure her , however , that there is no sphere in which the Commission will act irresponsibly .
We strive to ensure that there is effective burden-sharing , but I am mindful of the fact that we are counselled continually by those who are expert in this field that a more liberal attitude towards the purchase of goods from Third World countries would do more to stimulate world trade and conquer poverty , and thereby stem immigration , than possibly any other measure .
Mr President , the question actually referred to illegal immigration but , in this context , I should like to ask the Commissioner whether he sees that immigration is the other side of the coin of development and whether he understands that we are talking about many illegal immigrants who come from Morocco and from throughout northern Africa .
How can we accept the contradiction that the MEDA Programme has been shrinking in the current three-year period and that the reduction in the preliminary draft budget for 2003 is quite drastic - 470 % less in real terms ?
Does the Commissioner not see that this is crazy and that in order to combat this illegal immigration we have to undertake development programmes on the other side of the Mediterranean ?
The honourable Member is right to indicate that the spur for migration - indeed including legal migration - is frequently poverty and the sense of hopelessness about the future that makes people desperate enough to uproot themselves and to seek to move to countries with which they have no familiarity either in terms of language or custom .
It is true to say that development policies must be partly geared to trying to combat poverty to provide people with a workable , reasonable alternative to moving themselves and their families to other parts of the world .
It is important , however , that when the Community allocates funds for trying to combat poverty and provide the basis for sustainable development , those funds are fully and effectively spent .
Upon examination , what the honourable Member will see is not any meanness or narrowness in the attitude taken to the MEDA programme .
On the contrary , the attitude towards financing the MEDA programme has much more to do with a desire to ensure efficient , value-for-money spending with proper , generous effects for the people who should be the recipients of such development support , rather than simply having figures on a budget which can look impressive but have less impressive consequences .
Question No 6 by Christopher Heaton-Harris ( H-0431 / 02 ) :
Subject : The Berlaymont Building
What are the latest developments in negotiations between the European Commission and the Belgian Government over the renovations to the Berlaymont Building ?
What are the current projected costs ?
When does the Commission expect , if ever , to reoccupy the building ?
Will the Commission forward the cost-benefit analysis of the Berlaymont project to the European Parliament ?
Does the Commission feel that European and Belgian taxpayers are receiving proper value for money ?
Is the Commission satisfied with the quality and efficiency of the work being carried out on the Berlaymont Building ?
Mr Heaton-Harris has put six distinct questions .
I will answer them all , but it will unfortunately take a few minutes .
The first question : firstly , in the memorandum of understanding signed by the Belgian Minister Mr Rik Dams and me on behalf of the Commission on 17 July 2001 , it was anticipated that the negotiations on the Berlaymont should be concluded by the end of December 2001 .
However , on 14 December , I was informed by the minister that Belgium would not be ready to discuss financial questions until February because he was expecting the outcome of relevant audits .
The audit reports eventually became available to him in March and intensive negotiations then started .
Since then , the positions of the Belgian Government and the Commission have become closer , but we have not yet reached final agreement on the price that the Commission would be willing to pay or on legal guarantees which are required by the Commission .
Negotiations are therefore continuing .
I will take questions 2 and 3 together .
The Belgian authorities have confirmed that the current estimated costs of the basic renovated building are EUR 605 million and the Government has confirmed its intention to make the building fit for reoccupation by 31 December 2003 .
The history of this project means , however , that the Commission considers that certainty about the realistic hand-over date can only be established when a specific date has been fixed in a contract that will also make provision for financial penalties for late delivery .
Question 4 : Before the Commission enters into a binding contract with the Belgian Government , we will naturally provide the budgetary authority with an analysis of the outcome of the negotiations held with the Belgian government .
As I have indicated on several occasions , the Commission 's negotiating position is based on an independent analysis of the total cost as well as on those costs that are due to the numerous delays encountered in the renovation project .
Question 5 : I can confirm that throughout all the discussions and activities related to the Berlaymont question , the Commission has been motivated by the absolute need to ensure value for money in the use of Community funds .
That will continue to be a major pre-condition for a satisfactory conclusion of the negotiations with Belgium .
Finally , question 6 : The technical description of the building will be legally binding and there will be legal guarantees for the quality delivered .
By these means , we will ensure that the final product satisfies high standards of quality .
As regards efficiency , the Commission has made it very clear that we are deeply dissatisfied with the fact that the original deadline was not respected and , even more importantly , that it has changed on numerous occasions .
As I have said to Parliament and to the Belgian Government , I believe that many of the difficulties encountered in this project are due to serious management problems that originated with the management structure of Berlaymont 2000 .
I have a couple of supplementary questions .
In principle is the Commission absolutely committed to reoccupying the Berlaymont building ?
If not , when do you believe the final decision will be taken within the college of the Commission ?
Is there any sort of timetable within the Commission for looking at these procedures ?
How will the final cost of EUR 605 million be borne within the European budget ?
I am grateful to the honourable Member because he provides me with an opportunity to further spell out the Commission 's approach .
The EUR 605 million is what the negotiations are all about , so I am not yet in a position to be able to say to him whether that overall price is satisfactory to us , whether it meets the needs we have or what our eventual position following the conclusion of negotiations will be about that price .
As far as the final decision in the College is concerned , that too is dependent on the satisfactory outcome of negotiations ; and I have specified the fundamental considerations there .
The price , if we are to reoccupy the Berlaymont , has to be satisfactory ; the quality has to be acceptable ; there have to be legal guarantees ; and these are preconditions for our eventual reoccupation of the Berlaymont .
Until those conditions are satisfied , I cannot specify a date for a final decision in the College .
I hope that it will not be long delayed .
It is in nobody 's interest for the existing uncertainty to be continued .
I have , then , virtually answered the first question as to whether we are absolutely committed to reoccupying the renovated building .
It is our preference to do so for a large number of reasons , not least the fact that possession of the building in something like 27 years would give us a very valuable piece of real estate in an extremely intensively developed part of Brussels .
We are also aware that the logistical convenience of the Commission would be served by being able to reoccupy that building , but we will not reoccupy under any conditions ; and therefore it is crucial that if we are to consider , finally , reoccupation of the Berlaymont Building , we are confident that the requirements relating to price and value , which we have made very clear throughout , are satisfied .
I would like Mr Kinnock to elaborate on his last answer and just to confirm , in the light of the very extensive organisational reforms , and all that is implied in some of the changes of responsibility , out-sourcing , and the new technology , whether he is really satisfied that the Berlaymont is going to be the appropriate home for the new re-focused Commission .
Alongside that , I wonder if I might invite him , given that yesterday this Parliament finally received formally the package for the reform of the Staff Regulations , to say what his expectations are in terms of our scrutiny of this very important package given that it is of course tied in with a number of important considerations , such as the pay package , ' le mthode ' , and what he would like to see the Parliament do in terms of timing and other work on this important package .
I am grateful , as ever , to Mr Harbour for illuminating questions .
On the second point , I should like to take this opportunity of saying what I told the Bureau of Parliament earlier today , and I have said it to many parliamentarians : the package of proposed reforms of the Staff Regulations are now before Parliament and the Council .
Everyone 's interests would be served - in particular Parliament 's interests - if it were possible for Parliament to arrive at its opinion this year , simply because that would then facilitate consideration of any revisions that Parliament proposed or any opinions that it presented .
Consideration of those features could then take place properly in the early months of 2003 .
If we receive Parliament 's opinion late , then that , obviously , would put pressure on the time available for the proper consideration of Parliament 's opinion .
On the first question , we believe that a properly equipped modern facility Berlaymont would , at the right price , be an appropriate home for the European Commission .
There is no doubt about that .
Certainly , with the additional pressures that are coming with an unprecedented enlargement , that emphasises the case .
However desirable and however appropriate the Berlaymont is - and we have made that clear throughout - the acceptability of the Berlaymont is conditional upon the satisfaction of standards of quality and the negotiation and conclusion on a reasonable price .
Until those conditions are satisfied , we cannot conclusively say that we would definitely go back into the Berlaymont , however desirable it may be in terms of location and facility .
Thank you very much for your cooperation , Commissioner .
Questions to Mr Liikanen
Mr President , it is a real procedural motion this time .
By this , I mean that some MEPs , myself included at times , take advantage of this possibility , but this is a real procedural motion .
I am a loyal customer of question time .
I therefore prepare my questions .
I knew that Mr Kinnock would be present , and I therefore asked Mr Kinnock a very specific question .
This is question No 18 about language use in the European institutions .
The services of Parliament have included this question in the third section , that is , the second question in the third section , although it was an explicit question for Mr Kinnock .
I do not understand this .
I will now only receive a written reply , while I might have wanted to ask Mr Kinnock additional questions .
Can you explain to me how the procedure worked in this case , and why a question addressed to Mr Kinnock still ends up in the third section ?
I take very good note of your comments , but as you know , and as laid down in the Rules of Procedure , it is the President , together with his cabinet , who sets the order and the allocation of questions to the Commission , and the Commission decides which question each Commissioner shall answer .
Your question has been scheduled for the end of the day , in the third part , which is certain to be answered in writing .
These are the provisions laid down in the Rules of Procedure and we will not be entering into a debate on the matter .
This is how things stand .
As the author is not present , Questions No 7 lapses .
Question No 8 by Pat the Cope Gallagher ( H-0383 / 02 ) , which has been taken over by Mr Crowley :
Subject : Measures to boost the European tourism industry
Following the recent informal meeting of tourism ministers and the stakeholders ' seminar organised by the Spanish Presidency , can the Commission indicate what concrete measures it will propose to boost the European tourist industry , given the particular importance of the industry and job-creation potential within regions which , because of their peripheral location , have few other generators of economic growth and prosperity ?
In its Communication " Working together for the future of European Tourism " , the Commission proposed an operational framework with the aim of strengthening European tourism .
This Communication and the Parliament resolution on European tourism , and the Council Resolution on the future of European tourism , provide the basis for concrete measures to be undertaken .
But first of all , I would like to thank the European Parliament for its high involvement in promoting tourism as is shown by this question from the honourable Member .
Recently , just in May , we had an opportunity to debate tourism , when the European Parliament adopted the report of Ms Torres Marques .
The resolution supports our proposals and encourages us to implement and follow them up carefully .
Let me now turn to some of the concrete measures which will be taken .
The main objective is to incorporate tourism in Community policies and measures favouring an integrated approach .
We need to improve cooperation between tourism stakeholders , notably social partners , including an annual European Tourism Forum .
We will organise this forum for the first time in December this year in Brussels .
We want to promote stakeholder access to Community instruments , involving also local authorities and the private sector .
We are mobilising existing survey , analysis , competence and support centres for the development of knowledge and observation regarding tourism .
This has been a major request by the European Parliament .
More specifically , we will look at Tourism Satellite Accounts to measure the economic impact of tourism , and on a European Agenda 21 for tourism to promote the sustainable development of tourism .
Finally , we need to strengthen the position and image of Europe as a diverse and attractive set of destinations .
This was a major discussion point at the informal meeting of the tourism ministers , to which the honourable Member refers in his question .
These measures benefit all types of regions in Europe , also those with a peripheral location .
A considerable share of Structural Funds made available to the Member States supports tourism , both directly and indirectly .
Less densely-populated , rural or peripheral regions can therefore make good use of the possibility offered in this context to create jobs and to generate economic growth .
For the mainstream programmes which represent over 90 % of the financial envelope available in the Structural Funds , the Commission has set clear guidelines which explicitly encourage the support of a balanced and sustainable development of tourism , in particular through three activities :
Firstly , the modernisation of tourism-related infrastructures and the improvement of their efficiency ;
Secondly , upgrading skills and professional profiles in order to respond better to the expectations of tourists and the needs of the industry ;
Thirdly , encouraging business-to-business partnerships , public-private cooperation and networking in order to improve the integration of the different services involved in the ' tourism chain ? .
In the context of the diversification of activities in rural areas , there are also funds allocated in the framework of Rural Development Programmes by the European Agriculture Guarantee and Guidance Funds .
These measures try to improve the attractiveness of the villages and rural areas , protecting nature and historical and cultural heritage .
Tourism related measures are also financed with the Funds allocated to the Community Initiative LEADER + improving the quality of life of the rural areas .
In conclusion , tourism development should be carefully planned so as to take into consideration the carrying capacity of the site with regard to environmental , social and economic impacts .
I should like to thank the Commissioner for his response to the question .
I have three follow-up points in relation to what you have said .
Firstly , with regard to sustainable tourism , obviously tourism is best dealt with where you have human populations .
Therefore maintaining people in rural areas and in peripheral areas of the European Union is a better way of encouraging more tourism to those areas .
On that particular point , would a proposal with regard to the worldwide marketing of the European Union as a tourist destination be considered - not necessarily funded or put in place , but just considered ?
Secondly , can we utilise already existing airline hubs to ensure that peripheral areas can be serviced into those areas as well ?
The European Commission has already given approval for marketing support to small regional airports because of their importance in creating tourism and economic development .
There is a necessity and an urgency with regard to ensuring that those people who make investments in the tourism product and the tourism area are given the necessary back-up marketing and structural supports from the European Union programmes , which are sometimes denied them because they have already made capital investments themselves .
In reply to the honourable Member , I would say this : first of all , we discussed in a ministerial meeting - and since that we have included in the Europe Action Plan 2005 - a possibility to create a European-wide portal which would provide easy access to all European destinations .
If this were to be done as a project between the Member States , of course according to their choice , these kinds of peripheral , lesser-known but exciting areas would be better marketed .
Secondly , I agree with you that in those areas where there is a rural population it is easier to guarantee sustainable development .
If the marketing is well done there are a lot of tourists who will chose these types of destinations .
But it is difficult for companies to reach rural populations .
Concentrated Internet marketing would be the cheapest way .
Finally , on the investment issue , I should know more of the details of the fund which the Member is talking about .
I am sure that we can come back to this issue later .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to ask the Commissioner what he will do to get the effects of Basle II to promote tourism enterprises ?
The present situation is that tourism enterprises do not , as a rule , have equity capital , are financed in the long term , and rating is too expensive for them .
In the Budget guidelines , Parliament proposed the drawing up of an action plan , quite simply in order to avoid mass bankruptcies and a great increase in unemployment in this sector .
As far as Basle II is concerned , thanks to the great attention paid to this issue by Parliament - and Mr Rbig in particular - the Commission is carefully following and participating in the preparations .
Before any decisions are made , we will have open consultation with all the stakeholders so that nobody will be taken by surprise .
The interests of European SMEs have indeed been communicated for inclusion in that preparatory work .
I fully agree with you that SMEs in general and tourism enterprises in particular , which often do not have much equity capital , are most vulnerable if borrowing or lending become too tight .
We need to pay particular attention to that .
The problem is that real banking activities are run in Member States by private financial institutions .
Our scope is therefore limited .
Question No 9 by Astrid Thors ( H-0449 / 02 ) :
Subject : Migration to an open API
How does the Commission intend to encourage and organise migration from existing APIs to a single open API in the following months ?
How does the Commission intend to organise the dialogue on such migration ?
Will the Commission restrict this dialogue only to industry and technical experts , or is it willing to open this dialogue also to consumer groups and members of the European Parliament ?
The honourable Member 's question concerning migration to an open API for application programs is about operational compatibility for interactive TV services .
There are three parts to the question .
First part : How does the Commission intend to promote and organise migration from existing APIs to a single API ?
The provisions of Article 18 of European Parliament and Council Directive 2002 / 21 / EC on a common regulatory framework for electronic communications networks and services ( Framework Directive ) includes a legal requirement for the Member States to promote transparency when it comes to making APIs available for application programs .
The provisions do not include a requirement for any particular API technology or a single API .
The standard for multimedia home platforms ( or MHPs ) fulfils the requirements for operational compatibility and transparency in this area .
We are therefore encouraging industry to introduce this standard voluntarily .
The MHP standard will be included in the list of standards published in the Official Journal of the European Communities in accordance with the directive .
The Member States are responsible for encouraging use of the standards included in the list .
We anticipate the list 's being published this autumn .
According to the directive , the Member States must also carry out a review of operational compatibility and user options before July 2004 .
The directive contains a procedure for making use of a standard compulsory .
That is one of the issues which will be addressed in the proposed review .
The second part of the question is as follows : How does the Commission intend to organise the dialogue in connection with such a migration ?
The Information Society Directorate-General has initiated a dialogue with industry on operational compatibility for interactive TV services .
Operational compatibility has been set up as the most important objective , and standardisation is part of the solution .
There is a lack of agreement within industry as to what operational compatibility actually involves .
We have therefore taken measures to give some impetus to the dialogue .
First of all , we have asked the Digital Video Broadcasting ( or DVB ) Group to investigate the technical operational compatibility of interactive services .
Secondly , we have begun an investigation of the strategic aspects of operational compatibility so as to have access to an independent analysis later this year .
Consumer issues are among those covered by the analysis .
Finally , we have asked the standardisation body , CENELEC , to carry out a preliminary investigation of the standardisation of digital TV and interactive TV services .
Their brief will be to analyse the present technical position and come up with recommendations .
The third part of the question concerns whether the Commission will restrict the dialogue exclusively to industry and have it cover only technical aspects .
In fact , it is also willing to open the dialogue to consumer groups and Members of the European Parliament .
I am very well disposed to participation by MEPs and consumer groups .
The dialogue must , however , have a stable technical basis , and that is what we are at present concentrating upon .
The political debate must be preceded by careful investigations of issues such as operational compatibility .
The decision makers must understand what alternatives there are and what the consequences of these would be .
It is a process which shows that the Commission is following up the commitment it made in the December plenary .
The Commissioner is right in saying that the decision makers should ideally understand what they are talking about .
That is something on which we completely agree .
I am also pleased that you indicated the timetable for publication of the standard .
If , however , we look at developments in Europe and at the almost daily contributions to Finnish newspapers too , there is a prevailing uncertainty - even in Finland , as one of the countries to have signed a memorandum of understanding - as to whether the same standard will be used by cable , satellite and terrestrial operators .
The question , therefore , is : Does the Commissioner think that 2004 is adequate as a deadline ?
In fact , we are in something of a ' chicken and egg ' situation where developments within digital TV are concerned .
May I ask the Commissioner if the issue of digital TV is in some way to be touched upon again before Seville ?
I want to give two answers .
Where the Seville Summit is concerned , digital TV will be included in the Europe 2005 action plan .
I personally believe that digital television will play a major role in the information society in the longer term because the Internet must also be available via television if we really want the whole population to use it .
In December , we decided that industry should be given a year in which to adapt , once the directive had entered into force , and we must keep to that commitment .
I very much appreciate , however , that we perhaps must do more in the course of time to guarantee that everyone who participates in the process is aware that , if a solution does not come about on a voluntary basis , the Commission has a mandate to act .
Question No 10 by Gary Titley ( H-0450 / 02 ) :
Subject : Regulatory impact assessments of SMEs
The European Commission 's Communication on the creation of an interinstitutional network to develop instruments of impact assessment is most welcome .
Indeed , attempts to achieve better regulation will only be successful when the European institutions cooperate .
Since the Parliament enjoys the power of codecision in many business-related domains and MEPs ' votes therefore have a direct impact on the regulation , how is the Commission planning to take forward its proposals and what concrete plans has it to involve the European Parliament in its strategy ?
The Better Regulation package that the Commission adopted last week sets out a number of fundamental principles that will be followed in future policy and legislative proposals .
In particular , it establishes that all the Commission 's proposals presented in the Annual Policy Strategy and later in the Work Programme will undergo a proportionate integrated impact assessment and that all departments will follow uniform minimum standards on consultation .
Briefly , it aims at more transparent , efficient and cost-effective lawmaking .
Such tools should significantly contribute to improving the quality and coherence of policy design by the European institutions .
A strong and solid knowledge base for policy making is crucial if the European institutions are to improve the regulatory environment .
The challenge is to ensure a high level of protection for European citizens in sensitive areas such as the environment , health and consumer protection , while avoiding over-regulation , which damages growth and employment prospects .
However , to meet our common objective of simplifying the Union 's legislative environment , in particular for European small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) , there is a need to increase interinstitutional cooperation , including cooperation on impact assessments by Parliament and the Council .
The Commission has been calling for this , proposing that a permanent interinstitutional mechanism be created to implement its Action Plan , in order to ensure the quality of legislation .
In addition , during his presentation of the Better Regulation package to the Conference of Presidents at Parliament on 5 June , President Prodi renewed the appeal for an interinstitutional agreement on some of the proposed actions .
Hopefully , progress will soon be achieved .
Encouraging discussions have already started between the three institutions .
In formally adopting new tools for impact analysis and consultation , the Commission also wants to promote a new culture of transparency , participation and challenge .
All parties concerned by its proposals will be invited to contribute with their views and expertise .
Parliament has a crucial role to play in this process of cultural change .
I welcome Commissioner Liikanen 's statement and his communication , which is a major step forward .
Could the Commissioner tell me if , as part of the impact assessment that the Commission will be carrying out , there will be a rigorous cost / benefit analysis of the Commission 's proposal , taking into account all factors ?
Secondly , given that the Commission proposes to do this before making proposals which then go before the Council and Parliament , how does it envisage following the amendments being made by the Council and Parliament to ensure that there is an impact assessment of those amendments ?
I recognise that what he has done is lay down the gauntlet to Parliament to get its act together on carrying out assessments of its own amendments .
Far too often Parliament passes amendments on important legislation with no consideration for its impact .
I hope the Commission will be able to work with Parliament and the Council in order to ensure an on-going process .
As far as this impact assessment on the business side is concerned , we are very advanced .
We had a two-year project to consolidate methodology on business impact assessments , we have organised a public hearing and consultation on that and I am happy to give all this information to the honourable Member .
So it is well advanced and I hope that by the end of the year we will be in the phase that all the new major proposals will go through this kind of profound assessment .
As to the role of the other institutions , in the spirit of open and transparent legislation it will be important that the Parliament and the Council also include the same logic .
That is not for the Commission to decide .
If the Parliament , the Council and the Commission agree on the principles , the Commission 's impact assessment already must have analysed different parameters and that information will be available and helpful to assess the amendments .
If any further work needs to be done , I am sure the Commission is very willing to cooperate .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the following assessment is of great and special importance for us , as bankruptcies have gone up over the past year by an average of 19 % in the European Union , and in Germany by 32 % .
As regards the impact assessment , Commissioner , will you now have it worked out in the planned Green Paper on entrepreneurship , what European legislation has contributed to it and what can be done so that there are fewer bankruptcies in future ?
I agree that it is important to have fewer bankruptcies , but this paper on entrepreneurship is intended to be a more basic analysis of the entrepreneurship dilemma in Europe : why are entrepreneurs so respected and appreciated and yet so few people want to become entrepreneurs ?
The second problem is that those who want to become entrepreneurs want to stay manager-owners but do not want to grow .
Why are so few prepared to take risks ?
We will analyse that in the broader sense but without neglecting Mr Rbig 's point of view .
I would also like to compliment Mr Liikanen on the work that he has done on business impact assessment .
I would like to press him a bit further , first of all , on the timing about when he expects this consistent methodology to be working throughout the directorates of the entire Commission .
Secondly ; does he feel that there is a need for some independent assessment ?
Might there be a danger that the impact assessments being done by the directorates-general themselves would perhaps be a little too favourable towards the proposals ?
Thirdly , would he agree with me that the logic followed through by my colleague Mr Titley , is that we really ought to be thinking in terms of having an independent regulatory assessment unit operating institutionally , which would provide a true external verification on impact assessment for all the European institutions ?
On the first question , the commitment of the Commission is to start impact assessment gradually from the beginning of next year for all major proposals .
That is a commitment for the whole Commission .
I am sure the President will ensure that all the Directorates General will follow that .
I agree that an independent view on the assessment is a very valid one .
When discussions take place between institutions , that is a good question to raise in that context .
The Commission has no final view on that matter .
I am ready to pass this question to my colleagues .
I am sure that you will also discuss it in your context .
Thank you very much , Mr Liikanen .
Mr President , on a point of order , it was a big disappointment that President Prodi did not present his reform package on regulation to a Conference of Presidents open to all Members .
Could you transmit this back to President Cox to say that many of us felt that as it was such an important announcement we should all have been involved in that announcement .
I am sure the Commission would have benefited from that .
We take good note of your comments .
We thank Mr Liikanen .
Questions to Commissioner De Palacio
Question No 12 by Joachim Wuermeling ( H-0364 / 02 ) , which has been taken over by Mrs Mller :
Subject : Dramatic increase in east-west traffic
Heavy goods traffic between the European Union and the candidate countries is increasing steadily owing to growth in trade .
In the last five years , for instance , the number of lorries passing through customs clearance at border crossings between the Czech Republic and Bavaria has risen by 50 % .
What further increase in road freight traffic is the Commission expecting in the next few years , in particular after accession ?
Are Member States ' road-building plans sufficient to accommodate the additional volume of traffic ?
What action is the Commission taking to prevent bottlenecks that are emerging ?
Mr President , the White Paper on European transport policy lays down that , unless new and wide-ranging initiatives are adopted , by 2010 traffic from heavy goods vehicles will increase by between 40 % and 50 % in comparison to its 1998 levels .
Experience suggests that the growth of transport , especially in border regions , will speed up as a result of enlargement .
In the aim of dealing with the bottlenecks caused by this situation , the White Paper puts forward a policy designed to ensure a return to balance between the various forms of transport .
It is appropriate that a considerable part of this growth in transport should take place in infrastructures other than roads , such as the railways , inland waterways or maritime transport .
The broad aim of the Commission proposal revising the decision on the guidelines for the trans-European transport network is to reduce bottlenecks .
In this context , the Commission has proposed adding a set of links to the applicant countries .
In order to improve East-West corridors , it has also proposed two new priority projects , which are : the combined transport project , the high-speed Stuttgart-Vienna rail link and the project to improve the Danube between Vilshoffen and Straubin .
Furthermore , the Commission has proposed amending the Regulation laying down general rules for the granting of Community financial aid in the field of trans-European networks , increasing the upper limits for cofinancing , from the current 10 % to 20 % , of investment costs , in exceptional cases , including projects carried out at borders with candidate countries .
The Commission intends to carry out a broader review of all the trans-European networks in 2004 , bearing in mind the new shape of the European Union , in other words , the shape arising from enlargement .
With regard to the transport of goods by rail we have already presented , not only the first rail package that was adopted a year and a half ago , but also the second rail package that is intended , precisely , to boost the rail transport of goods , producing a railway fit for the twenty-first century , which is dynamic , competitive with roads , geared towards the customer and which , consequently , provides a high-quality service .
I hope that the work in this Parliament and in the Council of Ministers will enable us soon to give the green light to these extremely important measures .
Lastly , in the field of logistics , thanks to the new Marco Polo project , designed to promote interoperability and to subsidise the development of alternatives to road transport , companies in the candidate countries will be able to obtain economic aid if they make their request for it in conjunction with a European Union company .
Thank you , Commissioner , for giving such comprehensive information .
Mr Wuermeling and I are generally concerned about this as , in the border regions from which we come , the increase in the volume of traffic is not merely between 40 % and 50 % , but in excess of that figure .
People living along the main roads in border areas have to cope with traffic jams , noise and gas emissions .
When they travel to work , they constantly do so trailing behind HGVs from the Czech Republic , Slovakia , Romania and Bulgaria .
As a supplementary question , I would like to ask , as you have mentioned that railways are to receive special support , whether , in the meantime , measures have been taken or supported to transfer freight from road to rail in border regions , and whether you have had discussions about this with the German railways .
That is my supplementary question .
Clearly , the increase in traffic will indeed be highly concentrated in border areas and for this very reason , we are promoting , through various projects , a return to rail goods transport in the fifteen current Member States of the European Union and also the maintenance of railways as a mode of transport in the candidate countries .
In other words , even with the pre-accession funds , we are trying to ensure that the candidate countries do not dump their transport onto the roads and that they maintain a percentage at least equivalent to the current figure in the rail sector .
I am aware of the problems , the trouble and the annoyance caused to communities living next to major road transport arteries and this is why we are looking at how we can improve the quality of this traffic .
We have spoken with Deutsche Bahn , of course , and , next year , the first railway package will enter into force , which will mean , first of all , that the European Union will have , for the first time , a European railway network , which does not currently exist , that we will be able to move beyond national railway networks and that we will integrate these national networks into a European network .
Through this European network , the various transport operators , Deutsche Bahn amongst others , will compete against one another , enjoying non-discriminatory access to it .
I believe that with these systems , and then with the introduction in the coming years of common or at least interoperable technical standards , we will be able to build a genuine European rail network that can really compete with road transport .
Madam President , I am very grateful for that reply .
I must start by apologising for my somewhat late arrival , but I am glad that I managed to get here .
As you will be aware , we are reforming our Rules of Procedure , a process in which I play a part as a shadow rapporteur , and people are getting very touchy about it all .
I would like to start by thanking the Commission for committing itself to plugging the gaps between the trans-European transport network in the European Union and the TINA network in the candidate countries .
That is very important .
It has submitted proposals for completing the trans-European networks and has also made financial commitments in this connection .
This is , in my view , a very good thing .
In the regions we live in , individual infrastructure projects are now , of course , the subject of heated debate .
The reason why I am putting this supplementary question is that we still do not have a more or less reliable indication of by what percentage freight traffic , in particular , is expected to increase .
It would be very important for us to know that , as it would also be for the public , for whom new transport links bring disadvantages to be endured .
Ladies and gentlemen , we do not know the exact percentage .
We only have projections and forecasts and , as I said in my first speech , the forecast is of an increase of around 50 % in road transport - between 40 % and 50 % - in the next ten years , in other words , by 2010 .
This is the general forecast ; it is clearly quite possible , however , that the rate will be greater in some areas .
The basis for this is the latest extensions to have been made : for example , the Iberian Peninsula - in its road link with France through the Pyrenees , or the integration of the Scandinavian countries , in their road links with the rest of the continent , or Austria .
There is no doubt that enlargement automatically produces a qualitative and quantitative increase in road links , but we cannot give you more specific figures , apart from the general forecasts of around 50 % by the year 2010 .
Question No 13 by Alexandros Alavanos ( H-0369 / 02 ) :
Subject : New unlawful aid granted to Olympic Airways
In its letter set out in Official Journal C 98 of 23 April 2002 , the Commission addressed to Greece an ' order to provide information on the implementation of Article 10 of Council Regulation ( EC ) 659 / 1999
Mr President , on 6 March 2002 the Commission decided to initiate a normal review procedure , pursuant to Article 88 ( 2 ) of the EC Treaty , with regard to the possible illegal use of State aid authorised by the Commission in previous decisions in 1994 and 1998 , as well as the legality of new aid that has just been granted to Olympic Airways .
The Greek Government was notified of the decision and sent its comments on more than one occasion .
The Commission 's decision was also published in the Official Journal , so that interested third parties could send their comments to the Commission within the space of one month .
This deadline ended on 23 May 2002 , the date on which the Commission received comments from the parties concerned .
The Commission will take a final decision once it has studied in great detail the comments sent by the Greek authorities and by interested third parties who have made a formal representation on the matter .
The Commission cannot comment on fundamental issues before issuing its final statement on the allegations made in its decision of 6 March 2002 .
I thank the Commissioner .
But one thing puzzles me .
The question of the 1994 aid , which the Commission approved , is being reopened but , at the same time , the Commission has failed totally to react to comments made in the European Parliament by Members such as myself on the competition for the sale of Olympic Airways .
What I should like to ask the Commission is this : first , who are the third interested parties ? And secondly , is it the Commission 's objective and is the Commission interested in the survival of Olympic Airways which , as we know , is vital to air travel in Greece ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission 's aim is to foster the development of the air sector in the European Union and to help airlines to consolidate , to be competitive , to provide a good service for passengers . The Commission also wishes to enable economic development to take place .
I am fully aware that Olympic Airways is an extremely important company for Greece 's economic activity and that it also has a marked affect on the economic activity of the European Union as a whole .
Having said all of this , however , I must add that what we are talking about here - as I said before about 1994 and 1998 - is simply the way in which these decisions have been implemented , having been authorised at the time in line with the information that was available to us . We have , furthermore , requested confirmation and details from the Greek administration .
What I would most like to see , however , and I repeat , is for the Olympic affair to be resolved in a positive way , for all the initiatives and the work undertaken by the Greek authorities to privatise Olympic to reach a positive conclusion and simply not to see this type of information about further alleged aid from the Greek Government .
I cannot tell you how much happier I would be if Olympic had no problems and if we were not having to look into this matter now .
As the time allocated to Question Time is at an end , Questions Nos 11 and 14 to 70 will be answered in writing

Mr President , we are all extremely satisfied to have reached the end of the procedure to reform the 1976 directive on equal treatment for men and women , a directive which has played an important part in the life of working women in Europe .
The new text , which we trust the European Parliament will adopt , reflects the outcome of systematic efforts by and successful cooperation between the three institutions of the European Union .
It also reflects changes in economic and social conditions in the Member States of the European Union and efforts to update our social model .
However , it also reflects the roles which women have to play today if we are to achieve our development targets and the obligations and responsibilities of the state and society towards working women .
The new directive will therefore be an important tool in achieving sexual equality in the workplace .
New concepts have been included in the area of discrimination , such as sexual harassment , as have company action plans and employer 's responsibilities . Equality monitoring bodies are to be created and , more importantly , subsidised at the insistence of the European People 's Party .
We believe this is an important directive and we must all work to ensure it is implemented , because our ultimate objective is the impact it will have on the life of working citizens .
So we need to ensure that it is transposed into law in the Member States as quickly as possible and , more importantly , that information is broadly available to citizens , especially women , social agencies , the judicial system and the administrative system .
We must not overlook the importance of this information and awareness raising , because we all know that we have progressive legislation and policies in our countries , but they are not applied , which is why we have the effect of discrimination against women in the workplace .
This directive must give laws and policies on equal treatment a chance to flourish and be applied .
Mr President , the conciliation procedure on the Equal Treatment Directive has produced a respectable result , for which heartfelt thanks are due to our rapporteur , Mrs Hautala .
I am convinced that this amended directive will prove to be a milestone in the improvement of women 's career opportunities .
It was quite literally at the last minute that we managed to come to a compromise on the definition of the concept of sexual harassment in the workplace , one which prohibits any form of unwanted verbal , non-verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature violating the dignity of the person affected .
For the first time direct and indirect discrimination come within the scope of an EU law , with binding effect in fifteen Member States and soon in ten more .
It also constitutes a breakthrough of massive dimensions that women may not suffer any disadvantage in employment in connection with pregnancy or motherhood , and that they are accorded the right to their former job or an equivalent post after maternity leave .
It has taken a tenacious struggle to give paternal leave to fathers and the protection of the directive to adoptive parents as well .
The Member States and the candidate countries now have until 2005 to see to it that businesses are required to set up independent units to draw up equal treatment plans , also to take preventive action and equip themselves with the resources they need to do this .
Real sanctions are to be imposed for non-compliance .
It is an open question whether the arrangement in Germany , with a voluntary joint commitment by the federal government and the employers ' associations which goes in this direction , will meet the high standards of our EU directive .
If businesses do not noticeably redouble their efforts to promote women , it is inevitable that the way ahead will be via a referral to the European Court of Justice .
Mr President , Mrs Hautala really deserves the recognition she is receiving today .
In spite of stubborn and , in certain cases , fairly uninterested and uncommitted ministers , Mrs Hautala succeeded in crafting an excellent agreement .
The work on equality within the EU has taken a major step forwards .
Both women and men can now call upon the law in avoiding sexual harassment .
We know that it is women who all too commonly suffer harassment of this kind .
Now , we are obtaining a legal definition in EC law , and the employer is being given a clear responsibility .
Many European women have had their working days ruined by men who will not take no for an answer .
Between 40 % and 50 % of professionally employed women in the EU have at some point been exposed to sexual advances .
I am also particularly delighted that the right to parental leave is being strengthened , and for women as well as men .
I should nonetheless have preferred clearer wording concerning people 's right to return to the jobs they had before taking parental leave .
Finally , I would once again thank the Commissioner responsible for her assiduous work .
I would also thank my fellow MEP , Mrs Hautala , for the characteristically Finnish refusal to give in that she has shown in the interests of European work on equality .
Mr President , it is with great pleasure that I thank Mrs Hautala for this serious piece of work .
Mrs Hautala has not just lived with it herself but has also involved quite a few political groups in the course of a very long period , and that has paid dividends .
I wish particularly to mention that both parents are now entitled to return to the same , or similar , jobs following parental leave .
That only applies , however , if this right is established in the Member States ' legislation .
I really do hope that knowledge of this directive will quickly be disseminated among people and also be taken due note of by those Member States which still do not have this type of legislation .
It is also worth mentioning that the directive in actual fact gives concrete form to the political ambition always expressed in formal speeches : namely , that of being able to combine family and working life .
The directive entails practical action that can contribute to realising this ambition .
A lack of will and understanding is revealed when our political ambition collides with employers ' absolute unwillingness to reflect upon their role when it comes to low birth rates in the European Union .
Finally , I would remind you , regarding Paragraph 9 of the report , that , in this area , the church and the army have proved to be two solidly reactionary elements in society .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , amendment of this directive had become urgently necessary in order to do justice to the Treaty of Amsterdam , which includes new provisions on equal opportunities for women and men , but many wide-ranging rulings by the European Court of Justice - for example in the Kalanke and Marschall cases - also provide grounds for adapting the directive .

Both in Parliament and with the Council , we have striven long and hard for a workable compromise , never losing sight of our objective , which is to safeguard equal treatment for men and women as regards their access to work .
The definition of sexual harassment was being honed right up to the end , although opinions can still differ as to whether it should form part of a legal text .
A compromise was reached on the setting up of one or more independent units to analyse and oversee the transposition and implementation of the directive .
Units of this sort , which can also form part of existing facilities , are worthy of support .
The directive also deals with the rights of adoptive parents in those Member States in which adoption leave is recognised .
The right to return to a former job or to an equivalent post at the end of maternity leave has also been incorporated .
The Member States will now be obliged by this directive to introduce a range of binding measures on equal treatment , but businesses should not , in my view , be left to implement these on their own .
To do it , they will also need support .
It is only when the family , the raising of children , and the care of the aged are the responsibility of men and women equally , and only when men avail themselves of educational leave for family commitments as a matter of course , that we will have moved nearer to the goal of equal opportunities , equal rights and equal duties .
Mr President , we have a definitive text , approved at the conciliation meeting of 17 April , which rounded off a long period of work .


We in the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities have sought to reach agreement on the most important points of this directive .
It has not been easy ; we have all made concessions , but we have managed to produce a text that satisfies the majority and which the Council agreed on following many meetings , both formal and informal .
The directive addresses issues as important as the definition at Community level of sexual harassment ; it bans discrimination against women on the grounds of pregnancy and maternity in the workplace , and also includes the issues of adoption and paternity , guaranteeing the employee 's job or an equivalent job ; positive measures have been included for sectors in which one gender is under-represented ; preventive measures have been drawn up to prevent discrimination in the workplace on the grounds of gender - especially harassment and sexual harassment - ensuring that real sanctions will be imposed in the event of non-compliance with the directive ; equal treatment in the workplace is to be planned and systematic , and reports are to be drawn up every four years to help us determine the real situation women have to cope with .
I believe that this is a good directive , which deals with the problems women face far too frequently , in the workplace and in professional life and will be a genuine tool to prevent discrimination .
The excellent work done by the Spanish Presidency deserves mention as well as its efforts to ensure that the Council and the Commission were able to reach agreement .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of my colleague , Mrs Diamantopoulou , who sends her apologies for not being with us this evening , I should like to congratulate all of you , and in particular Mrs Hautala , on reaching an agreement with the Council on this extremely important directive .
This agreement would not have been possible without Parliament and the Council 's willingness to compromise .
The political agreement of 17 April 2002 considerably strengthens the text of the common position which was adopted in June 2001 .
We can all be very proud of what we have achieved , because we have taken a significant step forward towards our shared objective of equality between men and women .
I think that we have successfully resolved all of the major issues and that we have , to a large extent , met the European Parliament 's concerns .
The dossier was a complex one and provoked various amendments .
I believe that the final approved text is a compromise in the noble sense of the word , because we are giving the men and women of Europe a tangible result , a very robust directive .
We have made considerable progress in the fight against discrimination on the grounds of sex and we have ensured that a fundamental principle of the Treaty will be implemented effectively in the Member States for the foreseeable future .
A striking feature of the new directive is its clarity , which guarantees legal certainty and ensures consistency with similar legislation seeking to combat discrimination .
I particularly welcome the new provisions that have been introduced : the approval of a common European definition of sexual harassment , with a responsibility for employers ; the prevention of harassment and sexual harassment and the establishment of company equality reports , and the extended mandate given by the directive to bodies responsible for implementing the principle of equality .
The institutions have shown their determination to reach the compromises necessary to conclude this dossier , and I hope that this will set a precedent for future collaboration between them .
Mrs Diamantopoulou would certainly have been better to look at , but you have certainly dealt with the subject matter just as well as she would have done .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following debates :
A5-0211 / 2002 by Mr van Velzen on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy on the amended proposal for a Council decision ( COM ( 2002 ) 43 - C5-0212 / 2002 - 2001 / 0122 ( SNC ) ) adopting a specific programme for research , technological development and demonstration : ' Integrating and strengthening the European Research Area ' ( 2002-2006 ) ;
A5-0206 / 2002 by Mrs Zorba on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy on the amended proposal for a Council decision ( COM ( 2002 ) 43 - C5-0213 / 2002 - 2001 / 0123 ( CNS ) ) on adopting a specific programme for research , technological development and demonstration : ' structuring the European Research Area ? ( 2002-2006 ) ;
A5-0210 / 2002 ) by Mr Pitrasanta on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy on the amended proposal for a Council decision ( COM ( 2002 ) 43 - C5-0214 / 2002 - 2001 / 0124 ( CNS ) ) adopting a specific programme for research , technological development and demonstration to be carried out by means of direct actions by the Joint Research Centre ( 2002-2006 ) ;
A5-0209 / 2002 by Mr Alyssandrakis on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy on the amended proposal for a Council decision ( COM ( 2002 ) 279 - C5-0333 / 2001 + COM ( 2002 ) 43 - C5-0215 / 2002 - 2001 / 0125 ( CNS ) ) adopting a specific programme 2002-2006 ( Euratom ) for research and training on nuclear energy ;
A5-0208 / 2002 ) by Mr Schwaiger on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy on the amended proposal for a Council decision ( COM ( 2002 ) 279 - C5-0334 / 2001 + COM ( 2002 ) 43 - C5-0216 / 2002 - 2001 / 0126 ( CNS ) ) adopting a specific programme 2002-2006 for research and training to be carried out by the Joint Research Centre by means of direct actions for the European Atomic Energy Community .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I should like to express my thanks to the Commissioner and his cabinet , to the representatives of the European Commission , the Spanish Presidency , the secretariat of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , the consultants , the shadow rapporteurs and all those who have been involved in the preparations for this report .
In the final analysis , this is about the specific programmes for research , technological development and integration and reinforcement of the European Research Area .
Mr President , I think we can only say that thanks to fruitful cooperation in this House - this is also true of the Caudron report - the European Parliament can be satisfied with the results which will be voted on tomorrow .
As I have said before , we are building on the successful work of Mr Caudron .
Accordingly , we have adopted the structure and the appropriations of the Sixth Framework Programme as they are in the specific programmes , without making any changes .
In that way , we are actually making history .
For the first time , as far as I know , we are therefore voting twice in plenary about more or less the same amendments .
Tomorrow , we will be voting again on the amendments which we had discussed before and adopted in the framework of the Caudron report and which we , in informal trilogue with the Council and Commission , have decided to transfer to the specific programmes . This seems to me to be an historic event .
What are , in fact , the items of the specific programme that have been added since Mr Caudron 's Sixth Framework Programme ?
Needless to say , I will not enter into each and every detail , but simply allow me to mention a few points that are very close to my heart .
I will naturally begin with bio-science .
We were right , in my view , to focus mainly on cancer research , among other things .
We want European support for fundamental and experimental cancer research that is centred on issues related to a much more effective diagnosis at an earlier stage , for this is ultimately the basis for patient survival .
We naturally also want more support for preventive measures .
Last week , we held a discussion with a number of very prominent cancer specialists , and the word ' prevention ' was very much on everyone 's lips . I believe that we can make an important contribution to this by means of the Sixth Framework Programme .
Furthermore , we also naturally want a much faster transfer of the results between experimental work and what ultimately benefits the patient , and we refer to this with an unusual word , namely ' translational research ' .
This is what it is all about .
We also support new approaches in the case of cardio-vascular diseases and diabetes , however , with the specific aim to try to establish a link between research in the field of the human genome and the application of new technologies and new research methods .
In my view , we can make a lot of headway with this new approach of genetic engineering etc .
We are , however , also looking into other developments .
We are , for example , looking into how nanotechnology can be used in order to treat heart attacks more effectively and faster , and how we can use advanced innovative technologies in surgery relating to cardio-vascular diseases .
If we close our eyes and consider what we can offer our citizens in the next ten years in the form of new technologies , better research methods , etc , then you will appreciate the huge importance of this programme .
In the field of food safety , we also rightly focus in this programme on the fundamental role of food , diet and life style in people 's health .
In my view , it is of enormous importance in Europe 's information society to establish the link between mobile communication on the one hand and new technologies in the field of digital television , and the potential in the field of broad-band communication on the other .
In this total package , we , as European industry , can play a much better role in employment too .
In the final analysis , this is what matters .
I should also like to draw your attention to the INTAS project .
We are always talking about a much stronger partnership between Europe and Russia .
Thanks to the INTAS project , we can considerably strengthen cooperation with Russia , and that is of great importance , partly to combat the brain drain in Russia .
Finally , I should like to note that our Commissioner Busquin displayed a great deal of forward thinking when he established the Sixth Framework Programme in this manner and guided it in the direction of a European Research Area .
He particularly played a pioneering role in Barcelona when he persuaded the Member States to make joint efforts in order to get industry , the national governments and the European Union ultimately to commit to 3 % of GNP for research .
This is when actual jobs are created in Europe , this is when dedication for a competitive Europe is evident , and I would thank the Commissioner for this forward thinking .
You should see this programme in that light too .
It is essential that all groups give their full support to this programme tomorrow so that it can be implemented at the earliest opportunity .
Mr President , a basic political problem has overshadowed all our debates over recent months : how to resolve the structural weaknesses in all areas of research in Europe .
I think that , together , we can find suitable solutions which will ensure that the European Union can safeguard the future and respond to its citizens ' expectations , given that today 's European economies and societies are going for knowledge-based development .
As far as the specific programme for structuring the European Research Area is concerned , the Commission proposal did in fact contain all the ingredients we needed to identify sensitive points and I am grateful for the cooperation we enjoyed in committee and , vitally , from the Committee on Industry .
As luck would have it , the Barcelona Council approved the Commission proposal on increasing overall expenditure on research during the course of our work .
This was encouraging and came just at the right time .
These are a few of the basic points I should like to comment on : inter- and multidisciplinarity , which is , I think , crucial if we are to break traditional moulds and move on to more daring , innovative plans , to move into new research areas , rather than mere collaboration between various research areas .
I think that , if we move in this direction , we shall release creative powers which will allow us Europeans to beat other forces in this field in the forthcoming race for international competitiveness .
The second point is collaboration between and the mobility of researchers .
Attracting new researchers and overcoming obstacles is something which concerns not just the countries of Europe but candidate and third countries as well .
I think that the Marie Curie fellowships will help here , which is why we are calling for the Commission to monitor mobility , so that the European Parliament has reliable statistics over coming years .
Europe has much to gain from researchers from third countries .
Not only must we avoid underestimating the importance of fellowships to them ; I think we must also make some kind of commitment .
And if I reiterate this issue , Commissioner , it is because I think that you agree on its importance .
The third point is the European Higher Education Area .
Research and higher education have mutual benefits and are interconnected vessels .
There is , of course , a degree of competition , the question of teaching rights .
But I think that the Bologna procedure and the common initiative we are waiting for from Commissioners Busquin , Liikanen and Reding will be of immense interest here .
Society and science : the fears and expectations of European citizens from research and science are greater now than ever .
Not only do we need more systematic public dialogue , but this public dialogue needs to be structured so that it has a real impact on our society , provides food for thought and educates .
Dialogue implies a two-way relationship and should allow European research to understand the needs of our citizens and to respond to social demands , which is why we insisted that social sciences and human sciences take priority .
However , I believe that a great deal of work still needs to be done in the society and science area , mainly strategic , structural planning .
Finally , I should like to believe that , politically , we have done what we could , cautiously and by common assent , and have resolved some of the problems before us .
From now on , as far as implementation is concerned , the Commission now has the baton , although the research community will play the leading role in applying the programme and we trust that it will not gainsay our political choices .
Mr President , the specific programme for research and training on nuclear energy provides EUR 940 million for activities in three priority areas - controlled thermonuclear fusion , management of radioactive waste and radiation protection - as well as other activities in the field of nuclear technology and safety .
The bulk of the funds - EUR 750 million - is proposed to be used for nuclear fusion research , with a maximum of EUR 200 million provided for ITER , the Next Step tokamak device .
Subject to a positive outcome of the international negotiations , a specific decision is expected in the period 2003-2004 , so that construction of ITER could effectively start during the period 2005-2006 .
This will be a major step towards sustained production of energy from nuclear fusion , which is expected to become an efficient source of energy within a few decades .
In view of the limited deposits of fossil fuel , the importance of this development cannot be underestimated .
Consequently , the associated research fully deserves the proposed funding .
Given the fact that the final decision on ITER has not been taken yet , the flexibility in partitioning funds between ITER and other fusion activities is an important element of the proposal .
Other activities within the field of controlled nuclear fusion include the Associations ' programme in physics and technology and the exploitation of JET facilities .
The Associations ' programme includes , among others , studies of magnetic confinement schemes other than the tokamak , in particular the continuation of the construction of the Wendelstein 7-X " stellarator " , research on fusion materials and keeping in touch with civil research activities on inertial confinement and possible alternative concepts .
The Joint European Taurus ( JET ) in Culham , England , has been a highly successful machine and its facilities will continue to be exploited , but will have to be phased out at an appropriate time to enable the corresponding resources to be redirected to ITER .
Regardless of the future of nuclear fusion reactors , the problem of radioactive waste - in particular long-lived waste - will be with us for several thousands of years .
Consequently , it is only by an increase of the research efforts that we may hope to decrease the dangers emanating from them .
The specific programme provides for EUR 90 million to be used for research on geological disposal and the development of concepts to produce less waste .
Radiation protection takes up to EUR 50 million .
Finally , the chapter of " other activities " covers the evaluation of innovative concepts and the development of improved and safer nuclear energy processes , education and training in radiation protection , improvement of the safety of existing installations , for a total of EUR 50 million .
The Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy welcomes the Commission 's proposal and expresses its support for fusion research in general and ITER in particular .
A European site for ITER will confirm the worldwide leadership of the European Union in fusion technology , acquired through , among other things , the JET facilities , which should not be abandoned before exhausting its capabilities .
A number of amendments proposed by our committee refer to nuclear waste and nuclear safety .
Ways of dealing with waste should be not only acceptable to society , but also intrinsically safe .
At this point , I should like to point out that there is a mistake in the French translation of Amendment No 4 , where the original English text " both safe and acceptable " has been transmuted into " both healthy and acceptable " .
Could the President ensure that this is corrected ?
The research on interim disposal , waste characterisation and waste packaging , should be funded , together with research on geological disposal .
Research on innovative concepts and techniques that produce less waste should include the high-temperature reactor , light-water reactors , gas-cooled reactors , fast reactor technologies and co-generation .
Overall , the adoption of the report by the Committee on Industry will mark an important step towards more efficient and safer nuclear energy .
Mr President , Commissioner Busquin , ladies and gentlemen , my report deals with the direct actions for the European Atomic Energy Community that are implemented and realised in the Joint Research Centre and in its installations at Ispra , Petten , Geel , Mol and Karlsruhe .
This specific programme has several focal points , the policy objectives of which I would like to discuss in detail now .
I will start , though , by saying a bit about education and training .
Both advocates of atomic energy and its critics will surely agree that it is very important that an adequate number of young and superbly-qualified workers in the field of nuclear research in Europe should make an active contribution , by their research over the coming decades , to ensuring nuclear safety in the operational nuclear power stations and also , if need be , controlling the fuel cycle where this is a source of risk .
The same applies to the safe storage of nuclear waste over the next few decades , and to its being able to be decontaminated as soon as possible .
That is why it is important to maintain the Joint Research Centre 's high standards and build on its research capacity by training young scientists on courses and scientific practical placements which can , inter alia , be carried on in networks of international , national and regional facilities at the various levels .
More needs to be said about the general principles , but I do not want to go over the details again , as we had an in-depth discussion of them in the Sixth Framework Programme .
However , there are two principles to which I want to give particular attention .
The first principle is adherence to general ethical guidelines , which are also binding on EU researchers , and especially Euratom 's .
The public acceptability of research in the Member States plays an important part in this .
You will be aware , Commissioner , of the misgivings that remain as regards some areas of scientific research , biotechnology for example .
Secondly , adherence to the principle that women researchers should have equal opportunities .
This relates both to their training and also to the award of important research contracts , whether these are to be carried out by researchers acting on their own or in a team .
Now for the Joint Research Centre 's specific objectives .
I see research 's principal contribution as being to the safety of the atomic power stations and of their fuel cycle .
Europe 's citizens can demand that the safety of atomic power stations meets the highest standards even in an enlarged European Union .
The stringent western European rules , which the Member States have framed in exacting terms , but which have not to date been harmonised , must be recapitulated as part of the acquis communautaire and must also apply to the atomic power stations in the central and eastern European candidate countries .
The Joint Research Centre 's expertise and the results of its research and that of the national authorities in the European Union should be drawn on in establishing a European code of nuclear safety , which should be ratified before enlargement takes place , enabling it to be put before the candidate countries as being valid in law .
The candidate countries would have to accept this code as part of the acquis communautaire before their accession and would then have to put it into practice .
The Commission , especially Vice-President De Palacio , gave these ideas from the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy a favourable reception and supported them .
I also assume that you yourself will welcome these suggestions .
It is , then , our desire that a Commission proposal on this topic be submitted as early as this summer .
To take an example , the continued operation of the as yet unmodified atomic power station at Ignalina in Lithuania is not acceptable .
Another possibility would of course be for it to be decommissioned before Lithuania joins the European Union .
Taken as a whole , the European Union and the Joint Research Centre have a great deal of research capacity to hand in the field of nuclear safety .
Maintaining that capacity for decades is a safety requirement for the public , who have to be able to live in safety , protected from the radioactivity from nuclear waste .
The second is the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and , of course , of fissile materials .
The safeguards in the Euratom Treaty do indeed provide for this control , but it must also be extended , by means of the whole range of expertise within the Joint Research Centre , to the non-proliferation of fissile materials , which can of course also be used in terrorist attacks .
Thefts like those which have recently occurred in Germany are a warning signal in this respect .
This of course applies equally to the tracking down of stolen nuclear material and its safe storage .
I will conclude by highlighting the cooperation between the Joint Research Centre and the medical sector 's national and regional research centres , for example the cancer research carried on by the Institute for Transuranium Elements jointly with the German Cancer Research Centre .
Mr President , I am going to be presenting the non-nuclear section of the report on the Joint Research Centre ( JRC ) , which represents two thirds of its budget .
In the Sixth Framework Programme , the Joint Research Centre will be refocusing its activities so as to strengthen its organisational role and participate usefully in the European Research Area .
Its work programme has three distinguishing characteristics : concentration , openness and networking , and consumer-orientation .
To this end , the Joint Research Centre has restructured its non-nuclear activities around two main areas , supported by specialist skills : food , chemical products and health , and sustainable environment and development .
These areas will be supplemented by horizontal activities : technology foresight , reference materials and measurements , and public security and anti-fraud .
The total budget allocated to the JRC 's activities stands at EUR 760 million .
Its decision to adopt this new strategy and restructure its services was inspired by a report published last year by a high-level working party chaired by tienne Davignon .
These changes are intended to make the Joint Research Centre better adapted to the needs of political decision-makers and privileged users : the Council , Commission Directorates-General and Parliament .
The JRC will also be active in giving impetus to the European Research Area and the Sixth Framework Programme .
It will work on setting up a Community system to harmonise measurements and will participate in European and global networks .
The JRC will be a high-profile player throughout the implementation of the Sixth Framework Programme , in terms of participating in both networks of excellence and integrated projects .
It will be able to make an active contribution to developing the new European citizenship by providing a common knowledge base of scientific and technological references and by facilitating dialogue between scientists and decision-makers .
It will also be expected to help with the ' operational ' implementation of the new tools , including the stairways of excellence - as far as it is competent to do so , of course - and with integrating research into local development .
In certain thematic areas , proposals from the Joint Research Centre would appear to be essential for specifying the public contracts that may be awarded , for example in the sustainable development sector .
This sector encompasses all of the issues relating to ecosystems .
For example , the JRC has spent more than a year and a half working on establishing the criteria for ecosites and will help to set up a European network .
This also applies to food safety , where the JRC will help to establish a reference and standardisation system , and to the protection of individual privacy in information and communication technologies .
The Joint Research Centre 's role as an advisor on European policy needs to be enhanced .
It is improving networking and cooperation with public and private institutions in the Member States .
It is also finalising a human resources and mobility plan , which involves in particular training young scientists and arranging exchanges with national research institutions .
The point is not that it should become a research centre competing with other centres to research the scientific questions at issue in several Member States , but that it should ensure linkage between these centres when it comes to implementing the results and achieving the objectives of European directives . In the same way , the Commission must be able to turn to it for the most rapid response possible .
It therefore needs to have teams that are capable of adjusting readily to requests made and reacting immediately .
To do so , they must have knowledge of their fields permanently at their fingertips , keep up to date with upstream research , and even carry out additional research in areas that have not been covered by the national institutes .
The JRC has an important part to play in the process of opening the programme up to the accession countries , to the countries of the Mediterranean region and to those involved in international cooperation under the MEDA and TACIS programmes .
Let us not forget either the role of mediator that the Joint Research Centre has been called to play in the risk-management sector , on issues such as risk exposure , impact assessment , damages , and nuclear safety and waste problems , creating synergy in particular with the initiatives launched under the EUR-OPA Major Risks programme .
The Centre should further develop its work on implementing practical projects on saving energy , in particular in the construction sector , and on renewable energies .
It must not confine itself to research on photovoltaic energy , but must also promote demonstration projects in other areas , such as wind energy .
It might also monitor the assessment of the introduction of fuel cells .
Given the growing popularity of organic food products and traditional , locally-grown produce , the JRC will develop methods to ensure their authenticity and quality .
It will also study ways of optimising their impact on the environment and local development .
Finally , to make it possible for us to provide better guidance and if necessary to refocus particular studies in accordance with political developments on science , I think that it would be desirable for a monitoring committee to be set up that is in contact with Parliament , so that we would be kept abreast of its activities on a more regular basis , which would allow us to build on the fruitful exchanges we have had so far .
In conclusion , the Joint Research Centre 's main objectives will therefore be to remain close to its users - the European Parliament and the Commission - to develop its role as a recognised centre of excellence on issues of safety , health and the environment , and to develop its activities as a promoter of research networks .
The Joint Research Centre can therefore be expected to make a success of its commitment to reform and to justify its unique position within the European Commission . I should like to thank Commissioner Busquin and his services for having done all they could to help us to prepare this report and its conclusions which we are presenting to you today .
Mr President , I shall refer to five reports - and two minutes times five makes ten !
I readily concede , though , that atomic power and nuclear energy do not affect agriculture to that great a degree if we disregard the wind , which has just been mentioned .
I will therefore try to keep my comments brief .
It is on the basis of principle that the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development regrets that there is no specifically agricultural core area in the Sixth Framework Programme , but that projects are divided up between the chapters on food safety , protection of the environment and development .
What makes that all the more regrettable is that we claim to have a multifunctional approach to agricultural policy , with a concern to highlight the interaction between the technical , economic , environmental , social and cultural dimensions .
It would be appropriate for it to have a research package to itself as , in terms of extent and practical implementation , agriculture is , along with atomic energy and pharmaceuticals , one of the major areas in which the results of research are put to use .
Moreover , research in the area of agriculture and new technologies always essentially has to do with issues of genetic engineering , biotechnology being a much broader area in that it includes the production of both butter and beer .
Let it not be thought that research is only just beginning - it was indispensable to past generations ' means to live and enjoy life , and indeed to those of our own generation , and that far more so than new technology would have us believe .
If we are to talk about food safety in connection with new technologies , then it certainly offers an opportunity to explore the possibilities of the secure supply of safe food and to make a contribution to this .
It must be clear to us as well , though , that new technologies can endanger food safety .
When there are problems in the food sector , we often find that they have to do with these new technologies. for example , research into the use of seeds is not , or at least not primarily , concerned with the development of resistance ; rather , attempts are made to use gene manipulation to bring about the creation of resistance , mainly even to build up resistance to plant protection in the synthetic sector .
There is , though , not only the chemical sector , but also the organic sector .
If only this were about getting research to investigate natural substances with a view to finding potential ways of protecting plants .
If only this were about improving resistance in seed by means of research into the natural process of seed development , and not so much about mapping out core areas in the new field of genetic engineering .
On the other hand , we have the problem that the use of the new genetic engineering leads to contamination , which researchers for the firms that operate in this area had initially ruled out .
The crossover of genetically modified rape onto a related weed was formerly considered impossible , yet now it has happened .
Now , we also find transference from applications in conventional sectors into the organic sector , where it is banned and ruled out by current European Union legislation , and contamination of the latter by the former .
Organic businesses are not allowed to work with genetically modified organisms , so more research seems to be needed into how research into genetic engineering can be prevented from contaminating other areas .
Little has been done other than to put forward theories .
As you can see , agriculture generates a whole lot of issues .
Speaking as I do on the committee 's behalf , I make it clear that we are very definitely not opposed to new technological developments .
We are only against the risks inherent in the application of something that research has produced .
I have listed a number of points .
What matters is that the risk in the application is not passed on to the farmers and , in the course of food production , on to the consumers . As we have prescribed in the atomic energy sector , there must , rather , also be damage limitation and assessment of the damage and risks involved in practical applications and of what harm biotransfer can do to other sectors , so that we are not always only learning from our own mistakes but benefiting from research that can give us advance warning of potential risks .
Thank you , Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf .
You have indeed said what had to be said well within the time allocated .
Mr President , Mrs Zorba 's report is very sensible and the PPE-DE Group will support it and almost all the amendments by the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy .
These add to the Commission 's impressive project of developing a valid European research area .
The only amendments we will oppose are No 6 , - which excludes European funding for research aimed at military purposes .
We do not look for research specifically aimed at military ends , but research might have military as well as civilian applications , for example research into new materials .
By including this prohibition clause , there could be unnecessary impediments to genuinely beneficial research projects .
We also prefer the committee 's Amendment No 24 , regarding the budget , to Mrs Zorba 's Amendment No 26 , which specifies an amount for the Marie Curie International Fellowships .
It is surely better to leave the EUR 1.630 billion for human resources unspecified , so that there is more flexibility .
We certainly have nothing against the Marie Curie fellowships .
Our group has tabled a clarifying Amendment No 25 which specifies that participation will be permitted by those who hold doctoral degrees where those degrees were obtained in three , rather than four , years .
I trust that Mrs Zorba will accept that this is a sensible clarification .
I would like to concentrate on the specific programme for science and society , which is essential for re-establishing the necessary level of trust and mutual understanding between the scientific community and civil society at large .
This is vital if Europe 's research effort is to be supported widely and with continuity and thereby realise its full potential .
We have seen a lamentable breakdown in this relationship , perhaps as a result of faulty assertions by scientists and politicians in previous crises .
Perhaps it is even more attributable to a lack of willingness by science and industry to communicate clearly and systematically .
Our hope is that this programme will promote much improved communication and that the public will be much better informed about the objectives , the results , the applications , the achievements , the recognition of the ethical and environmental constraints and the practical usefulness of scientific endeavour .
We hope , above all , that more young people will be attracted to science as a career .
We badly need them for all our futures .
We wish Mr Busquin , his team and this programme well .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate the five rapporteurs and the Commission , who have steadfastly showed their willingness to listen to the European Parliament , both in the Caudron report and since .
I will speak briefly about each of the reports .
First of all , I welcome Mr van Velzen 's emphasis on life sciences other than genomics and his advocacy of translational research , which means rapid transposition into clinical applications .
This is something which will appeal to the public .
I also welcome our amendment , which adds nanosciences to nanotechnology .
The recent excellent STOA report on nanotechnologies makes it clear that we are still at the stage of nanoscience .
That must be emphasised .
As far as aeronautics is concerned , I am glad that there will be some attention to the health of passengers .
I support our amendment on space science .
Indeed I would like more attention to the big science projects in the European research area outside the framework programme .
Of course I support Parliament 's new emphasis on health and safety at work .
I support Mrs Zorba 's conclusions .
Like her , I was delighted with the increase in funding for science and society .
However , I agree with her that some funding should come from the priority thematic areas for the science and society implications .
Multidisciplinary research , yes ; a European higher education area , with the synergies that implies for the European research area .
We should be training people in research management and ethics .
Mr Pitrasanta has made an excellent analysis of the new tasks of the JRC as a technical reference body and a support mechanism for decision-making .
I greatly welcome his emphasis on the need for monitoring and the need for the European Parliament to be involved in such monitoring - not just in the JRC .
As far as Mr Alyssandrakis ' report is concerned , I would welcome a breakthrough in fusion research , not least because it is far less dangerous than nuclear fission and we need to have an alternative to that form of energy .
I am fairly sceptical about whether or not ITER will proceed within this framework programme , but we will see .
Every citizen wants action on radioactive waste .
The Royal Society in the UK emphasised that recently .
It has not been solved yet .
I am a great advocate of transmutation and partitioning and welcome any support that can be given to those technologies .
I am not , however , a supporter of spending EU money on research into new reactors .
This is something that should be funded by the nuclear industry itself .
We are not in the business of giving industrial aid to that particular sector .
That is not what the public is calling for .
As far as Mr Schwaiger is concerned , he is absolutely right to say that we must have , before long , some sort of aquis communautaire in the sector of nuclear safety .
So congratulations to everyone for their good work and cooperation and good luck to all our scientists .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I too should like to thank all the rapporteurs , the Spanish Presidency and , naturally , the Commission for the pleasant and efficient cooperation , as a result of which we have completed the total package of the Sixth Framework Programme this week after all .
This will receive the unqualified support of the Liberal Group .
Europe must become more innovative .
Research results must be translated into new products .
The Sixth Framework Programme offers the opportunities to do this , especially by deploying new instruments so that , for example , multi-disciplinary teams within integrated projects can work together .
Innovations mainly take place on the cutting edge of disciplines , and it is important in this respect to clarify how the integrated projects will be implemented and how the loose ends will be tied up from an administrative point of view .
For clarity is still completely lacking in this field .
The Commission therefore has an important task to fulfil .
An area of attention in this respect is the late payments by the Commission , which can thus cause huge problems for projects and innovation .
I am delighted with the budget for information and communication technology of EUR 3 600 .
After all , ICT , being a horizontal technology , makes a huge contribution to innovation within all other disciplines .
My proposal to increase the budget for the participation of small and medium-size companies to 15 % has been adopted by the Commission and the Council , and this underlines the importance of small companies in terms of dynamism in our economy and employment .
This participation , however , should , according to the Liberal Group , feature within thematic programmes .
This would guarantee cooperation between large and small companies , for small companies lack the know-how and the manpower to go it alone .
It is not acceptable for the best part of the limited research budget that is available to be used for flanking policy by the Commission , since that is not a European task .
With regard to the Joint Research Centre , I should like to comment on its tasks in relation to nuclear safety , currently a very controversial topic in the Union .
For what transpires ?
The acceding Member States boast a large number of nuclear power plants which do not meet our safety standards .
Eight nuclear power plants have now been closed .
It is , in fact , very odd that we in Europe have high safety standards for our water intended for swimming in , as Mrs De Palacio pointed out recently , but that there is still no joint approach in the field of nuclear safety .
Binding rules across the EU are essential .
As we cannot distinguish between the current and acceding Member States , it is necessary to amend the Euratom Treaty so that the JRC can complete the tasks imposed on it via this specific programme in a clear , transparent and effective manner .
Mr President , I should like to thank all the rapporteurs for their hard work .
I will confine myself to the nuclear question .
The Euratom Atomic Energy Community was founded in 1957 and is now well past its sell-by date .
It is a closed institution and is regulated solely by the Council .
Codecision with Parliament is excluded .
We really need to change this .
Its separation from other EU norms is also highlighted by Euratom having its own framework for its research programme .
This nuclear technology is the only area to have its own ringfenced budget .
Moreover safety requirements , as Mr Schwaiger has pointed out , are not at all coordinated .
This is more than regrettable .
The nuclear fusion budget remains the largest single area - EUR 750 million - of energy research and proposes funds allocated to the development of the next generation of fusion research .
Most experts anticipate that if fusion is ever to achieve commercialisation it will not be for at least another 50 years .
Therefore the fusion budget is a financial black hole in pursuit of an ever-receding holy grail of fusion energy .
Despite around half a century of commercial operation of nuclear reactors , the solution to the long-term management of nuclear waste remains unsolved .
The framework programme for additional funds to research geological disposal of radioactive waste means that EU-funded research for what is effectively a commercial waste problem represents yet another subsidy to the nuclear industry .
This is unacceptable .
Mr President , in the proposal for a Council decision on the Euratom programme of research in the field of nuclear energy , submitted to us by the Commission , I note that the Union 's needs appear to have been identified correctly in the short and long term , but that a medium-term vision seems to be completely lacking .
As far as the short term is concerned , the budget should be increased , but the research topics selected are , in any case , relevant .
In fact they are by their very nature essential .
They consist , firstly , of managing ultimate residues and spent fuels : advanced reprocessing and transmutation into products that are less and less radioactive and have shorter and shorter lives .
This is the top priority and it is absolutely essential that we provide the resources necessary to ensure that we deactivate this final waste .
Secondly , they concern the safety of nuclear installations and radiation protection .
Even though European nuclear installations have already demonstrated their high safety standards and are the subject of very rigorous control and environmental protection measures , work on this must continue .
In the long term , by which I mean after 2050 , when any oilfields that are easily accessible will be exhausted , it is nuclear fusion that will take over and it is important that Europe is not left behind by its American and Japanese partners in perfecting this technology .
However , the medium-term proposals , the central link between the two , are , paradoxically , completely inadequate , in terms of the funds devoted to research into the new generation of fission reactors that will have to replace those currently in service .
In ten years ' time , on average , the reactors that now provide us with heat and light will have reached the end of their lives .
They will therefore have to be replaced by reactors incorporating new designs : high-temperature reactors , new pressurised water reactors and new fast neutron reactors .
The latter - I would stress this point - are currently the focus of publicly funded research in the United States , while the previous French Government recklessly abandoned the technology .
This is a field in which Europe is recognised as having genuine expertise - it is a world leader - and our objective has to be to maintain our technological advantage .
We therefore need to invest the necessary research effort .
Our American and Japanese partners have embarked on independent policies and the Union and its Member States , Mr President , must not be left behind .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in essence , all our objectives can be summed up in health well into old age , as well as , at the end of the day , the utilisation of the gigantic research potential of small and medium-sized enterprises .
We know that the JRC focuses its efforts on nutrition , chemical products and health , as well as , in particular , the environment and sustainable development , technology foresight , reference materials and measurements , but also public safety and the combating of fraud .
I would particularly like to thank Mr Schwaiger for pushing so hard for a code of safety standards for atomic power stations , because it is the prevention and containment of accidents that has recently become especially important , and Parliament is agreed that atomic power stations and atomic materials need a specialised approach in order to guarantee their safety in future .
It should also be said that , of the EUR 11 billion allocated to specific priorities , at least 15 % must of course be used for research projects for small and medium-sized enterprises , with a special allocation of EUR 430 million for horizontal research projects .
Then there is the ' stairway to excellence ' , where particular account has to be taken of SMEs , just as European SMEs and European industry will in future work more closely with universities and colleges , institutes of higher education and research organisations .
Finally , there is a need for small and medium-sized enterprises also to be allowed to cooperate with small research groups , newly established and distant research sites and with organisations in the candidate countries .
I believe that it is of vital importance to involve small and medium-sized enterprises , especially in the networks of excellence and in the integrated projects .
We must surely be aware that the 18 million small and medium-sized enterprises in Europe account for two-thirds of the workforce and , in the final analysis , for 80 % of tax revenue , a fact which , I believe , entitles them to work closely with others in research and thus help to shape Europe 's future .
For us , at the end of the day , good research policy , skilfully applied , makes for the best social policy , for it is always the case that first you have to create the necessary economic conditions , and then you can be generous when distributing the gains .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner Busquin , as rapporteur on the sixth RDFP , I should first like to say how pleased I am to see the deadlines for the adoption of the specific programmes being respected .
This will allow the broad guidelines on European research , which we adopted in last May 's part-session , to be implemented in the best possible conditions .
Admittedly , the adoption of the rules for participation has been postponed to July .
The tight deadlines - so we have been told - left no alternative .
In any case , the RDFP package - the specific programmes and the rules for participation - will be adopted before the summer recess , which will allow them to be implemented properly on 1 January 2003 .
We will therefore be respecting the undertaking that I gave to you back in February 2001 , and I am particularly pleased about this .
Turning now to the specific programmes , which are the subject of tonight 's debate , I should also like warmly to congratulate the rapporteurs , Mr van Velzen , Mrs Zorba , Mr Alyssandrakis , Mr Pitrasanta and Mr Schwaiger .

Personally , at this stage in the work , I followed progress more particularly on Mr van Velzen 's report on the specific programme on the first and third aspects of the RDFP .
Once again , I can testify to the quality of Mr van Velzen 's work , all the more so when he had to rework his report several times : he firstly had to take into account the outcome of the votes at the second reading of the RDFP and then had to transfer several of the amendments adopted en bloc at the same vote into the specific programme .
The end result is a report which is absolutely consistent with the results of the votes on the sixth RDFP , and this in three respects , the first being the seven priorities .
There is no point my reminding you of the list , but I will mention in particular the first of these priorities to say that in the specific programme we have better clarified the status of health and the fight against major diseases , separate from research on the genome .
Secondly , the report is consistent in terms of budget .
Parliament very much welcomes the increase in certain budget lines and the inclusion of footnotes giving guidance on allocation within some budget lines , as we requested .
Thirdly , and finally , it is consistent in terms of the transition between the new and old instruments , which had been a source of concern to Parliament and several Member States .
Finally , the report specifies the research areas adopted at an appropriate level of detail . For example , mine clearance , research into the solar system , doping practices , safety in the workplace and biological agents used by terrorists .
We managed to steer clear of a further debate on the ethical issue .
Some were nevertheless tempted , but common sense won through and the interests of the majority prevailed : I should like to thank all colleagues for this .
I will conclude by praising the excellent spirit of cooperation between the various political groups , the Commission representatives and Commissioner Busquin , the Council and the Spanish Presidency .
Thanks to this we will have adopted , by the appointed time , an excellent work programme that the European scientific community will now be able to implement from 1 January 2003 .
Mr President , this is a historic framework programme .
For the first time the preparatory work is on schedule - even ahead of schedule - and agreement has already been reached in the first round .
Thanks go to everyone who has been involved .
This time I am particularly interested in Mr Alyssandrakis 's report as I myself was the rapporteur of a similar report in the fifth framework programme .
Fusion is the energy solution of the future , and when it becomes established we can forget discussions about the energy deficit , the overly large share of imported energy in Europe , and greenhouse emissions .
The enormous potential associated with fusion means we must make it possible : the more resources we invest , the faster we shall achieve results .
For this reason , the ceiling of EUR 200 million the Commission has set for the ITER programme is misguided .
Hopefully more of us next time will look further into the future and have the courage to set aside more resources for fusion research .
It is in Europe 's interests to hold onto ITER .
ITER , if a Member State is to be chosen as its location , will bring a massive increase in know-how to Europe , as well as hardcore technical skills and new technology .
There already exist workable methods for the temporary storage of high-active fuels so there is no need to use the framework programme to finance this sort of research .
For this reason Amendment Nos 7 and 8 should be deleted .
There is a ready-made model for bedrock disposal already in Finland , although new alternatives can always be examined .
Nuclear power research and the issue of safety associated with its proper use are largely one and the same thing .
The Commission has recently indicated a desire to create common , pan-European minimum safety standards .
This carries with it its own risks .
Whenever there is harmonisation there is a danger that we will go with the weakest link .
On the other hand we have very good experience of cooperation between authorities .
This way the bad learn from the better , and there is no need for compromises , which the weakest cannot achieve , and which at the same time would lower standards of safety in the most advanced Member States .
Regulators already practise excellent , impartial cooperation .
For this reason I support Amendment No 17 .
Any development of harmonised regulatory approaches falls outside the scope of the framework programme .
The responsibility for following western safety regulations rests with the Member States , and responsibility for monitoring rests with that most viable of organisations , the Western European Nuclear Regulatory Association .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , structuring a united and mutually supportive European Research Area is part of building European citizenship and this is the subject of the structured dialogue between science and society that is proposed in this programme .
A dream that I simply want to tack on to this specific programme ?
Perhaps .
But above and beyond the dream , in a tangible and precise way , we Members of the European Parliament are thus affirming the existence of Europe with all the strength of the creative intelligence that it holds in reserve , whether in its industry , in its universities or in its researchers , and thanks in particular to their mobility .
It would be inconceivable for us to maintain the obstacle course that researchers have to negotiate on a day-to-day basis so as to gain the space to be able to devote themselves to their actual work , faced with rules and regulations , the minefield that is social security and the administrative mazes for obtaining visas and resolving career problems .
That is why we have a very clear affirmation in these programmes that a vital prerequisite for their successful implementation is mobility : mobility that crosses natural , cultural and economic boundaries , that champions gender equality and that will enable the exchange of research practices .
Perhaps the DG responsible will have to launch a mobility support service very soon : today it is just a freephone number , tomorrow it will be a crossroads towards a Europe on the move .
We should add that upstream it is necessary to develop interdisciplinary doctoral courses that will open up a new concept of the mental , technical and scientific plain on which research is conducted , a concept which meets the expectations and needs of the public .
For the universities it is a strategic challenge to encourage both teaching and research staff to open their minds to this possibility .
Promoting new skills and new attitudes that we need to adopt to place ourselves in the vanguard of research while taking into account the European dimension ; taking stock of this potential , of these reservoirs of grey matter , networking them , creating the prolific alchemy of the European Research Area ; is this a dream ? No .
Because , building the European Research Area is to rely on the strength and potential of our researchers , on the reservoirs of talent in our universities and schools , on mobility , which opens the way for the exchange of knowledge and expertise , and thus create a powerful catalyst that will make it possible for Europe to exist , to embody the very substance of the European Research Area of this millennium , with the people of Europe , for the people of the world .
Thank you to those who gave us this vision .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am grateful to the rapporteurs for the excellent work they have done , and I support these reports .
I give particularly strong support to the reports by Mr van Velzen and Mrs Zorba , which I believe improve on the Commission proposal and take us in the right direction .
I attach great importance to what Mr van Velzen had to say about cancer research , on which European assistance for research must continue to focus .
We fought hard for that when the Framework Programme was going through Parliament , and so we need to underline it again today .
As regards sustainable development , research needs to be used to deal with environmental problems .
I have tabled a number of amendments on this , which have met with the committee 's support , for example one on research into sustainable biofuels .
I disagree with what Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf said , and believe that biotechnology can play a thoroughly positive role , in which it would also benefit the environment .
I would just like to say , with reference to the ethical aspect of research , that I urge the Commission to support Amendments Nos 17 to 20 .
These were part of the package in the Caudron report , and could give a positive indication that we support those technical solutions that offer alternatives to what has very frequently been a matter of dispute here in Parliament .
So this would be a positive and constructive approach .
We have refrained from resubmitting the celebrated Nistic amendment on cloning and stem cell research , about which we have argued so much .
The main reason for this is that serious problems with specific parts of this amendment arose in Council .
I still do not understand why the Council was not able to come closer to this amendment .
Parliament wanted to go further than the Common Position had done .
I now hear , though , that a statement by five Member States has moved the Council to start discussing ethics , which cannot but be satisfactory from our point of view , and I call on the Commission to take a constructive approach and smooth the path to an agreement in Council .
Parliament will certainly not raise any objections if something is introduced in the ethics field approximating more closely to our amendment than the Commission 's declaration and the Common Position did .
Mr President , the specific programmes for implementing the Sixth Framework Programme deal with each thematic priority in detail , clarifying their content and certainly making them more effective .
They will make substantial changes contributing to the success of the whole programme in that they are based on the focusing of financial aid on a restricted , specific number of priority themes throughout Europe .
This will give researchers a closer system of cooperation and will increase their mobility , for the aim is to create an attractive working environment for them in Europe too .
As regards the employment rules , the Sixth Framework Programme , on which work began over a year ago and to which the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs has contributed , has preserved the very themes highlighted by our committee as well among the priorities , particularly employment , health and safety at the work place and the integration of the socially excluded and disadvantaged such as people with disabilities .
Indeed , we must not forget that the whole point of research is to serve the people : it is not an end in itself .
In addition , particular stress has been placed on support and research for small and medium-sized businesses , precisely because of their function of an economic catalyst in Europe .
Moreover , the restructuring of the Common Research Centre has made it more efficient and the confirmation of the budget is an important step towards the creation of a European Research Area .
Lastly , I am pleased to welcome the inclusion of an amendment tabled last June on employment in Europe .
Our request that research should be extended to the development of operating systems and hardware in Europe has been included in the specific programme aimed at integrating and strengthening the European Research Area .
That will certainly help to boost employment and put the brakes on our current growing dependence on the United States and Japan in what is considered to be a crucial sector for the new economy .
Mr President , from the point of view of the Budget , it is certainly to be welcomed , and in equal degree indispensable , that the Community Research Framework Programme is to be given more concrete form .
The sum of EUR 17.5 billion approved by the Council was , in any case , up for debate , which means that it was available for distribution .
However , I had to resign from the position of spokeswoman for the Committee on Budgets which had been entrusted to me ; this was not out of any refusal to do the job , but rather because the committee had resolved not to take up a position this evening , as we are dealing here with new methods of integration and coordination , which are not to be assessed ex ante .
I would nonetheless like to make use of this time , as practical experience has brought to my attention something I regard as crucial .
I refer , Mr Busquin , to the Commission 's negotiation of contracts with small and medium-sized enterprises with regard to proposals eligible for support under the Framework Programme .
How is it that projects with what I regard as excellent content are doomed to failure because the applicants cannot stand up to the Commission 's assessment procedure ?
An assessment procedure , which , in my view short-sightedly , insists on profit margins and liquidity , utterly disregarding the firms ' capacity for innovation and willingness to make investments .
An assessment procedure that faces SMEs in particular with safeguards that constitute high obstacles , and , in the final analysis , an assessment procedure that is humiliating and has a demotivating effect on firms working in an essentially innovative way and with less emphasis on profit , which should therefore actually be favoured partners in the Framework Programme .
Cofinancing requires that we ensure that private traders do not misuse Community funds or misdirect investment of them .
That much is clear , but such an audit needs decision-making parameters that are more accurate and more responsive to individual cases , or else innovation and initiative will be systematically ruled out rather than supported , and we will end up , as we did with the European Structural Fund , with an accumulation of funds and wasted resources .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I turn first to you , Mr President , to express my regret that you have not been able to take the floor , because in your capacity as Vice-President , you have always strongly supported the idea of the European Research Area , but I imagine that you will continue to do so .
I should firstly like to thank Mr Caudron once again for having ensured that the Sixth Framework Programme was put to the vote during the May part-session , which has made it possible - as you rightly said - to keep to a timetable that is in the interests of the entire scientific community , as well as European industry , and to adopt this framework programme , the specific programmes and the rules for participation within the allotted time .
Once again I should like - on behalf of the scientific community , essentially - to thank Parliament and all those who have made it possible for us to achieve something that you have rightly described as very positive , that is to adopt these rules in due time , so that we can prepare for 1 January 2003 in the best possible conditions .
Today , however , it is the specific programmes that are at issue , and thus another important stage in the process , and here I should like to thank very warmly the rapporteurs for the five specific programmes , Mr van Velzen , Mrs Zorba , Mr Alyssandrakis , Mr Pitrasanta and Mr Schwaiger , for the quality of their work .


I should also like to thank the other members of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , who may not have been rapporteurs but have taken part in this work and made useful contributions .
I should also , for the benefit of Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , who issued an opinion on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture but who has now left the Chamber , like to make it clear that there was never any question of defining research on a sector-by-sector basis .
We did not champion a particular sector - we focused on research - but we are not by any means indifferent to agriculture and it is evident in many areas .
Very special attention is paid to it in an area that he did not mention , in the context of support to Community policies , where agriculture will play a very important role .
Moreover , the multifunctionality of agriculture is included in its own right , as are aspects of sustainable rural development and support for biodiversity , which shows clearly that we are not concerned about genomics alone , but also about biodiversity , as a natural process , which may be of interest in many respects .
One very positive point is that the specific programmes have turned out to be absolutely consistent with the framework programme , which , as you know , has been finally approved by the Council and has now been officially in force since 3 June .
In any case , the framework programme is only a basis .
I note that the rapporteurs have done some very high-quality work and that even now the Commission can definitely accept a very large proportion of the amendments in their present form , in terms of both their principle and content .
I should like , furthermore , to echo Mr van Velzen 's praise of the initiative that has been taken - which qualifies as historic - to table en bloc the amendments adopted en bloc at the May part-session , which , if adopted , will be incorporated into the text as described in the statements issued by the Commission and the Council when the framework programme was adopted .
We have therefore complied fully with the agreement that we concluded and I think that this is an interesting and new element from an institutional and methodological point of view .
As Mr Caudron rightly stressed , clearly when we work in a spirit of mutual trust in this field we are able to make progress more rapidly , and I too wished to underline this myself once more .
Some of the amendments are useful clarifications and provide more detailed descriptions of the scientific content of the framework programme ; of course , they must be taken into consideration .
Sometimes , however , I have to say that the proposals go into too much detail and , although we can accept them in principle , in some cases it would be more appropriate to include these suggestions in the work programmes .
I now turn to the individual reports .
Mr van Velzen 's report , which is very wide-ranging and covers the first and third aspects of the European Research Area , that is integrating and strengthening the European Research Area , is clearly very comprehensive and we can confirm even now that all of his amendments are to a very large extent acceptable .
We can accept all of the amendments concerning the process of implementing the framework programme , as Mr Caudron also stressed : the transition from the fifth to the Sixth Framework Programme , the budgetary proposals , of course , which have been included , and the need for a flexible transition , where we have accepted your proposed form of wording .
I believe that here Parliament is making an important contribution to a Commission position which - we have to admit - was rather too isolationist ; Parliament has shown wisdom and understanding on this issue of the transition from one framework programme to another .
We will of course also have to ensure that the programme is implemented in an integrated way , and we will be sending Parliament some information in this regard , in particular on drawing up the work programmes .
I hope that we will be able to continue to work together in the implementation phase , that we will be able to keep you informed on a regular basis about the various aspects and that you will obviously let us have your views and thoughts on any problems that may arise .
We all agree that it will be necessary to evaluate the contribution made by the framework programme to establishing the European Research Area , and I would remind you that there will be an evaluation of the new instruments after two years .
All of this is work that we can do together .
As far as the priority of genomics and biotechnology for health is concerned , the Commission will of course take on board all of the amendments relating to research into cancer , of whatever form : genetic , clinical and others .
In particular , as you also mentioned , translational research is a very important aspect , as are , of course , strategies for prevention .
In the same way , we will not forget diabetes and the new opportunities opening up here , as Mr van Velzen has just stressed .
I should like to say to Mr Liese , who tabled an amendment in plenary , that in my view , where palliative care is concerned , it is quite clear that this point can be taken into account in what we call the coordination of European policies , and in the support for research into diseases , which must in any case be approached holistically .
There will not therefore be any problem with incorporating this idea that you expounded in plenary .
On the other hand , I can assure you that the Commission will not be able to accept any of the amendments on life sciences that have just been tabled in plenary if they compromise the balance that we all worked together to achieve between genomics and non-genomics research in the Sixth Framework Programme .
As far as the other thematic priorities are concerned , overall the Commission can accept all of the amendments , apart , however , from those which go into too much detail on the specific programmes , such as on food safety and quality .
These are details and issues that do not fall within the scope of the specific programmes as described in the Sixth Framework Programme .
Turning now to an amendment that has just been tabled in the plenary , by Mr van Velzen I think , on space and satellites , we need to engage in a process of reflection and carry out research , but this must also be done in collaboration with the European Space Agency , which is moreover responsible for implementing space policy .
Although I have sympathy for the substance of your proposal , we will have to adjust the wording to find a way to make collaboration possible .
Generally speaking , I can safely say that the entire contents of Mr van Velzen 's report are an accurate reflection of the wishes that we have all expressed , even though some points are obviously too detailed for us to take on board as they stand , but we are certainly on the same wavelength , a fact that I can only welcome .
The same obviously goes for Mrs Zorba 's amendments .
They are all acceptable and have even introduced an extra dimension into the reflection process by establishing a link with the notion of multidisciplinarity and by putting greater emphasis on researcher mobility . I also agree , Mrs Zorba , with the comments just made by your neighbour , Mrs Zrihen , on the notion of Europe , because Europe 's wealth lies mainly in its human resources - in its researchers - and we must capitalise on them by strengthening the link between the research process and the so-called Bologna process , so that we can establish a Europe of knowledge .
This was , moreover , stated at the Barcelona Summit . Europe 's greatest challenge will be to maintain high-quality human resources , and I will be coming back to this when I address science and society and attracting young people into careers in research .
There is also , as you said , support for the creation of the European Higher Education Area .
I think that this idea of science and education has a bearing on our debate on the rules for participation , which is obviously important , but we also think that we need to ensure complementarity with contrasting and similar actions within the thematic priorities .
Turning now to Mr Purvis , who addressed a drafting problem in the text of an amendment tabled in plenary , which seeks to clarify the eligibility criteria for experienced researchers , I should like to say that we intended our text to mean four years of experience or a doctorate .
The original wording is therefore unsatisfactory .
We are now proposing a much simpler text , which reads , four years of experience or a doctorate , and is therefore along the same lines as the amendment that you are tabling in plenary . This is the crucial point , and I think that you were right to stress the fact that where we wrote ' including ' , this was not perhaps sufficiently clear and that it was therefore better to replace ' including ' with ' or ' , which is much simpler .
There you have a very precise answer to an amendment that is going to be put to the vote in plenary .
On the other hand , Mrs Zorba , we find it difficult to accept the amendment setting a fixed budget for international fellowships , because I think that fixing amounts in advance introduces a degree of inflexibility that is not entirely appropriate . We can assure you , however , that we will monitor the individual fellowships in the spirit of your amendment , because obviously they are one of the entry points into the framework programme .
But we do not agree that we should start classifying all mobility actions in an excessively rigid way , because this would end up being damaging .
However , where your amendments on science and society are concerned , we fully agree with those which call for greater involvement of the general public and the stakeholders - such as patients ' organisations and environmental associations - in the science and society debate , and those which underline the important role played by teachers and the media in developing a better understanding of science .
Nevertheless , we do not think that it would be appropriate to mention issues relating to science and society explicitly in the thematic priorities , because this is an area that cuts across the thematic priorities and covers science and society as a whole .
We would therefore be downgrading it if we were to include it solely in the thematic priorities .
Having said that , these are details compared with the general thinking behind your proposal .
Next , and this is an important point , I note that Parliament has ensured that greater priority is given to ' science and society ' .
We have to recognise that this is actually the first time that this subject has been addressed explicitly in a framework programme , and you have increased its budget , which is a good decision in my view .
Turning now to Mr Alyssandrakis 's report and the additional comments made by Mrs Matikainen , I believe , Mr Alyssandrakis , that all of your amendments serve to clarify the Commission proposal .
The Commission is willing to accept all of them , subject to some minor drafting changes , although this will not affect the general thinking behind them .
This applies , for example , to all of the amendments concerning radiation protection , which is of course a major issue .
On nuclear fusion , we can take on board the majority of the amendments that advocate funding for the activities concerned , but we have to make it very clear that the ITER project is a new initiative .
I believe that you and Mrs Matikainen are saying more or less the same thing , but the ITER project really does have to be seen as a next step and it is therefore essential that it also be included in the specific programme because it is one of the projects on which the future of nuclear fusion depends .
This does not mean that basic research and research in general should not be pursued in areas other than implementing ITER , as you rightly stressed , for example on JET and other types of tokamak , such as the stellarator .
But our objective has to be to make ITER our next step .
Moreover , substantial progress has been made in international negotiations on ITER in recent weeks : today we have a proposal for at least three sites , two , maybe three , in Europe - Mr Vidal-Quadras will understand what I am getting at because Spain is doing marvellous work in this field - and one site in Japan .
Negotiations are progressing well here and that is significant .
The Commission fully recognises the importance of the management of radioactive waste .
However , the amendments tabled tend to introduce deadlines that are too restrictive for the purposes of research .
They cannot therefore be accepted in full , because we have to keep research into the management of radioactive waste fairly open-ended : there may not be just one solution , but several .
I turn now to Mr Pitrasanta 's report .
We should like to thank you , Mr Pitrasanta , and through you the entire Parliament .
We wish to thank you , as Mrs McNally mentioned , for taking such a keen interest in the Joint Research Centre and for ensuring that it is supported in the framework programme .
It is very important for Parliament to realise that in the Joint Research Centre the European Union has an instrument at its disposal that can help to make certain political objectives a reality .
It will be useful in helping us to establish the European Research Area by creating common bases of knowledge and measurements and also , as you stressed Mr Pitrasanta , by fostering links with national centres .
This is an interesting point and you did well to highlight it .
While we are on the subject , I should like to inform you that the Commission intends to make a statement for the Council Minutes indicating that it welcomes Parliament 's intention to set up an ad-hoc group of Members , a kind of monitoring committee , to act as an interface with the Joint Research Centre .
I think this idea was already in the Avignon report , but you were right to take it up again .
From an institutional point of view , we will see that we make a statement to the Council and have it noted in the Minutes .
This is a good idea and it enjoys parliamentary support .
We consider the amendments to be acceptable , including those that emphasise the priority that must be given to environmental issues , in particular the protection of ecosystems and food safety .
You will be aware that the Joint Research Centre is considered to have some of the best expertise in Europe on traceability , for example of GMOs .
It will therefore be an important tool in the run-up , in particular , to enlargement , when the Centre is opened up to new members : I will return to this point when I address Mr Schwaiger 's report .

Mr Schwaiger , I should like to say how timely your amendments are ; this comes as no surprise given that you are very familiar with the issues and that you insisted on visiting the JRC .
We do not have any problems with them ; quite the opposite .
We think that your report puts forward additional arguments in favour of integrating the Joint Research Centre into European networks , and in particular networks of excellence , and we agree with the principles that you mentioned , both on ethics and openness .
I should like to make it clear , however , that the same goes for research into both efforts to harmonise nuclear safety criteria and the nuclear fuel cycle , which is vital .
Here , recent events show that the nuclear fuel cycle needs to be subjected to ever more stringent controls , and the agreement on disarmament that has just been concluded by Russia and the United States assumes that Europe will also play a part in this discussion .
I met officials from the International Atomic Energy Agency in Vienna who asked us to pool some of our expertise with theirs , precisely so as to gain a better understanding of these dissemination issues .
Your comment , Mr Schwaiger , could not therefore have been more pertinent and is highly topical .
This therefore needs to be taken into account when considering the general issue of dispersion and non-dissemination , and Europe needs to make its contribution to the joint effort .
Mrs De Palacio and I also support the technical aspects of your proposal .
As you emphasised , the safety of some nuclear power stations , including those in Lithuania , gives huge cause for concern and the JRC has a degree of expertise and a training capability here that could be exploited .
There you have it : I think that I have now dealt with all of the reports and I should like , by way of a conclusion , to respond to some of the interventions made in the debate .
I have already said to Mr Purvis that on the issue of the Marie Curie fellowships we will correct the text along the lines that you suggested .
I would stress that you were right to say how important ' science and society ' is for young people .
How can we encourage young people to study science , a point also made by Mrs McNally ?
This is where we need the actions to converge .
As you know , we have drafted a ' science and society ' action plan .
We will have to consider how to implement it and we can do so together .
Mr Liese mentioned biofuels : his proposal is highly relevant and we can support his amendment .
Besides , it is along the same lines as Mrs De Palacio 's directive on the same issue .
As I have already said , we can support the ideas on palliative care that you mentioned in the debate .
Mr Souchet has left I think , but his question on nuclear energy is clearly a general one .
In conclusion , I should like to address some more general issues related to the economy .
Today , in adopting the framework programme and the specific programmes , I think that we have shown how essential research and innovation are to achieving the Lisbon objective of becoming the most dynamic economy in the world .
With this in mind , I think that the July part-session , as Mrs Quisthoudt-Rowohl and the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy proposed yesterday , will obviously be very significant , because it is then that we will be in a position to make the Sixth Framework Programme a reality as part of the European Research Area .
In this respect , I can tell you that the response to the calls for expressions of interest - a new initiative that we have just launched for the first time and that we issued to the scientific community and industry - has been startlingly successful , and has even been rather difficult to manage because we have received more than 15 000 expressions of interest .
This shows that the European research community and the European Research Area are gathering momentum .
The problem is that we risk being the victim of our own success and running into management difficulties .
But 15 000 expressions of interest is quite something !
Success on this scale reflects the efforts we have all made - that you have made - to provide information and raise awareness .
I think that this work has been very worthwhile because it points to the emergence of an awareness of and willingness to foster research and innovation in Europe .
You are right about this and I should like to respond to a number of the points made about research and innovation , by Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel , who stressed the issue of the link between research and innovation , and by Mr Rbig , who mentioned the problem of small and medium-sized enterprises .
It is clear that we need to move into the implementation phase , and that we have to achieve our target of 15 % , which is not always easy because doing so relies on providing information and raising awareness .
In the implementation phase we will have to pay particular attention to the practical measures we can take to reach this objective .
For an SME the difficulty lies in the costs and in saying this I am responding to Mrs Langenhagen 's comment : I think that you are right to highlight this issue of guarantees for small and medium-sized enterprises .
When it comes to implementation , we are trying to ensure that the guarantees no longer constitute an additional source of fear or present additional difficulties for small and medium-sized enterprises .
So much then for the issue of implementation , based on the rules for participation , of what we will call the admissible costs .
This is what we have in mind at the moment , but the debate is ongoing because , as you know better than anybody , we are talking about public money and we cannot commit it any old how .
The debate is underway though , and I hope to have the opportunity to discuss it with the Committee on Budgets and , of course , the Court of Auditors .
In this way our proposal will be able to cater for this difficulty , while ensuring that we do not run any unacceptable risks .
Mr Mantovani , you also mentioned SMEs .
This is an objective that we all share and I think it is important for us to launch an information campaign and reflect on the modalities .
If you wish , I would be quite happy to have a meeting with you about this issue , to listen to your proposals and consider how we might best implement the SME strand ; in any case they will benefit from over EUR 2 billion under the next framework programme , which is a very significant sum .
We must also ensure , as you said , Mr Rbig , that our work complements that of the European Investment Bank , which is prepared to deploy additional resources in this area .
In conclusion , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think that we are going to try to create some momentum , given that in Barcelona we agreed on the objective of 3 % of GDP .
I should like to thank Mr van Velzen for having underlined once more that the future of Europe is at stake here , that we need to boost research and innovation in Europe , and that we need to do this together ; this is what Parliament wanted .
I remember that when the idea of the European Research Area was first floated , you insisted on the objective of 3 % of GDP .
We are going to achieve this , thanks to you , thanks to the scientific community , and thanks to the desire to make research and innovation a priority at European level .
I should like to thank you in any case for your work and I hope that we will all have played our part in moving things forward .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
. ( PT ) The purpose of this report is to revise Article 6 of Parliament 's Rules of Procedure concerning : ( a ) the concept of the ' appropriate authority ' of a Member State to request that immunity be waived ; ( b ) the appropriate procedure for verifying the competence of the authority submitting the application for the lifting of immunity of a Member facing prosecution ; ( c ) the procedure Parliament should follow when examining a request for the waiver of a Member 's immunity ; and ( d ) the procedure to be adopted when Parliament needs to assert the parliamentary immunity of a Member .
I fully supported the initiative , especially the part - which I consider to be most relevant - which closed an obvious gap in the Rules of Procedure , which has been clearly illustrated in the cases underlying the MacCormick report , which was debated and voted on at the same time .
These were cases in which it was not the Member State authorities requesting the waiver of immunity but instead a Member requesting that his status be guaranteed in the event of prosecution in any given Member State . As in the specific case of the Italian system , the onus is on the Member himself or herself and not the authorities to submit the request for immunity .
.
( PT ) The drafting of this report was prompted by the cases brought by the Italian courts against individuals who are Members of the European Parliament . In the course of these proceedings , certain provisions concerning immunity were not complied with , because it was not the Italian authorities that asked the European Parliament to consider waiving immunity , but the Members concerned themselves .
The difficulty was then knowing whether or not the European Parliament could take the view that it had , in fact , been consulted on the matter , given that Rule 6 of its Rules of Procedure requires any request to be addressed to the President of the European Parliament by the competent authorities of a Member State .
It must be clarified that , in the proceedings in question , it was the Members themselves who submitted these requests to Parliament , in line with the Italian practice according to which , when the issue of waiving the immunity of a Member facing prosecution is raised , it is the responsibility of that individual to submit the request to the Assembly of which he or she is a Member .
It is in this context that the rapporteur suggested a specific procedure that is not intended to replace the request for a waiver of immunity submitted by the competent national authority as laid down in Rule 6 of the Rules of Procedure , but instead to prevent national authorities , in the formal absence of such a request , being able not to take account of the protection afforded to the Members of the European Parliament .
The procedure suggested by the rapporteur deserves our total support , because it is the best way of dealing with the loopholes in the texts currently in force .
Only a comprehensive reform such as the one suggested in the Duff report , which was studied and voted on the same day , will provide a complete and structured response to this type of problem .
. ( PT ) The vote took place at a time when the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy had delivered the following opinion on the aspects that remained the most sensitive in political terms : firstly , an immediate ban on the sale of new cosmetic products tested on animals where other validated methods of testing exist ; secondly , a total ban , in five years ' time , on the sale of all new cosmetic products tested on animals ; thirdly , a ban on testing on animals by the end of 2004 .
It is well known that if plenary pursued this approach , we would face the prospect of a major disagreement with the Council which , in turn , will give up not only on the idea of banning experiments on animals but also on the idea of banning sales . In other words , we would face the prospect of a heated and lively conciliation process .
This is my position exactly , because I am disappointed with the degree of conformism that I discerned in the prevailing Council positions and because I am convinced that it is absolutely crucial to push forward with the positions held by the industry in this field , in order to achieve a balanced weighting of the values involved .
Preparation of European Council ( Seville , 21 / 22 June 2002 ) , including situation between India and Pakistan
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the preparation of the European Council in Seville on 21 and 22 June 2002 , including the situation between India and Pakistan .
Mr President , I shall comment very briefly on the issue raised by Mr Van Orden .
This Parliament is well aware that the Council has attended to the issue of Zimbabwe on various occasions and that this matter was addressed at the Barcelona European Council .
I have been following the matter very closely and I can tell you that a General Affairs Council will be held next Monday .
Let us hope that we can deal with the matter at Minister of Foreign Affairs level and should it prove necessary or appropriate , it could then be raised at the Seville European Council .
With regard to the Seville European Council , Mr President , from 21 to 22 June the second and last European Council of the Spanish Presidency of the European Union will take place in Seville .
Five basic issues will be addressed at this Council : the process of economic reforms , as a follow-up to the Barcelona European Council ; the current state of negotiations on enlargement , a process on which we have made substantial progress ; issues of Justice and Home Affairs , in particular immigration policy ; the debate on the future of Europe , with a report from the President of the Convention , Mr Giscard d 'Estaing ; and the issues of greatest concern in the context of the CFSP ( Common Foreign and Security Policy ) .
I shall now briefly discuss the issues I have mentioned .
I shall start with the economic issues - the follow-up to the Spring European Council .
This follow-up will be one of the fundamental elements of this forthcoming European Council , since the Spring European Council laid down a programme and a follow-up for certain issues and established a set of tasks to be revised in Seville .
Barcelona represented the continuation of the process inaugurated at the Lisbon European Council , which focused on a programme of economic reforms in the aim of making the European Union the most dynamic and competitive region in the world in the context of the new economy of the information society .
In Seville , therefore , and as a follow-up to Barcelona , the following issues will be examined : firstly , Ecofin - which is due to meet on 20 June , before the European Council - will present a final report on the adoption of the broad economic policy guidelines .
The Presidency intends to present a report on the current state of work on the tax package , which includes a range of initiatives on savings tax , energy tax and cooperation with tax authorities .
The issue of ' corporate governance ' ( the governance of businesses ) will also be addressed .
For this reason , the report by the high level working group on company law must discuss three issues : the role of non-executive directors and of boards of directors , company directors ' pay and the board of directors ' responsibility for preparing information about the company 's finances .
Other issues left pending from the Barcelona European Council and which will be addressed by the Seville Council are : the simplification and improvement of regulations - known as ' better regulation ' ; economic services of general interest - the Commission will also present the report that has been requested of it ; energy supply - on which it will present another report ; telecommunications , education , research ; the outermost regions and sustainable development .
The second major issue that I announced was that of negotiations on enlargement .
Unless you ask me to provide further information , Mr President , I would prefer not to dwell on the issue of enlargement , since today a substantive debate is going to be held on the matter .
Therefore , as enlargement will be the subject of a specifically scheduled statement this very evening , I think we could keep the debate short and leave this issue for later .
Issues of Justice and Home Affairs have been one of the main priorities of the Spanish Presidency of the Union .
In Seville we will be pressing ahead on these issues in four main areas : firstly , a review of Community asylum and immigration policy will be undertaken - basically a review of the Tampere commitments - as well as an assessment of the situation and a clear programme to fulfil the commitments that we adopted in 1999 during the Finnish Presidency , as a consequence of the communitarisation of Justice and Home Affairs issues , formalised in the Treaty of Amsterdam .
Secondly , the Heads of State and Government will be discussing a global plan to combat illegal immigration .
Then there will be a discussion of a programme and a policy on protecting the Union 's external borders .
Lastly , a debate will be held on integrating migration policy into the Union 's external actions .
With regard to the first issue I mentioned , the European Council , in line with the conclusions of the Tampere Council and of following Councils , is going to urge the Council to approve , within the deadlines laid down in the Treaty of Amsterdam , the necessary legislative instruments to adopt a common asylum and immigration policy .
This policy must respect the balance between a set of principles , such as the protection of refugees , the Union and the Member States ' ability to receive asylum seekers and the integration of legal immigrants .
Secondly , the negotiations currently underway on adopting a common policy in the field of asylum and legal immigration will be given a boost if at the same time the Union develops a common policy to combat illegal immigration , which produces effective results in the short and medium term .
For these reasons , on 28 February of this year , the Council approved its plan to combat illegal immigration .
This will also be addressed by the European Council .
In addition to vigilance and closer monitoring of the borders and of border crossing points , one of the plan 's aims is to prevent the illegal crossing of the external borders of the Member States of the Union , whilst at the same time ensuring that asylum seekers can exercise their right to ask for international protection .
In this context , the communication that the Commission presented recently , entitled " Towards integrated management of the external borders of the Member States of the European Union " takes on particular importance .
Lastly , on the basis of the agreement reached at the Laeken Summit , in Seville the European Council will demonstrate its desire to integrate immigration policy much more deeply into the Union 's external actions .
The guiding principle of external action in the field of immigration and asylum with the countries of origin and of transit must be a global , integrated and balanced approach , which uses all the Community and Member States ' instruments in a coordinated way to establish a relationship of cooperation with a view to ensuring the joint management of migratory flows , and to address the underlying causes of these flows and of poverty , in order to incorporate this dimension into development aid policy .
Something else that will be raised is the development of an external strategy for areas in the immediate vicinity of borders to cooperate in the management and control of migratory flows .
The other major package of issues , to which I referred at the beginning , is everything that concerns institutional affairs , the debate on the future of Europe and the reform of the Council .
There are essentially two matters of an institutional nature , on which we shall focus : the debate on the future of Europe and the reform of the Council of Ministers .
With regard to the first issue , the Convention on the future of Europe held its inaugural sitting on 28 February , as you will remember , because this took place in the seat of the European Parliament , and before Seville , the Convention will already have held five plenary sessions .
Furthermore , I think we can draw some preliminary conclusions from the debates that have taken place to date .
On the one hand , the majority of the members of the Convention have shown themselves to be in favour of going more deeply into the process of European integration in a realistic way , in particular with regard to the distribution of competences .
On the other hand , and in relation to the works of the Convention , the Presidium has agreed to set up six working groups , which are to present their conclusions between September and November .
In Seville , in line with the provisions of the Laeken declaration , the President of the Convention , Mr Giscard d 'Estaing , will present an oral report on the progress achieved in the Convention 's works .
With regard to the reform of the Council , and in accordance with the conclusions of the Barcelona European Council , the Presidency will present a report in Seville on improving its functioning and on reforms to make it more effective on the basis of the report submitted by the Secretary General of the Council , in the aim of ensuring greater transparency in the legislative process and in which practical measures for its adoption will be put forward .
I should like , of course , to clarify something that to me seems obvious , but which bears repeating , and that is that these Council reforms only refer to internal reforms , to internal organisation , and that in no case does the Council intend to address issues that require a reform of primary law , because this , of course , is a matter for the Intergovernmental Conference and for the European Convention preparing the Intergovernmental Conference .
The Council will , therefore , be considering a set of practical reforms that will make the work of the European Council more rapid and more dynamic and which , furthermore , as you would expect , move towards the system employed by the Councils that support the European Council .
I hope that the European Council can now begin to attempt to simplify its administrative tasks so as to prepare the Union for a scenario in which , following enlargement , we will have 25 Member States .
Lastly , the European Council , as you would expect and as is the norm , will have to deal with the field of external relations focussing essentially on the following issues : firstly , the situation in the Middle East .
On this matter the European Union will maintain its efforts to achieve a negotiated solution to the conflict , by condemning the use of violence and by promoting conciliation as an instrument of joint action geared towards making progress in the economic , political and security spheres .
In particular , with regard to the crisis of the Church of the Nativity , the Council has been pleased at the resolution of this crisis in line with the memorandum of understanding signed by both sides .
The Palestinians affected by the agreement have been transferred to various Member States of the Union - Spain , Belgium , Ireland , Italy and Portugal - to be accepted , for humanitarian reasons , in line with the common position reached by the Council on 21 May .
The adoption of this common position underlines the commitment of the European Union to achieving a lasting peace in the Middle East .
I therefore believe that , in the context of these recent actions , the European Council will study the situation and will try once again to give impetus to the latest initiatives to be put forward by the High Representative , Mr Solana , for a Peace Conference to take place as soon as possible .
At the same time , the Council will study developments in issues of security and defence policy , in particular , in relation to the fight against terrorism and the follow-up to the Laeken mandate .
I also believe that the European Council will be forced to deal with the conflict between India and Pakistan to which I shall now specifically refer .
Despite having historically been strictly bilateral , this conflict today contains a new dimension , which transcends the sub-regional consequences to become a potential factor for destabilisation for the entire Asian Continent and for the whole world .
Given the possibility of a fourth India-Pakistan conflagration , which could spiral out of control towards nuclear escalation , the international community must react unambiguously .
At the end of last year , following the tragic attacks by terrorists on elected representatives in Srinagar and New Delhi , the Presidency held talks with both governments to urge both sides to prevent a military escalation , to reopen political dialogue and to find political formulas to resolve the problem of Kashmir .
After the encouraging speech given by President Musharraf on 12 January , New Delhi reacted with a sense of historical opportunity to this conciliatory gesture by Pakistan and agreed to stop military mobilisation .
Nevertheless , further devastating attacks - in Kaluchak and in Srinagar - border skirmishes and the re-emergence of the dialectic of confrontation , with the recent missile tests by Pakistan that matched those by India in January , have brought both armies to the brink of war .
We only have to remember the tone of the disappointing speech by the President of Pakistan on 27 May and the cold rigidity of India 's response to the calls for containment made at the highest political levels .
Here we must recall the visits to New Delhi and Islamabad by the Secretary of State , Mr Powell , by Commissioner Patten , by the Foreign Secretary , Mr Straw , the calls by Presidents Chirac and Putin and , lastly , the tour currently being undertaken by the United States ' Defence Secretary , Mr Rumsfeld .
The Union has to date wished to maintain a position that is as even-handed as possible in this conflict , insisting on the need for both sides to make efforts to reconcile their positions .
This was the idea that inspired the Presidency declaration on this matter , issued on 21 May .
Despite the undeniable efforts by the Pakistanis against the hideouts of Al-Qaida cells , the international community must not tolerate any link between the operation of the nuclear umbrella and political cross-border claims .
For this reason , Pakistan 's commitment against organised terror must be total and unconditional and not selective in its efforts or in the deadlines it sets .
I should like , specifically , to remind you that , at the General Affairs Council held last Monday , the ministers agreed to convey a new message , this time not in the form of a Council declaration , but in the form of a press communiqu , with the President of the General Affairs Council , Mr Piqu , informing the media , in order to encourage both sides at a time when we are already seeing signs of relaxation , such as the fact that India has already opened its air space to civilian Pakistani flights and the fact that currently there seems to be a more relaxed atmosphere , in which the alert has been withdrawn along the militarised lines .
Nor must we forget the European victims of the attacks that were carried out in April and May in Islamabad .
Let us remember the bomb set off in the Protestant church of a diplomatic neighbourhood and , in Karachi , the suicide attack on a bus containing French military advisers and technical specialists , as tragic proof that innocent EU citizens have not been excluded from terrorist madness in the region .
In these circumstances , the Presidency considers that the strategy of diplomatic monitoring of both sides must be maintained , albeit whilst now calling , with greater firmness , if necessary , for new gestures of conciliation by both sides which will satisfy the legitimate demands - especially by India - for terrorism to be firmly dealt with .
New Delhi and Islamabad must realise that the international community does not - and will not - understand if either of the two countries resorts to military force .
Since 17 May , more than 60 people have died at the India-Pakistan border ; a million soldiers from the two sides are watching each other from the line of control , awaiting orders to start a conflict which , if it happens , - whatever its final outcome may be - will mean desolation and death for the population of both countries .
Consequently , as I have already said , the European Union will continue to help ensure that both sides understand the need to keep the paths of dialogue open , in order to prevent a military scenario arising , the consequences of which would have a tragic affect on the entire continent of Asia .
I would say that next week , in Seville , the message of the Heads of State and Government will be along these lines , in the hope that the already nascent actions to decrease the tension that are taking place will increase with every passing day and that we will be able , at the end of next week , to see a situation that is calmer than the one we saw a few days ago .
Mr President , I should like to conclude this statement by expressing my hope and my belief that the Seville European Council will be a good ending to the term of the Spanish Presidency , during which none of us have spared any effort to push forwards our common idea of Europe and to make the motto that we proposed at the beginning of our Presidency - ' more Europe ' - a reality .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Mr de Miguel for his comments , with which I entirely agree .
I would also like to thank him for his digression into foreign policy with particular reference to the extremely disturbing situation of India and Pakistan , which warrants very close attention on our part .
To end this digression into foreign policy , on which , I repeat , I am in complete agreement with Mr de Miguel , I would like to call upon you to pay attention to potential conflicts too , to growing tensions such as the situation following the elections on the island of Madagascar , which is becoming increasingly perilous and which warrants our close attention precisely because we have greater influence and greater capacity for action before conflict breaks out .
Turning to today 's subject , I will just go briefly through the matters which will be debated at the Seville European Conference .
I have to say that my task has been made much easier by the first-rate work of the current Council Presidency .
I am extremely grateful to the Spanish Presidency , for we have worked both well and hard .
This is a critical time for the future of the institutions : the Convention is working on a new political and institutional framework for the Union and enlargement is approaching .
At Seville we shall report on the candidate countries ' progress in implementing the acquis .
They have come a long way and we are continuing to work with them under the special programme for them .
Our final opinion on each candidate country will be issued before the October European Council in Brussels .
The roadmap we drew up has been adhered to and everything is in place for the final decision .
There are real grounds for optimism and I continue to hope that the EU will have up to ten new members in 2004 .
There are many issues to be discussed at Seville , but today , before you , the Members of the European Parliament , I want to concentrate on two in particular : how the EU is run and immigration .
The Convention is up and running , the debate is lively and there are plenty of ideas and proposals .
That was to be expected , given that we are adopting an innovative approach rather than working through the usual diplomatic channels .
President Giscard d 'Estaing will be reporting on the first stage of the Convention 's work at Seville and we shall pay careful attention to what he has to say .
At Seville , however - and this is the main point of my speech - we will not just be talking about how to govern the Union in future : we will be discussing - and deciding - how we can improve the running of the Union now .
We cannot sit still and wait for the reform of the Treaties : we must take advantage right now of all the possibilities the existing Treaties offer to improve our running of the Union and our organisational model .
The Convention is working on policies for the future but we must also use the - albeit limited - instruments we have to hand to tackle today 's problems .
This is what links the proposals on Council reform made by Mr Solana in his report and the proposals of the Commission on better regulation .
Mr Corbett 's proposals on the reform of Parliament that you are discussing in this part-session are also similar in this regard .
These proposals involve all the institutions in different ways , and all the institutions will therefore have to work together to achieve the objective .
Let us start with what is known as ' better regulation ' .
This was the idea behind the White Paper on European Governance : to exploit all the opportunities available in the present legal framework in order to improve the legislative and decision-making process .
The enormous participation in the debate on the White Paper and your own contributions - especially the report by Mrs Kaufmann - show that this was the right strategy .
The system must therefore be leaner , more transparent and more efficient .
We must show that we are able to satisfy the demand for greater accountability and for more proportionality in the exercise of the powers conferred on the Council , Parliament and the Commission by the Treaties .
Moreover , we must gear our action to a new goal : the goal of giving more substance to the concept of citizenship and making our fellow citizens ' relationship with the Union more transparent , more direct and more tangible .
Last week I presented our project to the Conference of Presidents of the European Parliament , but I would like to go over certain crucial points again now .
Firstly , we are proposing to improve and simplify European legislation by reviewing the whole cycle of the legislative process , beginning with the exercise of the right of initiative .
There are three prongs to this project : laying down clear rules on consultation , assessing the impact of decisions and improving legislative technique .
Our drafting of legislative proposals must be based on wider consultation of all parties concerned and more exhaustive analysis of the economic , social and environmental impact , in accordance with the decisions of the Gothenburg European Council , and this must be done without introducing unnecessary red tape .
Good Community regulation also means acting in full accordance with the original spirit of the Treaties . This means , in particular , making use of framework directives , which are one of the most effective instruments for increasing compliance with the principles of proportionality and subsidiarity .
It is also time to review the implementation of our policies , because implementation is the stage that affects the citizens most directly .
Transparency and democratic accountability demand that each of the institutions refocus its efforts on its core tasks .
In this way , we can start right now to see how the Community method can be revamped in practical terms .
I must stress once again that all this does not just apply to the Commission .
All the institutions must be involved if we really want to get useful results : the institutions have no option but to work together .
Lastly , the institutions themselves must return to their core tasks .
Each must therefore take on clear responsibilities so that we can complete an interinstitutional agreement by the end of the year .
With the Solana report , the Council has also launched a new debate on similar issues and tabled practical proposals for internal organisational reform which do not involve amending the Treaties .
The Commission wholeheartedly supports the Council 's reform efforts .
I can only welcome the fact that the Council is looking to draw a distinction in its internal organisation between the procedures applicable to its legislative function and those applicable to its purely administrative functions .
I also support the points contained in the proposal on continuity of work , the need to improve internal coordination and the possibility of reducing the number of Council configurations .
These are all recommendations which simplify their and our work .
These efforts will help us to tackle the problems that the forthcoming enlargement will bring for the working of our institutions .
In my view , an objective of such importance can only be addressed through a coordinated approach involving the Commission , Parliament and the Council .
We must act together , calmly but resolutely , to move beyond ' better regulation ' to achieve ' better organisation ' of all the institutions .
The Commission is ready to play its part in this joint endeavour .
Better organisation means more speed , more coordination and less red tape . It means giving up long-established but outdated positions in the interests of working faster and better than before , despite the increased complexity of the system .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as I said at the beginning of my speech , the most burning issue to be dealt with by the European Council is immigration .
It is worth repeating that there is no question of proposing solutions that are incompatible with the fundamental values of our Union . Instead , we must promote a model of integration that can combine freedom with our citizens ' legitimate demands for security .
I have already expressed my support for the Presidency 's decision to put the issue of immigration high on the Seville agenda .
In the eyes of most of our citizens , immigration is becoming increasingly linked with requirements for their protection in the area of freedom , security and justice that we are trying to build together .
There are a variety of reasons for this and they have been somewhat accentuated by the events of September 11 too .
We must address these issues without demonising them .
Our discussions now under way on legal immigration and the right of asylum could break down if we do not take on board our fellow citizens ' concerns about illegal immigration .
At Tampere , we agreed on a number of objectives that are still valid today .
We even have before us suitable proposals for achieving those objectives such as those set out in the Commission communication on illegal immigration , which formed the basis for the Council 's Action Plan .
Others concern the management of our external borders and readmission policies .
The political signals we have received recently are quite clear .
We cannot put the issue of security on the back burner , and we cannot let people think that a return to nationalistic solutions can provide a valid answer to transnational phenomena that overwhelm the capacity and scope for action of individual States and can therefore be tackled and managed only at EU level .
The problem is not just combating illegal trafficking : we must also lay the foundations for the full integration of lawful immigrants into our societies and regulate the flow of the immigrants we need .
Even enlargement is presented as a threat by some because of the issue of immigration .
But why - I ask myself , ladies and gentlemen - would the citizens of the candidate countries leave their countries and turn their lives upside down just when membership of the European Union is offering them brighter prospects of prosperity ?
Was the same thing not said when Spain and Portugal joined and was the same thing not said about Italy when the European Community was first created ?
We have to act quickly on various fronts .
Most importantly , we must tighten controls on the Union 's external borders in accordance with the recent proposals put forward by the Commission and the Italian Government .
I trust that the European Council will decide to bring together border police representatives to work out what measures and instruments are needed in the immediate term to launch these initiatives .
External border controls must also be linked to our good-neighbour policy . This seeks to develop special relations and mutual trust between the Union and all countries on its borders , especially following enlargement , with a view , not least , to undertaking joint measures to combat illegal immigration .
In the Euro-Mediterranean context , we have already launched initiatives together with Morocco to devise an overall approach to the issue of immigration .
In addition , we must step up the adoption and implementation of measures on asylum , not least in order to give practical substance to the concept of European citizenship and certain principles enshrined in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union .
All this , ladies and gentlemen , will not suffice unless it goes hand in hand with a proper cooperation and development policy and the systematic use of all the instruments available to us : a policy to tackle the causes of migration , bilateral agreements and readmission agreements .
We will soon be putting forward practical proposals on these points .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I will ask the Seville Council to take appropriate decisions on these points quickly , with the common sense and responsibility that we demonstrated at Brussels and Ghent last autumn .
The two topics I have concentrated on today are of crucial importance for us at this time .
Making our institutions more democratic , transparent and accountable is a response to our fellow citizens ' demand for a more effective Europe that is more in touch with their everyday concerns .
The issue of immigration highlights the very reason for European integration : to build a Europe that is prosperous , just and secure .
I thank the President of the Commission .
In particular , I would like to underline Parliament 's deep appreciation for the President 's commitment to the necessity for proper interinstitutional dialogue and for all of the institutions to recognise that we have a role and a shared responsibility .
I say to the Council , on behalf of Parliament , that we have a strong expectation that Seville will deliver a platform for an interinstitutional dialogue of substance in order to produce a common accord on better regulation and on better law-making - an objective we all share and agree on - and each in our own way , each institution is indispensable to a successful reform .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , Mr President-in-Office , the Spanish Presidency has done a good job so far , but the Seville Summit will be the deciding factor in our final judgment of it .
Mr President-in-Office , may I make a point of reiterating what the President of the European Parliament and the President of the Commission just said , that is , that our group expects a high-ranking political working party of all three institutions to be set up in Seville to advise us and reach conclusions as to how we can improve our legislation so that , as the President of the Commission said , we can reach an institutional agreement by the end of this year .
Prime Minister and President-in-Office Jos Mara Aznar has promised this to Parliament and I really do implore you to pass a resolution for us in Seville setting up this sort of political working party .
If you do , our final judgment of the Spanish Presidency will be even more positive than it has been so far .
As far as the reform of the Council is concerned , I quite understand your reticence , Mr President-in-Office , and I assume it is because you do not as yet have a brief to discuss it .
I am sure I am right in assuming that the Spanish Presidency will do everything in its power to ensure that the Council as a legislative body is distinguished from the Council as an executive body and that , where it acts as legislator , it does so transparently .
This is what we expect from Seville .
You said that the president of the convention , Valry Giscard d 'Estaing , would be submitting a report .
I would be delighted if all the governments of the Member States of the European Union were to follow suit , if their representatives to the convention also reported back to their cabinets and governments in the Member States of the European Union , in order to ensure there is direct feedback , just as we do at parliamentary level .
I should like on behalf of our group to make it perfectly clear that the debates in the Council today and at the summit in Seville must be predicated on strengthening the European Community , because we need strong European institutions and must not slip back into intergovernmentalism .
I say this in the light of my visit to the United States over the last two days .
Unless we act as a European Union , and we are hardly even perceived as a European Union in America ; unless we strengthen the European Union , then we shall lose more and more clout internationally , which is why our objective must be to strengthen the European Community .
We acknowledge the Spanish Presidency 's determined approach to the fight against terrorism .
Our perception in Europe is different from the perception in the United States .
The United States feels it is at war , because it is the first time it has been attacked on home territory .
We have to understand that and we must do everything we can in Europe to help destroy terrorist networks .
But we also have to say that terrorism and the fight against terrorism cannot be used as an excuse to violate human rights , be it in Africa , Chechnya or anywhere else .
And we must make a clear distinction between terrorists , on the one hand , and the Arab and Islamic world on the other .
That is why it is so important that the European Union continue in its endeavours to help broker peace in the Middle East .
That we say to the Israelis , you have the right to live within secure borders and anyone who attacks those secure borders must be prepared to meet decisive resistance .
But we must also say to the Palestinians that they have their dignity and the right to live within secure borders in a Palestinian state .
We welcome your efforts in the fight against terrorism , we welcome your efforts to set up a common European border police to protect the external borders of the European Union and we hope that Seville will bring results .
We recognise that Spain 's efforts on the Sixth Research Framework Programme have been a huge success and we also hope - and this will be discussed more thoroughly this afternoon - to confirm the timetable for the enlargement of the European Union .
I can only reiterate what President Prodi said : that we , the European Parliament , the European Council , the European Commission , the European institutions , are encouraging the countries of central Europe to conclude negotiations on the basis of the acquis communautaire , so that we can achieve results within the planned time frame and the countries of central Europe which sign accession agreements , together with Malta and - hopefully - Cyprus , can take part in the next European elections .
We , the European Parliament , we , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , see ourselves as the champion of the nations seeking to join the European Union and my only request , from the bottom of my heart , is that we all help to keep to this timetable .
( Applause )
Mr President , as made clear in the speeches both by the Presidency and by those party spokespeople who have spoken , Seville will be the last summit of the Spanish Presidency and , although this is not the time to draw up the final balance sheet , this is the time to take a brief look at how it has performed its duties and to see whether we are likely to pass or even to get a good mark .
It could be said that these five months have been characterised by an excessive fuss about most of the issues set as priorities for the Presidency 's term in office .
There has been a great deal of fuss about enlargement , about immigration , about Mediterranean policy , about fisheries policy and the reform of agricultural policy , about external policy , about transatlantic relations , etc .
It cannot be denied , Mr President , that we have talked about everything : sustainable development , the spirit of Lisbon , the institutionalisation of the Union , the outermost regions ... but if we look at the progress that has been made on any of the issues I have just mentioned - we will reach the conclusion that a major imbalance has been created between what is said and what is done .
As they say , Mr President , there has been much ado about nothing .
I know that on some issues - perhaps on many of them - the Presidency has alibis , but the fact is that we are approaching the end of the Presidency with a more complicated agenda than when we started and with more confusion .
On the issue of immigration and asylum , for example , for more than a month , we have been repeating , ad nauseam , the conclusions of the Tampere Council ; commitments that the Council has been unable to fulfil due to a lack of political will .
Nothing new is being said .
Everything has already been said and agreed upon but there has been such a fanfare of trumpets that you would think we had come up with something new for the Seville Summit .
With regard to employment policy , all I can fairly say is that Barcelona threw the spirit of Lisbon off course .
No account was taken of the fact that Lisbon 's strategic objective was not only to create a more prosperous and competitive economic area ; the other objectives were full employment and greater social cohesion , and this is where a step backwards has been taken .
What can we say about the major challenge laid down by the Swedish Presidency : sustainable development ?
This is a representative example of what has not been achieved .
The resolution of the Barcelona Summit mentioned sustainability 103 times .
Are there any higher offers ?
The Valencia Summit was a success in that it took place .
I know that the climate in the Middle East was not the most favourable , but we were not even able to press ahead with one of the few tangible priorities of the Spanish Presidency , the Euro-Mediterranean Bank .
With regard to transatlantic relations , it has already been said - Mr Poettering said this himself - that we have never had so many ongoing disputes with the USA , such as , for example , the trade and industry issues , the failure to ratify the Kyoto Protocol , the divergent positions on the Middle East , the belligerent position of the USA towards the International Criminal Court , which makes them feel that they can threaten us with intervening if a member of the American military is put on trial in the Netherlands .
It looks as if the States no longer respect us on the world stage .
I shall conclude , Mr President , with a comment on the institutional reforms : the world has become a very complicated place , globalisation requires increasingly strong global institutions and policies that are increasingly close to the citizens , but the Spanish Presidency - and it genuinely pains me to say this - has been characterised by contradictory and misguided responses to these challenges and in this area : more renationalisation , less European government ; and this will not help us to solve any of the problems facing Europe .
Cutting back on the powers of our common institutions is a defensive reaction that can only lead to failure .
This is , Mr President , the most sordid form of nationalism , and ' More Europe ' means less nationalism , both of the old style and of the new .
To conclude , it could be said that , to date , we are quite dissatisfied , but that we would like nothing more than to change our minds and , in the days remaining , in the final stretch , for you to surprise us and for more light to appear and for some shadows to vanish .
As I said to President Aznar on 16 January in this very Parliament , I should like nothing more than to be able to congratulate you when it is all over .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , first of all , I should share a saying with you .
Pessimists are usually right , but progress is made thanks to optimists .
I think this is the attitude we should adopt with regard to the forthcoming Council in Seville .
There are a number of crucial points on the agenda for that summit .
Topics on which clear and tangible progress must actually be made are the immigration issue , enlargement and the Council reforms .
As enlargement will be debated this afternoon , I shall only make a brief reference to it now .
In the past six months , a number of government leaders , including Prime Ministers Aznar and Blair , have come up with proposals on immigration .
Remarkably , they have not done so before now .
Where were they in the past three years following the agreements of Tampere ?
Indeed , since then , the Council has made little real progress following the highly verbose phraseology of space and freedom , security and justice .
If the Council is so keen to keep this responsibility all to itself - after all , we as MEPs are only being heard out of politeness - it should also render account of its own role and responsibility .
In fact , I should at this stage share with you an embarrassing example of the Council 's tardiness : the package of measures which this House adopted at the proposal of Mr Graham Watson around Christmas in order to find an effective European answer to the terrorist threats .
The Ministers for Justice and Home Affairs have still not taken an effective decision on this matter .
The immigration proposals , as these reach us via the media , very much smack of a cosy PR exercise between Great Britain and Spain .
In all honesty , who expects a great deal of good to come from Her Majesty 's ship ' Ark Royal ' sailing up and down the Mediterranean ?
Surely this will not be the ark that immigrants are waiting to board ?
No , we would be much better off looking into realistic , effective and , at the same time , forceful measures in order to achieve a common asylum and immigration policy .
I would refer to the ideas of the Belgian Prime Minister , Mr Verhofstadt , on this matter .
A number of his points have already been raised at Laeken , but unfortunately , they were apparently surplus to requirements at the time .
We must set up a true common asylum and immigration policy .
Crucial in this is , first of all , that immigration policy is linked to an integration policy and anti-discrimination policy .
These are not self-contained issues .
When a policy of this kind is set up , a great deal of attention should go to fundamental rights and freedoms .
Central is therefore also parliamentary control and co-legislation .
In addition , the Commission 's right of initiative and a majority decision-making process in the Council should not be absent ; that much is obvious .
In the policy itself , the focus should be on the fight against human trafficking and illegal immigration .
The President of the Commission mentioned it a moment ago : plans are already drawn up for illegal immigration .
What is needed , is implementation rather than clever new ideas .
This can only be done properly if the external borders are closely monitored , whereby one common European border police force must be able to assist , where necessary .
In the light of this , I should , in fact , share with you my serious concerns regarding control of the future eastern borders .
As far as I am concerned , no compromises should be made in that respect .
Mr President , you will have noticed that I do not always have a high opinion of the functioning of the Council .
I am therefore delighted to see that various proposals will be submitted in Seville which relate to the Council 's reform .
For the Liberal Group , it is of huge importance that the Council should , crucially , be democratic , open and subject to supervision .
This is why I call for the Community method across the board and for Council meetings , in which the Council acts as co-legislator , to be open to the public .
In fact , this openness should start with enlargement , so that everyone can see what the Council 's common position is on the matter .
As things stand at the moment , we are receiving such unsatisfactory - and some would claim coloured - information from the Council and also from the Commission , in fact , that one would almost consider hiring independent experts in order to find out what the true state of affairs in the candidate countries is or how the negotiations are really going .
You will really have to give us , along with the European citizen , better information , so that we can continue to trust in the role of the Commission and the Council .
On a final note , I should like to say that I am not so fond of pessimists , but the saying is there for a reason .
They are sometimes right .
We could say , nothing will come of Seville , but we will not .
I should like to say to the Spanish Presidency : show your bright , optimistic side .
Do what you are good at : grab the bull by the horns and you will have us on your side .
Pave the way for real progress , for that is what people want and what is desperately needed .
Mr President , firstly , I wish to pick up on a couple of points in the joint resolution , which my group will not be supporting , points which seem to be missing from the speeches we have heard this morning : for example , the welcome given to the International Criminal Court while regretting the position of the United States in seeking to protect its own citizens from it .
As we have heard today , justice should be universal and not dependent on nationality .
The European Parliament has also taken the view in the resolution that the Union should be taking a strong , leading role at the Johannesburg Summit , as it did on the Kyoto Protocol .
However , to do that it needs a commitment to sustainability in all aspects of its work , and that includes integration of social and environmental factors into its economic and trade policies .
We have to remember that without a healthy environment we have no sound foundation for our economies .
So we trust that will be remembered , as promised by Commission President Prodi , in the better governance arrangements and we are looking forward to the policy proofing and the impact on the social and environmental dimensions he mentioned today .
To be credible at that sustainability summit , we also need to demonstrate that we understand the importance of development and its link to certain aspects of immigration policy .
I was pleased to hear the Spanish minister referring to issues about deep poverty .
That is in marked contrast to what we have been hearing from the Spanish Prime Minister over the last few weeks .
The European Union wants a mobile , flexible workforce .
It is a priority in our employment policy , so why do we insist on making legal immigration for all skilled sectors virtually impossible ?
What we have been hearing over the last few weeks and today sounds to us simply like moving the walls of fortress Europe and looking for stronger building materials , including using the idea of economic clout - such as development aid - in our attempts to have other countries police their borders more effectively to stop people leaving .
The countries of eastern and central Europe are joining the Union to escape that sort of policy .
We are also concerned at some of the proposed reforms to the Council 's inner workings - the Development Council , for example , is to be absorbed into a wider grouping .
But we welcome the reassurance we have heard today that the reforms will not touch matters for the IGC and the Convention , because it is essential that the Council does not become the legislature and executive and break the current balance between the institutions .
We welcome the commitment to greater transparency and trust that this will not just be for the Council but for the public as well .
Mr President , although I greatly admire Mr de Miguel , I am sorry that he is replacing Mr Aznar here today .
I am sorry because it is Mr Aznar who has undoubtedly been the architect of the first variable-geometry Presidency of the European Union .
I have looked through my notes and read the initial speeches of the Presidency and I have been surprised at the tenuous link between his statement of priorities and the activities of the European Union in this six-month term .
I do not know whether this is a subtle strategy to achieve the unstated objective of reaching a common position on legal and illegal immigration or whether it is an objective devised to cover up other gaps and camouflage itself in the wave of xenophobia sweeping Europe .
The Seville conclusions should not focus solely on policing and crime-reduction , but should include the beneficial effects of immigration .
I hope that immigration policies that respect human rights and fundamental freedoms , and that ensure equal treatment for immigrants , will be promoted in Seville .
Another problem is that the inclusion of immigration has disguised the disappearance of important issues such as enlargement .
In January Mr Aznar applied the motto ' More Europe ' to enlargement .
It is now impossible to hide a certain amount of disappointment that has been felt , at least to date .
The miserly proposal by the Commission has been rejected by most countries .
Furthermore , the block by four States in the General Affairs Council last Monday highlights the extent of the problem .
A large number of Member States want a bigger market but not more Europe .
The reasons for this are budgetary and the objective is to dismantle the limited common policies .
Yes , Mr de Miguel , ' More Europe ' , a bigger Europe , but not a hollow , empty Europe .
Similarly , in January , Mr Aznar literally demonstrated his intention to create an area of greater economic prosperity to safeguard the European social model , but the Barcelona Council and the policies his government intends to apply in Spain show evidence to the contrary .
Sadly , the fears we had prior to the Barcelona Council can now be confirmed .
The Presidency has led a vision of Europe that avoids including the idea of public service in European integration , which , in its own interests , confuses privatisation and deregulation processes with liberalisation measures , that advocates labour policies which , in practice , establish regressive distribution of the social product , threaten stability in employment and contribute to pockets of exclusion and underemployment and sanction the zero deficit at the cost of perpetuating social deficit .
Between Barcelona and Seville , the Spanish Government has been informed that a general strike has been called .
There is no alternative , as its labour reform , which eliminates protection against unemployment and reduces redundancy pay , is another sign of what the Spanish Presidency means by making the labour market more flexible .
This is a model which , far from promoting social participation and cooperation for the greater good , places further pressure on the least protected sectors , blames the victims of the model itself and increases the possibilities of social exclusion and marginalisation .
In the face of economic uncertainty in the labour market , the economic policies of the Member States need to be discussed and coordinated in order to boost the economy , make the margins for budgetary action more flexible and to promote cohesion and the European social model .
The European Union may be an essential marker for world economic growth , but in order to achieve this , and for an upturn to become reality , the economic policy must change course .
The euro , the internal market , common policies and an increased Community budget must contribute to establishing an effective European economic government that is capable of encouraging economic growth and sustainable development , improving income distribution and achieving full employment .
We cannot go around singing the praises of ' More Europe ' whilst we are seeing a deterioration in social policies or fewer European policies .
Mr de Miguel , we do need more Europe , but , most of all , we also need a better Europe .
Mr President , firstly I would like to express my sincere thanks and appreciation to the Spanish Presidency for its very professional and successful approach to its many responsibilities and obligations .
I note with satisfaction that we did not have any embarrassing incidents during the Presidency , as we have had in other recent presidencies .
Under the Spanish Presidency , negotiations for future European enlargement are continuing at a strong pace .
The European Union is currently dealing with difficult areas such as agricultural affairs , regional policy and budgetary matters .
We all know the moral arguments for enlargement of the Union .
Developing democratic and civil societies , respecting the rule of law and promoting human rights are central goals of the Union .
The European Union is a political model that has helped to bring peace to our continent .
This process will be furthered , not diminished , by the enlargement of the Union .
But we must all reflect on the key practical procedure being used to streamline the enlargement of the Union .
In December 2000 European Union leaders agreed a set of Treaty reforms in Nice which they considered would be the best procedure for bringing about enlargement .
Already 13 out of the 15 countries in the European Union have ratified the provisions of the Treaty of Nice .
If the Treaty of Nice is not ratified by all 15 Member States , enlargement will undoubtedly be delayed .
If the Treaty of Nice is rejected by one Member State it is not valid law , because the proposed Treaty changes do not command the unanimous support of all the Member States .
Delaying enlargement would have a very negative effect on the development of the Union .
Prior to the birth of the EEC in 1957 , Europe was bedevilled by hatred and division .
The European Union has now ensured that the tools of war have been put aside in favour of the development of new policies .
The European Union is not simply about mutual economic progress .
Thanks to the European Union , Europe 's past has been put aside in the interests of peace and prosperity for all the peoples of Europe .
That is not to say that the Irish people do not have clear concerns which they want addressed before any further referendum on the Treaty of Nice .
The majority want assurances that Ireland 's traditional military neutrality will be fully protected and respected by all Member States of the European Union .
It is very important that a declaration is agreed by all European Union leaders , spelling out in unequivocal terms that Ireland 's military neutrality will be respected now and in the future .
Irish troops have always served in peace-keeping and humanitarian operations under the auspices of the United Nations .
The provisions of the Treaty of Nice do not change that .
The situation is not altered by Ireland 's participation in the European Rapid Reaction Force , but it is still very important and politically necessary for a declaration to be made in Seville expressing the support of EU governments for this special foreign policy issue , which means so much to so many people in Ireland .
Finally , the European Union is the natural home of the Irish , both geographically and politically .
We recognise that standing alone is of little benefit when international cooperation is increasing .
The European Union must ensure that the interests of each individual citizen are protected at all times .
Mr President , I am able to support the separation of foreign and security policy from other EU cooperation and the restriction regarding the constitution of the Council , but I must disassociate myself from all the attempts to give the larger countries a greater share of presidencies and posts .
All countries must be equal in the EU - before , during and after the Seville Summit .
The proposed reform concerning transparency does not seriously open the Council of Ministers ' work up to the public , let alone to the elected representatives in the European Parliament and the national parliaments .
What is wanted is an open debate on Commission proposals when these are first tabled , and it is true that transparency will embrace all proposals .
It is not , however , until the end of the process that voting will be opened up and , because only a small number of proposals are voted on in practice , this part of the exercise is purely cosmetic .
We shall learn no more than we do at present when the Council publishes approximately 50 records of the votes per year .
The problem is that 70 % of decisions are finalised by the Council 's working parties and 15 % at meetings of COREPER ambassadors . Only 15 % of the proposals are put before the Council , and we do not have figures for what percentage ministers in actual fact see .
The requirement in this area must be that all elected representatives , at least , have full right of access to documents as part of the legislative process .
The Commission has promised us that we can be shown Members ' contributions to the Council 's working parties .
I am pleased that , yesterday at the Conference of Presidents , the Spanish Foreign Minister , Mr Piquet , promised us full access to the Council 's working parties during the codecision process , and so that is a good beginning .
Why not decide that every EU proposal is to be put before the national parliaments and go through the same process as national bills .
A purely national bill can always be altered , whereas an EU bill can never be altered .
That is precisely why an EU bill should not be debated any less thoroughly than those bills which permit the rapid adjustment of errors or unintended consequences .
It could be assumed that the right of veto under the Luxembourg Accords should continue to apply , perhaps in the variant proposed by Georges Berthoin , Monnet 's right-hand man , whereby the prime minister is obliged to defend a veto at the next summit .
It might also be required that a national parliament 's decision to use the veto be made openly .
It must not be made easy to block a proposal , but use of the veto must be an option if the EU is to consist of cooperation between parliamentary democracies in free countries . That is our wish in a Europe of democracies and diversities .
Mr President , I would like to focus on the first theme introduced by President Prodi of better regulation and better organisation .
While , in private enterprises , better organisation might be seen as a decisive factor for the life or future of the company , I feel that the priority for a democratic institution should not be to have leaner , more transparent , more effective procedures but simply to have more democratic procedures .
I am not saying we do not need lean , transparent , effective procedures too but that there is a problem of priorities .
I feel that expressions such as ' improve and simplify legislation ' , ' give practical substance to the concept of citizenship ' , ' improving legislative technique ' and ' working faster and better ' are liable to be meaningless and even to serve as fig leaves covering up the lack of democracy in the European Union 's legislative and decision-making process .
I feel that Parliament must demand one thing and one thing alone : that the Council of Ministers cease to be the only legislative body of so-called democratic institutions in the world to meet in secret .
This is the crucial thing !
Not just Parliament but the European citizen too is in the dark about the Council 's legislative process .
If this is conceded , it will be a step forwards ; if it is not , none of the rest - not even more effectiveness or better organisation - will make any difference to the European Union 's decision-making process .
Another issue I would like to focus on is the foreign and internal policy aspects of the anti-terrorism alliance .
Here , too , I believe that the European institutions have been disregarding the guiding principles of democracy and the rule of law for too long in the name of combating terrorism .
We all agree on the need for a balance between these two requirements , but I feel that a sufficient balance has not yet been found .
I will mention one place , Chechnya , by way of example .
As regards Chechnya , the European Union and the Member States have shown themselves to be incapable of consistency .
I could mention other things such as measures for combating terrorism , measures which have been introduced : what has been done has been done in a disturbingly unbalanced way , in the name of security but very often with disregard for human rights , civil liberties and democracy .
The final issue is that of immigration .
I appreciate the efforts which are being made , but I feel that there is a problem of priorities in respect of this issue too .
We cannot expect to continue to block imports of goods , farm produce and basic manufactured goods from the poorer developing countries throughout the world and , at the same time , cherish the fond hope that we are managing the issue of legal and illegal immigration properly .
We are still in a situation where the customs tariffs imposed on imports from the poorer countries in the world are greater than the aid we give those countries .
In this situation , immigration is in danger of exploding uncontrollably , and so even security and control measures which may , in themselves , be appropriate are actually in danger of sparking off even greater illegal activity and of placing us in a position where we are even less able to control the phenomenon .
Mr President , I believe that in these debates in preparation for the summits , it is important that we remain realistic and take account of two things : first , that the Presidency-in-Office - which in my opinion has been unjustly attacked because destruction is far easier than construction and criticism is far easier than contributing something positive - has neither a philosopher 's stone nor a magic potion to solve all the problems of the European Union to the satisfaction of this Parliament : the other 14 Member States are also involved and all have a contribution to make .
Certainly , some of these criticisms reminded me of what Oscar Wilde used to say about bad literary critics : they never enjoy any success , despite having been to all the opening nights .
Secondly , it is important to bear in mind that summits give rise to a number of expectations that are not always fulfilled .
I therefore think it should be pointed out that what is most important about a summit - and this is what we are hoping for from Seville - is that it can generate enough political momentum for the project of European union to progress .
In this respect , the lines of thought announced by President Prodi on behalf of the European Commission seem to me to be particularly suitable .
Leaving aside the subject of the Barcelona mandate and the issue of accession - which will be the subject of a later debate this afternoon , and which will clearly show where the real difficulties of accession lie , as they are neither in the Presidency-in-Office nor in the Commission - I would like to express my satisfaction at the reference made by the President-in-Office of the Council to the fact that Seville will not interfere with the work of the Convention .
I believe it would be desirable to discuss some of the matters relating to the reform of the Council in detail .
Perhaps the representative of the Presidency-in-Office of the Council could talk to us about these different functions or mandates of the Foreign Affairs Council and the European Affairs Council and how they plan to proceed more effectively , without dedicating themselves to negotiating every last detail of previous debates , and giving political momentum to the subject on the table .
Mr President , I would like to end by referring briefly to immigration , which is a very serious , urgent topic that is particularly relevant at a time when various Member States are adopting individual policies , some of which are contradictory .
I therefore believe that we must clearly support the objectives expressed here by the Commission and by the Presidency-in-Office of the Council , emphasising two aspects : first , that this issue should not be used for the purposes of engaging in manipulative rhetoric , and secondly that we must find real solutions to real problems and try to strip this debate of ideological waffle .
It is important that we strike a balance between the European Union 's tradition of welcome and hospitality - bearing in mind our values , as expressed in the fitting phrase ' immigrants might not have papers , but they shall have dignity ? - and its actual possibilities , which are not unlimited .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Mr President of the Commission , both we in this House and the people of Europe are waiting for the Council in Seville to send out clear , sensible messages on asylum , immigration and the integration of immigrants in Europe .
Europe must continue , for ethical reasons , to stand by the principles of a humanitarian asylum policy .
We must continue to make our citizens understand that we need immigrants .
But we still have to prove to them that we can manage and control immigration and this - as the Spanish Presidency quite rightly maintains - means involving our neighbours , especially the countries from which illegal immigrants come and the countries they pass through .
Most importantly , however , we must all join forces in fighting the people who rake in huge profits from trafficking in human beings .
Mrs Rosa Dez Gonzlez spoke of the Spanish Presidency 's drum roll .
This comment probably applies to us all , given the drum rolls we play all over the place .
But if we take a close look at what the European Union as a whole has done to combat trafficking in human beings , then I for one see very little .
Some Members of the House recently visited Bucharest with their national counterparts and went to an anti-cross-border crime centre .
This centre is supported by a few Member States , it is supported by the Americans , but it does not receive any European funding .
Worse still , we are only now just slowly beginning to make contact with Europol or rather Europol is only now just slowly beginning to take any real action here .
I think what the citizens of Europe expect is a positive immigration policy that also cracks down on the increase in human trafficking and other criminal activities .
We also , however , have to give the people who come to our countries the opportunity to integrate into our society .
By carving out a living for themselves - and many are involved in setting up new companies - they increase prosperity for all of us .
This is not just a game of heads or tails , with either the immigrants winning or the locals winning , we all stand to gain from a reasonable , targeted immigration and integration policy if we would only just get on with it and put everything Commissioner Vitorino and the Council have proposed into practice .
As has already been said , however , we also expect Seville to send out some sort of message about the reform of the Council .
As Mr Poettering said , things have gone a bit quiet on this front and there are rumours that no one really wants to do anything about it .
However , as the members of the Council themselves know , the Council is in urgent need of reform , especially in its legislative capacity , mainly to make it more efficient and transparent .
You only have to compare the openness and accessibility of this House with the situation in the Council .
A few concessions at least to transparency and openness would not go amiss and would both serve the Council 's interests and enhance acceptance of the European legislative process as a whole in the eyes of the European public .
Finally , I should just like to point out that this House and my group are prepared to push ahead with further reform of the European legislative process .
In the meantime , as the President of the Commission mentioned , the Commission has tabled a number of proposals in this direction .
I should like to thank you and your colleagues , Mr President of the Commission , for adopting many - not all but a great many - of the thoughts and ideas which have emanated from this Chamber .
But now , as my colleague has already said - we need to set up an interinstitutional working party and come to an agreement here .
And in order to do so , we need the Council on board . Mr President-in-Office , I fail to understand , many of us in this House fail to understand how it is that Prime Minister Aznar made a clear promise , that you made a clear promise in this House and the diplomatic and official representatives of the Spanish Presidency have done nothing about it ; they have in fact blocked this working party right down the line .
I have to say that , as a Member of Parliament , I wonder what counts .
Are the promise and the statement made by the President-in-Office and by you what counts or is official blocking during the course of implementation what counts ?
Surely the political decision-makers should have the last , clear word .
Mr President , little new action on immigration and asylum will emerge from Seville .
The Tampere agenda had three elements : control , harmonisation and integration .
The Council has eagerly legislated on the first with half a dozen laws and a thirty-page action plan on illegal immigration , but it has lagged on harmonisation for a common asylum system and integration of minorities and migrants .
That is where leaders need to give ministers a big kick but instead all they will really do is ratchet up the rhetoric of repression and hostility of fortress Europe .
The most despicable and stupid proposal is the denial of development aid to countries which fail to stem migration , thereby making them even poorer and generating a new exodus of desperate people .
The reality is that far from promoting the greater security Europe needs , the illiberal Blair-Aznar-Berlusconi trio risks creating greater threats for European citizens by their hysterical , populist and macho responses to current challenges .
By their abusive hysteria about illegal immigrants and asylum seekers they demonise foreigners and generate more race tensions and suspicions .
By their big brother extension of powers for police and security services to monitor people 's email , Internet and telephone records they menace individual privacy .
By banning organisations like the Kurdish PKK and Batasuna they remove political outlets for dissent as an alternative to terrorism .
Accession countries are encouraged to seek EU membership as a beacon of democracy , liberty and tolerance but the Blair-Aznar-Berlusconi trio are making a mockery of that .
Mr President , I would like to welcome Mr Prodi and thank him for his words .
I thoroughly regret the fact that the Spanish Prime Minister is not present at this , the final plenary sitting of Parliament under the Spanish Presidency .
Next , I would like to say that the six priorities cited by the Spanish Presidency at the beginning of this semester have , in effect , been reduced to two : achieving a fortress Europe and militarising democratic life ; and making Europe a police state .
In fact , Prime Minister Aznar currently wants to become the chief of police and would also like to achieve a Europe of States which stands in opposition to the Commission and Parliament .
Among the proposals he has made for the reform of the Council , I am not sure what I should highlight most : his arrogance or his impertinence .
Under the Spanish Presidency , all our problems are worse than six months ago .
And Mr Aznar sees himself as permanent President of the European Union .
The Irish referendum is neither planned nor completed ; nor is enlargement , which is , furthermore , in an even more confused state ; nor is the common agricultural policy , nor the common fisheries policy , where he failed to understand the real tension that exists between the northern and southern countries ; immigration and asylum are confused with criminality and nothing has been done on the structural funds , on the European budget , on full employment , etc .
In fact , there is nothing left of Tampere , Lisbon or Gothenburg .
We should ask ourselves what is left of the spirit of these summits .
In fact , what is left is a caricature in which Jos Mara Aznar , the Spanish Prime Minister , plays the leading role .
Europe is a powder keg waiting to be lit .
This remarkable analysis was made recently by a Dutch columnist .
According to him , people have been dissatisfied with the European Union for years .
The successes of populist parties across Europe demonstrate that the spark can all of a sudden ignite .
I share this concern , although I hope it is unfounded .
Effectively functioning European institutions are therefore of the utmost importance .
Organisational problems should not be the cause of stagnating decision-making or consultation .
This applies not in the least to the Council .
As an encounter of national ministers and prime ministers , this institution is , after all , closest to the people .
At the same time , this institution seems to be suffering most from organisational defects following enlargement .
What can be done about this ?
A number of practical proposals have been made here and elsewhere , including , for example , splitting up the General Affairs Council into a Coordinating Council and a CFSP Council .
Similarly , the restriction of the permitted number of participants in a national Council delegation is a reasonable option .
However , more far-reaching proposals , such as abandoning the rolling presidency system , are also doing the rounds .
These proposals are only acceptable if the balance between the countries is not lost and also if the national administrations remain closely enough involved with Europe .
Indeed , States that are equivalent and involved form the keystone of the European Union .
Whoever denies this might well be the one to light the fuse to the powder keg .
Mr President , when the European Council convenes at Seville , two years and a few months , or four presidential terms , will have passed since the Lisbon Summit and its ambitious decisions to make the Union the world 's most competitive economic area by the year 2010 .
It would be wrong and disparaging to say that nothing has been done .
Bringing modern IT skills within the scope of lifelong learning , which is Commissioner Liikanen 's department , has , for example , already made progress in many countries .
However , in these two years , one of which has been overshadowed by the recession in the United States of America , we have only lagged behind the United States .
GNP there has grown faster and unemployment is less than 6 % , while it is more like in excess of 10 % in the Union .
Not nearly enough has happened , therefore .
Without going over all the sectors one by one , privatisation , the genuine opening up of markets , and the removal of barriers to restructuring in industry and services have still not come about .
The job market remains structurally rigid , keeping the unemployed at bay and protecting those with jobs .
The reasons for this inactivity are to be found in the Union 's nation states which the Commission has not managed to enjoin or tempt to embrace economic reforms .
Short-term real , but also often imagined , interests have come before the common interest .
There are always elections going on in some country , and reforms become paralysed for the space of a year .
The inflexible nature of the labour market , the maintenance of industrial structures in a way that hinders competition , and the non-existent policy the countries of the Union have on immigration and asylum have led to the sort of dissatisfaction that is now breaking out and which has broken out in recent elections in the form of protests by both the young and the old in Europe unable to find work .
In connection with this too is the feeling many foreigners legally resident in many countries in the Union have that they are being discriminated against .
I no longer intend to blame the socialist governments that have been edged aside .
I am also addressing my plea and warning to the centre-right governments that have come to power via the Commission and the Council . Unless you have the courage to make reforms you can forget the grand words of Lisbon and the future picture of a Europe as the world 's most competitive area !
Sometimes I really miss Margaret Thatcher , the fruits of whose policies Tony Blair still enjoys .
Economical , clean energy is one basic requirement for the economic growth of sustainable development .
It is a pleasure for me to praise the political decision-makers in my own country , Finland , for their courage in keeping nuclear energy clearly alongside other forms of development in electrical energy .
The decision was that of a small country but was just the sort of courageous start that was needed , although the cacophony that opposes this and wants to put the brakes on progress is loud .
The country to hold the Presidency , Spain , is to be congratulated now on giving the shaping of a common asylum and immigration policy a key position at Seville .
It is necessary , because a Europe whose population is ageing should not be turning away immigrants but integrating them in a controlled way as new Europeans .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I would like to remind you that this - as you are doubtless aware - is the European Parliament .
I am telling you this because in this Parliament we are familiar with the Tampere agenda ; we know what was decided there .
I would like to remind you of this because it does not exactly coincide with what you have told us .
The Tampere agenda comprised four sections with regard to the common management of immigration ; one was family reunification .
The Council has already eliminated one proposal .
Another is on the parliamentary agenda but not on the Council 's .
A policy for the management of migration flows , a policy for establishing legal immigration channels , clear , transparent , not drowning in a sea of bureaucracy from 15 different legal systems .
A Commission proposal is being considered in Parliament , and it is not on the Council agenda .
An integration policy that translates into a Commission proposal to create a statute for long-term immigrants .
This is not on the Council agenda .
We are in total chaos .
The Social Affairs Council has approved the free movement of immigrant workers , which is prevented by immigration laws in 15 Member States .
This is not on the Seville agenda .
With regard to the external agenda : in Tampere , we spoke of co-development , the joint management of migration flows , and you told me that in Seville there is a tiny part referring to the threat to third countries .
Co-management is not on the Seville agenda .
The fight against illegal immigration , with which my group and I are entirely in agreement , appears in a somewhat esoteric form .
You say that the Commission plan for the joint control of external borders is of particular importance .
We do not understand that here , and nor does the public .
Are you going to debate this ?
Why would this be the first thing on the Council agenda ?
Not only this , but the national governments , over the past two years and eight months , have implemented differing national policies in this area .
You talk of reviewing the Tampere commitments .
Save yourself the trouble - it will not take long , since no progress has been made with regard to immigration in two years and eight months .
As the Council , you are responsible by omission for not having governed Community policy , and that , Mr President , is extremely serious .
You are replacing consensus on solutions with making joint gestures that are incapable of resolving problems .
You are replacing the adoption of legislation and policies to manage migration flows with writing notes and press releases that contribute to creating a problematic climate .
Do not be surprised that the citizens view the European Union as a problem and not as the solution it should be .
Mr President , I shall very briefly put three observations to the President-in-Office of the Council , the President of the Commission , and my fellow Members , the first of which concerns immigration .
I think the evidence should lead us to believe that we should establish in Seville a policy that has been asked for since Tampere , that is truly effective at European level , that has a European dimension and that also establishes and intensifies a real political dimension to the European Union . This is a subject which , through the intergovernmental method , has sadly been postponed for too long .
The second observation I would like to make is that account should also be taken of the external dimension that causes immigration , and that the cooperation mechanisms must therefore be strengthened far more than they have been to date .
I believe that one topic should be resolved in Seville : the evident distancing of the positions expressed by the Commission over the past few months from the Commission proposals and their reception by the Council .
I think that , specifically , Mr de Miguel has commented on the importance attached to the Convention ; it would be good to wait for the results of the Convention before making a series of proposals which seem to rather distort the context in which the Intergovernmental Conference would subsequently have to state its position .
Lastly , allow me to note that in Laeken the seats of many agencies of the European Union were not decided on .
I would like to know whether this area will be covered in Seville .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Mr President of the Commission , a brief word on the Kashmir conflict .
This conflict over one of the most beautiful mountain regions in the world now needs to be addressed on a long-term basis .
The need for a solution has never been greater or more promising that it is now ; but this dialogue between India and Pakistan will only get started if everyone on the sidelines , the EU , the USA , Russia and the UN , treats both countries on the same footing .
The explosive force of the Kashmir conflict , which is rooted in historic events - already three wars in the region , terrorism , propaganda , rampant nationalism and Al Qaeda - could be disastrous , but it could also be restrained with the help of moderate forces in the area and a policy from outside which respects both sides .
I warn you - and this is very important today , especially following the war in Afghanistan - not to take sides .
Mr President , we live at a vital juncture of European and international affairs .
My delegation strongly supports the enlargement process although as part of the institutional reform process designed to bring about our declared goal of a wider , looser Europe and an unwinding of the CAP and CFP .
We also believe that the central eastern European countries , having thrown off the mantle of Soviet-dominated communism from which we in the West were unable to protect them , and for which we can help to atone by welcoming them back into the family of European nations , do not simply wish to see the construction of another Brussels-led superstate .
We also welcome the rapprochement between NATO and Russia which now shares a common agenda with the EU in the fight against global terrorism and the goal of becoming a functioning market economy as a member of WTO and at peace with its EU neighbours .
We strongly support a responsible attitude towards our environment .
However , we do have a number of problems with the resolution , ranging from our opposition to the Treaty of Nice as a prerequisite of enlargement to rejection of a common asylum and immigration policy , which we believe is a prerogative of the Member States , although we strongly favour bilateral cooperation designed to safeguard the integrity of our borders .
We remain deeply sceptical that joint Euro-border guards would work in practice and oppose the principle of the European security and defence policy both as a duplication and as a means of de-coupling Europe from our US partners in NATO .
We also believe there is a danger that the International Criminal Court will be used to make political mischief by parties hostile to our American allies .
However , we welcome calls for restraint and de-escalation between India and Pakistan over disputed Kashmir and note encouraging signs that President Musharraf has finally heeded calls to reign in Islamic terrorists which his regime has until very recently supported , terrorists who have recently committed atrocities against Jamu and Kashmiri civilians and even the Indian parliament .
He should arrest and hand over those committing such acts to India for trial and justice .
Nevertheless we all wish the summiteers in Seville every success in the challenges that lie ahead .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , I intend to confine my comments to the conflict between India and Pakistan .
Mr President-in-Office , you rightly noted in your speech that this conflict threatens to destabilise and endanger the whole region .
Concern about this immense danger has brought all of us responsible for foreign policy in nearly all the groups to a common position , as expressed in the resolution on Seville .
We call in this resolution for both countries to make every possible effort to deescalate the situation and join in constructive dialogue in a bid to resolve the conflict as quickly as possible .
Both sides clearly have a responsibility to defuse the conflict , which is why I welcome the measures taken over the past few days by India , which has decided to lift the ban on Pakistani aeroplanes using Indian airspace , appoint a high commissioner for Islamabad and order its warships back to port .
We also expect President Musharaf to continue and step up his efforts to stop the infiltration of terrorists via the line of control in Kashmir .
If he honours the promises made in his speech on 12 January this year , then a huge step will have been made towards resolving the conflict .
I was in Kashmir a few weeks ago and went to an Indian post 3 400 metres up on the line of control , so I know what I am talking about .
The war against terrorism can in fact only be effectively waged on the Pakistani side .
Pakistan is responsible not just for catching terrorists before they reach the border , but also for meting out appropriate punishment and taking them out of circulation .
One last point which plays a very important part in the whole dispute is the need to strengthen democracy .
India is a democracy and we hope that Pakistan will be too if free elections are held in the autumn and put a democratic government in power .
Mr President , Mr de Miguel , now that we are more or less a family , and in the interminable minute I have to speak for , I am not going to talk to you about immigration .
Now it seems that everything you said to our generation about how good immigrants were does not apply to today 's immigrants .
On the subject of issuing orders , I would ask you , who order so much by decree , please to ask the President , Mr Aznar , to bring here , to where things are decided , all that power-wielding that surrounds his actions in government in Spain , so that the proposal adopted by the College of Commissioners for the reform of the common fisheries policy does not go ahead , since it is a proposal which will send the shattered Spanish fishing fleet to the bottom of the sea .
Prevent your party colleague , Mr Fischler , that friend of the farmers and fishermen of the south , from getting his own way .
Do not invite him to Madrid - there are no fishermen , fishing ports or ice factories there . Invite him to Barbate , to Isla Cristina , where there are fishermen .
Show him the results of his disastrous negotiation with Morocco and let him imagine what will happen to these European citizens if his proposal goes ahead .
If you do not do so , the firmness you demonstrate there will be of little use when decisions are made here .
Make a firm commitment against this fisheries proposal during the Seville Council and in that way , in my view , you will have salvaged the Spanish Presidency .
Mr President , the Seville European Council will have to address the issue of the political role of the Union once again .
I regret to say that our great economic influence fails still today to be matched by equally effective political action on the world stage .
The Middle East conflict is only the last in a series of cases in which the Union has failed to play a leading role in endeavours to bring peace .
Although it is true , however , that we are still far off the objective of a politically strong Europe , it must be said that the Spanish Presidency has helped us to make some progress .
Prime Minister Aznar 's words to the effect that we must all join forces to tackle the extremely thorny issue of illegal immigration are confirmation of the will for Europe to have a single foreign and security policy .
The immigration crisis must be tackled responsibly and resolutely , without populism and , above all , without concealing the importance of the issue , as we are all too often wont to do .
We need increasing cooperation to control the Union 's borders and the development of a single border policy - it is the Italian Government 's proposal which has been accepted and , I believe , selected by Commissioner Vitorino too - but we also need the costs of containing migration flows in Europe to be shared .
That is not all , however .
President Prodi is right to say that the causes of uncontrolled immigration must be eradicated .
We need to work towards cooperation which genuinely helps the people , not the local dictators , as has all too often been the case .
We need to take action to alleviate the debt , as has recently been pointed out at the FAO Summit in Rome too .
However , we must not overlook the need for legislation which combines rigour and solidarity , and the only way to achieve this is to regulate migration flows , welcoming those who wish to work in Europe with great respect and rejecting those attempting to organise unlawful activities which are all too often criminal and are sometimes linked to terrorism .
The European citizens are demanding this .
I am sure that Seville will deliver the response they are waiting for .
Mr President , I also welcome the statement in the Seville declaration concerning India and Pakistan .
It is crucial that Europe takes responsibility and initiative in solving the crisis in the region and does not just leave the peace efforts to the USA and Russia , especially since some of the EU Member States have strong historical links with the region .
I also believe that it is essential for the development of the CFSP that the EU plays a major role .
I strongly agree with the Council 's statement about the threat to the whole region and , indeed , the whole world from a nuclear conflict .
President Prodi is correct in saying that we have far more opportunity to influence the situation positively before a conflict breaks out than after .
I wholeheartedly endorse moves by both India and Pakistan in the last few days , to seek a peaceful solution to the conflict in Kashmir .
We have to support these .
However , despite the reduced tension at present , skirmishes along the border continue .
Casualties continue to rise .
So the sooner de-escalation takes place the better .
It is vital that diplomatic relations and transport links between the two countries are restored .
Bilateral talks between two sides need to take place as soon as possible .
Although war seems to be averted for now , tensions could easily rise again , especially around the time of elections in the Indian Kashmir in September .
On that point , it is vital that these elections are demonstrably free and fair .
However , we need to ensure that fighting over the territory of Kashmir is stopped permanently .
A quest for territory was the catalyst for the Second World War and the solution sought to that issue needs to be applied in this case as well .
Just as trade was used to prevent conflict when the European Coal and Steel community was founded , it is vital to consider such means as a peaceful way to keep tensions permanently low .
The GDP of the two countries is very low and poverty remains a major problem .
Despite recent positive efforts , only half the population of the region is literate , which is a major a barrier to economic growth .
It is essential for the EU to prioritise global security through a poverty reduction programme .
The overwhelming message is clear .
War can never be the solution in situations like this .
Any action must be economic or humanitarian with positive steps to resolve the high level tensions .
Let us now turn our attention to the people .
Mr President , I should like to thank the Council for its statement and thank the President of the Commission for his contribution .
I should like to make a few observations about the Council reforms and the problem of illegal immigrants .
As far as Council reforms are concerned , three issues appear to me to be of major importance .
These are the improvement and revaluation of the General Affairs Council , the improvement of the decision-making procedure and especially the public nature of Council legislation .
It seems to me that the General Affairs Council should be split up as a matter of urgency , particularly because the specialist councils have pulled far too much power towards themselves , and the General Affairs Council seems to have lost its coordinating task .
It might also be helpful if in all Member States , people in charge of European affairs would actually be given the title of minister so that they are put on an equal footing as most specialist ministers .
This would facilitate the coordinating role of the relevant ministers both nationally and in the Council .
As far as the decision-making procedure is concerned , I should like to advise the Council to study the 34 types of decision in order to find out whether improvements can be made in the Council on this score without amending the Treaty .
Decision-making as it stands is totally lacking transparency and the scope of the decisions is unclear .
Measures to simplify these and to promote transparency would be very desirable .
As far as this transparency is concerned , I believe it could be a very important improvement , without changing the Treaty , if public access were organised in the case of decision-making on European legislation .
It is one of the fundamental rules of democracy that a legislator lays down legislation in public .
The Council of Ministers is one of the few bodies in the world that does not do that , and that is really no longer acceptable .
A decision , therefore , to make those components of the Council public that are involved with legislation is required as a matter of urgency .
I should like to finish off with a comment on illegality .
I welcome the fact that border police will be introduced , but perhaps making airports into external borders again could also be considered .
Since at present , security checks are being made at airports anyway , it would be easy also to show your passport .
This may be a little like swearing in church , but in my view , the issue of illegal immigrants in Europe must be solved , and the stepping up of security at airports could be an attempt at a solution .
In fact , I have always been opposed to the opening up of airports .
Presidents of the European institutions , ladies and gentlemen , we must first of all express our support for the intense activity that the European Union has been undertaking , together with the United States , Russia and the United Nations , to prevent a war between India and Pakistan .
I had the opportunity to visit the region a few weeks ago and , from the meetings I held with the parties involved , in my capacity as President of Parliament 's Delegation for relations with the countries of South Asia , I can confirm that , beyond the palpable tensions , there is also a genuine desire for peace .
It is true that these two great countries have already gone to war with each other three times : twice over Kashmir and once over Bangladesh .
Now , however , what we would have is not just another war , if I may put it that way , because both countries now have nuclear weapons and the ability to move them around .
As Mr Ramn de Miguel stressed , the possibility of escalation can never be excluded in a military conflict .
We have , therefore , been greatly encouraged by some positive developments that have taken place in recent days .
On the one hand , we have the commitment given by the President of Pakistan to stop the infiltration across the line of control in Kashmir ; on the other , there is India 's decision to reopen its airspace to Pakistani civil aviation , to re-establish diplomatic representation and to withdraw its battleships from the Gulf of Oman .
This Monday 's news from the United States , however , linking the terrorist who was planning to manufacture a nuclear bomb with connections in Pakistan , means that we must remain extremely vigilant towards developments in that region .
The world can only gain from having a European Union that is more active on the international stage .
In order for this to happen , however , we must , specifically , improve the coordination of our efforts in external policy and defence , and make real progress towards having a common diplomatic service .
This is the only way in which the European Union will be genuinely able to bring its influence to bear in conflict prevention .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , Mr President-in-Office , the citizens of the European Union have a right to security and they recognise that the European Union has a very decisive role to play here .
They also recognise that internal security is the sine qua non for stability and economic development in the European Union .
They also showed during the recent elections that those who deny this need and are not prepared to take suitable measures will find themselves ousted from office .
I am grateful to President Prodi for speaking in such unequivocal terms here today and I welcome and expressly support the Spanish initiative to be taken at the summit in Seville .
President Aznar said that immigration is a key problem and he is right .
But what we want are differentiated immigration measures .
We want measures to speed up the asylum process and measures to integrate genuine refugees , but we also want measures to control and limit immigration , depending on the capacity and needs of our individual Member States .
And we want a package of measures so that war refugees can be housed temporarily .
What we particularly welcome is the package of measures designed to combat illegal immigration and trafficking , especially the initiatives you intend to take to set up a European border police force to be deployed in the zones along our current and future external borders which are particularly at risk .
I also welcome cooperation with the countries from which immigrants come , help in bringing about political and economic stability , readmission agreements and sanctions against countries which are not prepared to protect their borders and even encourage illegal emigration .
If a great deal has been promised and initiated in the past and very little achieved , it has nothing to do with the Council presidency and everything to do with individual Member States and national animosities .
I call on you with the utmost urgency to lobby the Seville Summit to put these measures into practice , especially the measures on immigration .
You can count on the full backing of the European Parliament .
Mr President , I welcome the reference to the Treaty of Nice in Paragraph 6 of the joint resolution .
It is an important confirmation by Parliament that Nice is necessary to facilitate a successful enlargement process .
I want to speak directly to the Spanish President-in-Office at this point .
The Seville European Council is important for the many reasons outlined in our resolutions here today .
However , without the stepping stone of Nice , much of that will be in vain .
You must therefore ensure that the Seville conclusions at least include a declaration that Nice does not in any way modify the Irish policy of military neutrality , currently defined as non-membership of mutual defence pacts .
I would also urge that this declaration be accepted as a protocol to the next Treaty changes in 2004 .
I know that Nice does not impact on Irish neutrality .
However , considerable anxiety has been created in Ireland by irresponsible scaremongering on this issue by people fundamentally opposed to European integration , people like my colleague in this Parliament , Mrs McKenna of the Green Group , and the ethnic nationalists of the Sinn Fein Party in Ireland .
The provisions of Nice are part and parcel of the ground rules on which the candidate countries are negotiating their membership of the Union .
Ireland 's failure so far to ratify these ground rules serves only to strengthen the anti-European Union sentiment in the candidate countries , to the detriment of all Europeans .
I am also concerned at the grandstanding by some Member States , which are resisting the budgetary commitments needed for the successful development of the accession countries ' economies .
The public at large does not understand the tactical manoeuvring behind these battles .
What they see is a penny-pinching attitude , driven by an accountancy approach to politics , rather than the statecraft our citizens are crying out for .
If Seville shows some generosity from our political leaders , our citizens will emulate that generosity in return .
Mr President , as Mr De Rossa has pointed out it is expected that the Seville Summit will discuss the holding of a second Irish referendum on the Treaty of Nice .
Such a step , regrettable as it is , would have been unnecessary if the political establishment in Ireland had made any effort to persuade voters to ratify it .
Instead , a diverse coalition was able to exploit unfounded fears , resulting in its rejection and untold harm being inflicted on Ireland 's position within the EU and damaging our relations with applicant states .
Successful ratification is possible , but only if a huge effort is put into the ' yes ' campaign .
Our task is not made any easier because we are asking the electorate to overturn a decision it has already made .
Additionally , opponents of the Treaty have been strengthened by their electoral success in the recent Irish general election .
The responsibility for securing a successful outcome to the second referendum rests with Ireland 's pro-European parties and social partners .
However , the prime responsibility rests with the Irish Government .
Its task is made infinitely more difficult when its main spokesman at the Convention on Europe , former Commissioner Ray MacSharry , has disappointingly made it absolutely clear that his government has drawn a line in the sand in relation to future European integration .
Its approach - to state ' this far and no further ' - moves it closer to the British position on Europe , which places more emphasis on a free trade area rather than pursuing political union .
I take this opportunity to warn the Irish Government that it is following a very dangerous path .
Opportunistic Eurosceptic stances by some of its leading members played into the hands of those who opposed the Treaty of Nice , thereby contributing to its rejection .
It does not help that a leading Eurosceptic has been promoted to full cabinet rank .
Pandering to the same prejudices again could well result in a second failure and consequently leave Ireland in a semi-detached relationship with our EU partners , and that would be disastrous .
Mr President , if any of the guests in the galleries who are with us today had attended the debate that took place in this House in March , they would not understand a thing , because today the benches of the Left have piled on the criticisms of the Barcelona process when in March , on assessing that Council , we voted for an extremely favourable Resolution .
I would like to remind certain people that we cannot go against our own acts and that what was good three months ago cannot be bad now .
My second point is the issue of immigration .
I believe that this Presidency has given a fine example of something very important in politics , which is what in sporting terms is known as suppleness .
Immigration was not one of the Spanish Presidency 's priorities , but it has noted that it is now one of the citizens ' priorities , and it has incorporated it into its agenda .
And furthermore it is true that there are many issues that have been paralysed for some time in the Council .
I believe that instead of criticising that incorporation , we should have applauded the attempt to promote all these issues .
There is a final question , however , which was mentioned by President Poettering , which I believe to be extremely important and which has not perhaps been discussed so much , which is the delay in enlargement .
For a long time , led by this Parliament , we have been asking for enlargement to take place within specific time limits and now , all of a sudden , certain Member States , certain leaders of Member States , want to carry out certain modifications of the common agricultural policy , for example , which will make enlargement impossible within those limits .


Therefore , within the constructive environment of this House , I would ask our friends on the Left to speak to Mr Schrder , to Mr Persson and to Mr Blair to see if we can prevent the hindering of enlargement , so that it can go ahead when we want .
Mr President , I will speak very briefly - firstly due to time restrictions and secondly because it would be practically impossible to respond in detail to all the speakers - but I would like to say - in response to all the Members , such as President Poettering , who have said that we will judge the Spanish Presidency on the basis of the outcome of Seville - that the Presidency does not only exist for one Council , but rather from 1 January to 30 June .
Many days have passed , there are still many days left and we are going to do many things .
The impression is always given that the Union rests upon the will of a single country ; holding the Presidency of the Union means that one country is responsible for coordinating the activities of the Union , not for carrying out all the Union 's duties , because that is done by the Union itself .
There is something else which is not made sufficiently clear : the results of a Presidency - and at the end of the day a presidency is a period of time - are the results of good inter-institutional agreement : the Council can do nothing without the support and initiatives of the Commission , and the Commission and the Council can do nothing without the support of Parliament .
I believe that over these six months - and this is what I should stress most - the Presidency has received great support from the European Commission at all times , and it still is receiving it ; thanks to the efforts of the European Commission - and its right of initiative , in accordance with which it has presented its proposals - we have been able to resolve and do many things .
Also on the issue of co-decision and Parliament 's legislative duties , truly significant successes have been achieved , which we cannot fail to note : the last sitting approved - without the need for conciliation , and for the first time in history , thanks to the efforts of Parliament - the Research and Development Framework Programme , and also , thanks to the joint efforts of Parliament and the Presidency , the statute on the European Parliament 's electoral system , which had been in deadlock for years , is going to be approved today .
I am not going to make an assessment of the Spanish Presidency , of course : that will be done by the President of the Council at the sitting of 2 July , which is intended for just that purpose .
Then Mr Nogueira will have his wish , since he is so keen to see the President of the Spanish Government .
On 2 July , at 10 a.m. , we would like to see you here , Mr Nogueira , because , once the Presidency has ended - and it ends on Sunday , 30 June - the President will give an account of its results .
We are now talking about the Seville Council and there are certain issues I would like to comment on .
The President of the Group of the European People 's Party - and certain other Members , such as Mr Swoboda - have expressed concern about the issue of interinstitutional cooperation .
I would like to say firstly that it would have been impossible for the Council and the Commission to have made any more effort during this six-month period to reach an interinstitutional agreement .
Furthermore , that agreement already exists , I do not know why we are bringing the issue up again .
We have held a meeting in which the three institutions have agreed to create a high-level interinstitutional group , on three levels : first-level politician ( presidents ) , second-level politician ( commissioners , ministers and committee chairmen ) , and technical ( secretaries-general of the three institutions and ambassadors / permanent representatives ) .
This has now been created .
Who is calling this into question ?
By the way , it does not fall to me to explain the conclusions of the Council , that is not my responsibility , but I would urge the Members of this Parliament to read them and , when you have read them , we will speak again .
On 2 July , you will have the opportunity to ask Mr Aznar whether or not that commitment has really been fulfilled .
I do not understand why demands are being made here when things have developed in accordance with the commitments we had accepted .
I would remind you that there was a meeting here in February between President Prodi , President Aznar and President Cox at which the decision was taken .
I do not know why the issue is being raised again now .
The issue of ' better regulation ' falls entirely within the framework of that interinstitutional cooperation that we intend to implement .
With regard to other criticisms of the Socialist Group which I have heard , I believe that the syndrome of bringing the antagonism of internal politics to the European Parliament is very bad .
I am not therefore going to get involved in that slanging match about who is performing well and who is performing badly .
I am not going to respond , since I believe that the Spanish Presidency has done what it could and that its results are sufficiently satisfactory and above all I believe that we will be able to see the results of the Spanish Presidency on 2 July .
With regard to the other issues in the Council , such as enlargement , this afternoon we will have the opportunity to talk at length .
I would like to say that yesterday we finished the latest ministerial conferences on accession in Luxembourg , although there will be another , at vice-president level , before the end of the month .
The result is that during these six months 87 negotiation chapters have been concluded .
Of 31 chapters , the majority of the Member States have concluded an average of between 26 and 29 .
In other words , an average of around two or three chapters will remain for the Danish Presidency to conclude .
The ' road map ' has been completed , and the only thing that remains to be agreed on - and which I hope can be agreed before the Seville European Council - is the common position on agriculture .
We know why the common position has not been concluded : there are a number of countries which wish to ignore the principles of the Community acquis and establish two classes of country - those which receive direct payments and those which do not - seriously discriminating against the candidate countries and taking advantage of the situation , taking enlargement hostage , in order to further their objectives in terms of the reform of a certain common policy .
If they do not agree to what they should agree to , those countries will have to take responsibility for having delayed enlargement and will have to answer to this Parliament , to their respective publics and to the candidate countries .
Therefore , on the subject of enlargement I just wish to add that the Seville European Council only has to begin to talk , to acknowledge that the technical ' road map ' has been completed and draw up a great political itinerary : what is going to be done after concluding the negotiations , to see what our perspective is going to be for 2003 , how the Treaty is going to be signed , how the ratifications are going to be carried out , how the new candidate countries are going to be incorporated into the Intergovernmental Conference and how they are going to participate in the European Parliament elections .
That is the political ' road map ' that the Seville European Council has to draw up ; the technical one is finished .
Therefore , you can rest assured , since , with the efforts made by the Council and the tremendous support of the Commission , the Spanish Presidency has been able to fulfil the mandate of the European Council and also of this Parliament .
With regard to the reform of the Council , it is clear that the Council has a dual dimension : executive and legislative .
The legislative dimension needs to be more transparent - we are the first to agree with this - and the reforms of the Council move in that very direction .
They also move in the direction of making it more effective ; to divide up the General Affairs Council and the External Affairs Council ; to reduce the structure of the Council ; to establish better methods for preparing European Councils ; also reducing the machinery of the European Councils and making them more effective and smaller ; to create a system of conclusions which does not involve an interminable debate on insignificant details etc .
All of these are possible internal reforms of the Council which move in the direction of transparency , but which in no way compromise the provisions of primary Law , which fall to the Intergovernmental Conference .
I am not going to continue to insist on the economic issues .
There is an issue which I have not mentioned , since it was the subject of a debate yesterday afternoon in this House : the Johannesburg Summit and sustainable development .
We are very aware of the failure of the preparation conference in Bali , the PREPCON , and we want the Seville European Council to offer clear guidelines in order to re-affirm the leadership of the European Union in relation to the big issues for Johannesburg , which are development aid , respect for the environment and sustainable development .
During this Spanish Presidency , the Union has ratified the Kyoto Protocol and obtained a commitment in Monterrey on funding for development which in reality is a commitment on which we have managed to combine the wills of everybody and by means of which the whole of the developed world has committed itself to increasing its level of development aid .
I believe that these two factors can allow us to go to Johannesburg with the conviction that we belong to a group of countries which lead the world on all the great issues of sustainable development .
The Seville European Council will therefore acknowledge this as well .
Furthermore , I would like to say to Mr De Rossa that the European Council will give its opinion on the particular problem that he has mentioned , on a declaration which may help Ireland to present itself better and to provide greater security for its citizens in light of the ratification of the Treaty of Nice .
This issue will be dealt with and we hope to be able to issue a declaration which is as positive as possible , along the very lines that Mr De Rossa has indicated .
As well as all these issues , there are other external policy issues which we have already discussed .
I have taken good note of the speeches , in particular those which relate to the conflict between India and Pakistan .
I would like to reiterate the European Council 's intention to deal with this issue by sending the most forthright and constructive possible message and I believe it is almost impossible to examine everything that is going to be dealt with at the Council in detail , but I believe this Council will be the culmination of an incredibly intense six-month period .
I have not referred to immigration and asylum , but what I did want to say - since I cannot end without mentioning this issue which has been raised by many of you - is that I believe that the situation of illegal immigration is of concern to the whole of the European public , not legal immigration , since that has its official channels and there are millions of immigrants who have already settled in Europe , which has always been a land of acceptance and asylum .
What is raising great difficulties for European society is this wave of illegal immigrants which , precisely because they are illegal , are marginalised , living in illegal situations and are victims of exploitation and therefore suffer to an extent which is intolerable in our society .
We must therefore combat it .
With regard to the Tampere programme , well there it is , and if any part of it has not been implemented , this is due to the fact that it has not been possible to implement it between 1999 and 2002 .
Is that the responsibility of the Council ?
It will be , but it is not the responsibility of the current Presidency of the Council , but rather the accumulated responsibility of many other Presidencies .
The fact that this Presidency wants to put the Tampere programme on the table and say ' let us do it once and for all ' , should be praised rather than criticised .
Therefore , I believe that this issue , like all the issues relating to illegal immigration , is of concern to European society today and it is logical that the Heads of State and Government should deal with all aspects of them .
By the way , this is an entirely public dimension , because there are Commission proposals and furthermore I would like to point out that tomorrow and the next day the Justice and Home Affairs Council will meet and deal with all of these issues .
Councils are public and everybody knows the content of their agendas .
I do not therefore believe that there are any hidden agendas in relation to asylum and immigration and all the issues to be dealt with at the Seville European Council .
Mr President , I would simply like to say that this Council marks the end of this period , which has been hard and difficult ; let us hope that the Seville conclusions are able to reflect all the work we have done and that they fulfil the expectations which European society and this Parliament have of the work of the Council and the Commission .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I will try to be as brief as possible for I can see that the Chamber is already preparing for voting time .

I would just like to stress a few basic points : firstly , I welcome our great consensus on enlargement and I would point out , in this regard , that this is our greatest and most important task for the future ; secondly , I am delighted with this debate , which will take us to Seville - Parliament , Commission and Council - with a common line on the interinstitutional agreement and the work on better organisation and better legislation that we have to undertake together .
Our common desire to complete an interinstitutional agreement before the year is out will have a marked , decisive impact on the way we work , and I believe it will also help to make the Seville Summit a success .
I want to make it quite clear - and reassure all the Members of Parliament - that none of this will affect the Convention 's work in any way .
This is something we must do without modifying the Treaties , and we have a responsibility to do it for we will have to work with the Treaties in their present form for a long time anyway .
I would emphasise once again our joint undertaking with regard to the major objectives , which many speakers have mentioned in relation to Johannesburg .
We have not been treating it as a low priority , but I have to say that we are completely on our own in these international conventions .
And , quite frankly , I want to say before this House that all these summits we have held , which ought to have shown increasingly great attention towards the Developing World , have not yielded the desired results .
Even yesterday , the failure of the largest countries to send representatives to the FAO Summit was a powerful testimony to the fact that this policy needs to be completely revamped .
Of course , there are contradictions on these issues even in the Union 's own policies .
I would remind you of some of the issues which have been mentioned in this House such as Mediterranean policy , the difficulties surrounding the creation of a bank - a Euro-Mediterranean Development Bank - to boost development in this area , and the even greater obstacles encountered in our endeavours to set up a Euro-Mediterranean Foundation for dialogue between cultures , for which some countries were not even prepared to commit EUR 1 million .
With regard to immigration , there is remarkable consensus on the key points : border police , cooperation with the future Member States to combat illegal activity , and an active policy aimed , as Mrs Suominen said , at integrating immigrants and making them genuine citizens of the Union .
This is the shared objective towards which we are all working .
Of course , we have to remember that , if we are to achieve this goal , it is our duty , our responsibility to fight for an active role in integrating immigrants and reuniting families , and to establish , as Mr Pirker said , long-awaited immigration guidelines .
This , ladies and gentlemen , is the task we have to tackle together .
It will allow us to reach a goal which we all share : the goal of preparing for enlargement of the Union with institutions which are able to cope with this difficult project .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have the honour of speaking , by way of exception , before the vote , because the vote that is about to take place confirms that Parliament , the Committee on Budgets and the Committee on Budgetary Control were able to carry out proper cooperation and the proper procedure with regard to the Council and the Commission .
At this point I should like to acknowledge the work of my co-rapporteur , Michiel van Hulten , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , as well as the efforts of Mr Wyn , who chaired the Conciliation Committee , and also the efforts of the two committees which worked energetically with the two principal rapporteurs .
I should also like to thank the secretariats of the two committees , insofar as Parliament was concerned .
I should also like to acknowledge the very hard work put in by the Spanish Presidency so as to ensure that we successfully completed the work on this very difficult and very important dossier .
Finally , of course , I should naturally like to thank Mrs Schreyer and the Commission , as well as the Budget Directorate-General , for the cooperation that they gave us to enable this matter to be brought to a successful conclusion .
This report constitutes an agreement on the Financial Regulation of the Union .
It therefore concerns a very important subject .
We were able to agree on a formula which shows that there can be excellent cooperation between institutions in several interinstitutional fields .
I hope that it will be possible to follow this example when working on other dossiers which are more difficult or equally difficult .
On the subject of content , I should just like to say to Members that they will be voting for an agreement which makes it possible for our institution to reaffirm and strengthen its prerogatives with regard to budgetary authority and discharging authority .
It seems to me that it is important to emphasise this .
I should just like to add that they have to vote on a Financial Regulation which will be more transparent , so that the rules and procedures contained in that Regulation will be easier to understand and more transparent .
I believe , therefore , that this is a successful result , and I should like to thank all those who took part in this work .
As this concerns the budgetary procedure , the Commissioner responsible for the budget may speak briefly .
Mr President , honourable Members , the new version of the financial regulation is one of the largest and most comprehensive pieces of legislation during this parliamentary term , which is why I should like to thank you on the Commission 's behalf for the excellent collaboration which we have enjoyed with the European Parliament and the Council and , most importantly , with the two committees , the Committee on Budgets and the Committee on Budgetary Control .
I should also like to congratulate the two rapporteurs , Mr Dell 'Alba and Mr Hulten , on their very clever handling of the negotiations and the positive results for Parliament .
My warmest thanks on behalf of the Commission .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Commission is able to accept Amendments Nos 2 , 4 and 5 , and the Council ought to be able to do so before the end of the Spanish Presidency .
At this stage , however , the Commission believes that Amendment No 6 would run the risk of compromising the agreement obtained with the Council , and is therefore obliged to reject it .
Our common objective should in fact be the rapid adoption of the regulation establishing a European Maritime Safety Agency .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission congratulates the rapporteur , Mr Nistic , and the Committee on the Environment , on the progress achieved on this important dossier .
We hope that it will soon be possible to complete the work so as to allow the implementation , for the first time , of the new competences conferred by the Treaty of Amsterdam in matters concerning public health .
The Commission is able to accept Amendments Nos 1 , 9 , 12 , 15 , 17 , 19 , 25 , 27 and 28 .
The Commission is also able to accept , in part , Amendments Nos 2 , 3 , 5 , 6 , 10 , 13 , 14 , 16 , 18 , 20 and 21 .
The Commission is unable , for the reasons indicated by Mr Byrne during yesterday morning 's debate , to accept Amendments Nos 4 , 7 , 8 , 11 , 22 , 23 , 24 and 26 .
Mr President , I would like to amend the beginning of the amendment , where it reads ' Member States shall report to the Commission on these measures every two years ' .
I would like ' every two years ' to be changed to ' every three years ' .
Mr President , I would like the words ' and sustainable combustion ' added .
Mr President , we should remind colleagues who may not be here for the formal sitting that the vote on the calendar for next year takes place at 12.30 p.m. , so everybody should be back and not caught offside .
The sitting is suspended and will resume after the formal sitting .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.58 a.m. for the formal sitting and resumed at 12.35 p.m. )

Mr President , on a point of order , history seems to be repeating itself .
The vote on the calendar followed a formal sitting last time .
I wish to make sure in this great democracy that you give people time to get back into their seats to vote .
It seems too much of a coincidence that it happened exactly the same this year as it did last year .
I am sorry , you will have to look somewhere else for a conspiracy theory .
I want to get on with the vote .
Mr President , in my idea of what constitutes democracy , there are votes which should be expressed publicly .
( Loud applause )
The secret ballot is reserved for certain appointments , but when democrats are not capable of stating publicly their choices concerning essential political appointments , when they call for secret ballots on points of procedure , even though they claim to be defending transparency , then all I can say is that that is not my idea of democracy , or of transparency , or of a sense of political responsibility .
I want to say publicly , here and now , that I shall be voting against the amendments tabled by those advocates of transparency - a strange transparency indeed !
( Loud applause )
Mr President , let me say that we will not withdraw the request for a secret vote for the simple reason that in the past Members have found it difficult on this particular issue to vote according to their conscience and we want everyone to be able to vote according to their conscience on this issue .
Mr President , I should like to suggest to the plenary an oral amendment , at the request of a number of Members from several groups .
It would seem that , on such a complex report , there is one phrase which has hit on one of the current provisions of our Rules of Procedure which concerns Rule 108 .
I would suggest , with the agreement of our rapporteur , Mr Richard Corbett , that we should add the following words , ' Parliament may , at the request of one tenth of its Members and on the basis of a report , etc ? .
At the moment it is actually the plenary sessions which can instigate the procedure , together , obviously , with the competent committee which completes the work .
However , I think that it is important to remember this point .
Mr President , that is not what we agreed on this point in the debates in committee and in the group .
The point is , we do not start this sort of procedure unless there is some prospect of obtaining the required majorities further down the line in this difficult procedure to establish human rights violations in Member States .
That is why we are opposed to this oral amendment .
Mr President , an Amendment No 172 has been tabled , which contains a phrase , in English , which is quite incomprehensible .
Could there perhaps have been a mistake ?
I shall read it out to the rapporteur :
This arises because we have agreed with the other institutions two different deadlines for Parliament to object to implementing measures being taken by the Commission .
In the general framework agreement with the Commission , we have a one-month deadline .
However , quite recently we successfully negotiated a longer deadline in the context of the Lamfalussy report .
Mr von Wogau was the rapporteur and will remember that we obtained a three-month deadline for measures that fall within that category .
So rather than restricting ourselves to a one-month deadline in the Rules generally , when you can go further for that category , the Rule is being adapted to ensure that we can go further for measures of that kind .
It is relatively simple and I advise the House to accept the amendment .
Mr President , we in the PPE-DE Group tabled both Amendment No 142 and Amendment No 144 on this point .
Now that Amendment No 142 has been accepted , we do not , I think , need to vote on Amendment No 144 , because it deals with the same issue .
Mr Corbett , does 144 fall in consequence of adopting 142 ?
Mr President , I am glad that my colleague in the PPE-DE Group has now come round to the view that I put to him yesterday .
Yesterday he thought that we did need a separate and additional vote , but I am happy that he now accepts that we do not .
Mr President , the services have pointed out that the proposed amendments are identical .
However , that is not the case in all the language versions and , even in the English version , there are interesting differences between the version in the committee report and the version now before plenary .
The point is , do we call for the High Representative to be present at foreign and security policy debates or do we word it more politely by saying he should be invited .
I think that , as we are talking about foreign and security policy , we should opt for the diplomatic wording , as contained in Amendments Nos 120 and 174 .
Mr President , Mr Wuermeling is right .
The confusion arises from two different versions of the original having been circulated .
If we take the corrected version of the original then indeed the three amendments are identical and can be voted as one which would be the best solution .
Amendment No 74 reads : ' Any Member ... may give an oral explanation on the final vote ... orally at most twice each sitting . '
I have a vague , a faint suspicion that the intention of the Members who have tabled this amendment is to stop me talking , for I am the only person who delivers more than two explanations of vote .
Although I do not support Amendment No 74 , I will try to comply with the wishes of the Members who have tabled this amendment by adopting a silent approach as of now and withdrawing my oral amendment .
Mr President , as is his wont , Mr Fatuzzo has given an explanation of vote , because we have already addressed his cause for concern by rejecting the proposed amendment .
Colleagues , I should like to take up my protocol duties with the King of Jordan .
I am pleased to have been able to get this far into the Corbett vote .
I extend a modest apology to my friend Mr Bourlanges for being at the wrong end of my gavel earlier today but I believe the House appreciated voting expeditiously .
In the end I hope no injury was done to any particular interests .
Mr President , I should just like to make a brief comment here . The fact of the matter is , we should be obliged to examine the financial impact of committee reports .
Rule 159 refers at one point to legislative reports .
We have already adopted the wording for that .
Article 160 refers to non-legislative reports , but we should ensure that the same wording is used in both cases because , materially , it makes no difference if a financial statement is drawn up for a legislative or a non-legislative report .
In this respect , having voted on Amendment No 88 , there should in fact be no need to vote again here .
It appears to make sense to me .
Does the rapporteur agree ?
Mr President , this is another case where confusion has arisen because the amendments distributed before the vote do not quite correspond to the amendments contained in the report because there was a linguistic correction in between , but Mr Wuermeling is right .
We should stick to the same formula that we have already adopted so as to have consistency in the text .
. ( ES ) Very briefly , since the debate we should have had has not taken place on this occasion , I would like to warmly congratulate the rapporteur on his work .
This is essentially a highly technical report , which will no doubt be ignored by the press , but it is of enormous importance in terms of the good functioning of the European budget in the future .
The rapporteur 's work has preserved the rights of Parliament and prevented certain retrograde steps initially proposed by the Council .
I congratulate you once again .
. ( DE ) I voted against the recommendation in the Dell 'Alba report and , hence , against the new financial regulation .
This new financial regulation no longer makes provision for any independent financial control before payments are disbursed from the EU budget .
This is a violation of the EC Treaty , which requires independent financial control .
With no such ex-ante control , the risks of irregularity and fraud will increase .
The Commission has received warnings to this effect for a long time , most recently from its own accounting officer , who was promptly removed .
The Commission will have to pay a heavy price for refusing to take these warnings seriously .
- ( FR ) We voted in favour of this report because of the various elementary adoptions of position which it contains .
However , the mere fact that it was necessary to go through the whole conciliation process before the Council would agree to accept a few timid amendments by the European Parliament shows that we cannot count on governments , as represented by the Council , to implement real equality between women and men .
The de facto inequality between women 's wages and men 's wages bears witness , amongst many other things , to the gap between the hypocritical positions adopted by the policy makers and the reality of the situation .
- ( FR ) It would be difficult not to give one 's full and entire support to this new version of Directive 76 / 207 / EC on the implementation of the principle of equal treatment for men and women in all areas of employment including vocational training .
Among the many reasons for that support , there are three which are particularly crucial and essential as far as I am concerned .
The first of these is that this text , for the first time at Community level , contains a definition of ' sexual harassment ' , which is defined as a situation ' where any form of unwanted verbal , non-verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature occurs with the purpose or effect of violating the dignity of a person , in particular when creating an intimidating , hostile , humiliating or offensive environment ? .
This directive also defines ' direct discrimination ' , ' indirect discrimination ' and ' harassment ' .
The second reason is the fact that this new directive prohibits discrimination against women on the grounds of pregnancy or maternity leave , and lays down the entitlement to return to the same job or an equivalent position at the end of maternity leave , or paternity or adoption leave , when those rights are recognised by Member States .
( Explanation of vote cut short pursuant to Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
Establishing a European Maritime Safety Agency is the right move following a number of tragedies at sea over recent years , the worst of which , for Greece , was the shipwreck of the ' Samina ' ferry boat .
The Council 's position has been improved by a number of amendments made by the European Parliament in connection with transparency , forwarding the agency 's findings to the Member States , the role of experts on the agency 's administrative board and combating fraud .
The Mastorakis report is a considerable improvement on the Commission 's initial proposal , which is why I shall vote in favour of it .
- ( FR ) Following the shipwreck of the oil tanker ' Erika ' , the Commission submitted a second set of measures , including the proposed regulation on establishing a European Maritime Safety Agency .
This new agency will provide the Member States and the Commission with the technical and scientific support necessary to enable them to apply Community legislation effectively .
In formulating its Common Position , the Council has generally stuck to the spirit and objectives of the proposed regulation , that is , solving the safety problems of sea transport and protecting the marine environment .
This Common Position therefore expresses our most urgent desire , which is to reinforce both the safety of sea transport and the protection of the marine environment .
For that essential reason I shall be supporting this Common Position .
Of course , one may deplore the fact that it was not possible to tackle the issue of where this Agency should have its seat , and one may think that the option of excluding representatives of the professional sectors and replacing them with professionals nominated by the Commission does tend to distance this Common Position from the proposals made by the Commission and Parliament .
Nevertheless , I shall vote in favour of Mr Mastorakis ' report , which approves that position .
Two and a half years after the wreck of the ' Erika ' , there must be no further delay in putting into practice such important measures .
Transport safety is now at the top of the political agenda of the fifteen governments of the European Union .
It is rightly the case as too many innocent persons lose their lives as a result of inadequate transport measures .
Reducing fatalities and deaths on our roads must remain as the central political goal .
This must be achieved by ensuring greater enforcement of our road safety legislation and improving the quality of our road driving .
Maritime safety is also becoming a more important political issue within the European Union .
This is primarily the case because of the disastrous environmental damage that was caused as a result of the Erika tanker sinking of the coast of France a couple of years ago .
The European Commission has brought forward a proposal which is designed to establish a new European Maritime Safety Agency .
This new Agency will provide Member States of the EU and the European Commission with the necessary technical and scientific support in order to effectively implement Community legislation in the field of maritime safety and to prevent pollution from ships .
( Abbreviated in accordance with Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
. ( NL ) For some companies , it is appealing to carry out their activities in an area where there is little or no government control , so that they are not hindered in their profitable activities which could constitute a risk for their workers , for other people or for the environment .
For a long time , anything that was not allowed on land seemed to be permitted at sea , and certainly when this concerned the sea area outside the territorial waters .
Most of the damage was done and most indignation caused when oil tankers made water , as a result of which their cargo covered the coasts and animals living on them for a long time .
Decisions have already been taken on the use of ships that knowingly dump parts of their cargo that has become unusable , or the remainder of their fuel , as well as on the phasing out of single-hulled tankers .
This has not yet made the maritime environment sufficiently safe .
There are transitional periods , and unexpected situations arise all the time that constitute risks for passengers and crew and for a large area at sea or on the coast .
This is why it is useful that a body will be set up that gathers knowledge and monitors rules .
For too long , all eyes have been on the composition of the board and the differences of opinion on that score .
This is why I can agree in this case on a prompt start and on moving possible improvements to a later date .
We voted against the Commission 's Amendment No 7 and against Amendment No 19 because , while supporting absolutely a system in which blood is donated free of charge and regarding it as shocking that anyone could turn it into merchandise , we believe that employees who absent themselves from work in order to give blood should retain their wages .
If a worker is prepared to donate his blood , there is no reason why his boss , in turn , should not be able to donate a miserable few hours ' pay .
We would all welcome the setting of standards of quality for blood products .
On a basic human level , a constant supply of good quality products is essential to best provide for the people of Europe who need them because of disease and illness and to that extent we must be able to give certainty as regards the quality of the end product as well as the method of collection , testing , processing and storage .
Therefore I gladly support the proposal before us today .
It should also be emphasised that each of us has an obligation to contribute to the blood supply on a voluntary basis , as it is essential to maintain these services for all .
That being the case , if products are not available in the EU from a voluntary and non-remunerated supply , we should not prevent products being imported from outside the EU for the protection of human health and the delivery of services to people in need .
With this practical caveat , I give my full support to the proposal .
- ( FR ) The measures recommended in this report will largely make it possible to prevent the sort of disasters that we have seen , particularly in France with the contaminated blood affair .
We cannot avoid thinking about the tragic outcome , which has made such a deep impression on our minds .
We must , then , at European level , establish high standards for the quality of blood and for the safety of its collection , we must be strict about storage conditions and traceability , and we must lay down demanding rules for inspection and monitoring .
Blood is not an item of merchandise like any other .
It is not ' commercial goods ' , and nothing must be allowed to make us depart from that notion .
I remain firmly opposed to any commercial use of human blood , and I hope that all Member States will stand firm on the principle of voluntary donation without remuneration .
On this subject , subsidiarity applies , but in addition to being a cultural issue it is also a question of ethics , ethics that are shared by many Europeans , and also a scientific issue .
In fact , studies have shown that blood collected by voluntary , unpaid donation is of a higher quality .
In order to promote such voluntary unpaid donation , Europe should encourage all its Member States to promote this principle and should launch huge information and public-awareness campaigns .
Mr President , I would like to point out that the British Conservative delegation in the European Parliament voted against the Gil-Robles Gil-Delgado report because of a number of aspects it contains with which we do not agree .
I will not take up the time of the House by going through the details .
We would have voted for it if it had in any way impinged upon the right of the Gibraltar inhabitants to participate in the next European Parliament elections .
The minutes statement that is attached to this report from the UK Government makes it clear that it is the UK Government 's sole responsibility to ensure that the legislation is put in place for Gibraltarians to vote in those elections .
I would like to take this brief opportunity to urge the UK Government to live up to that minutes statement and put that legislation in place so that Gibraltarians are able to participate in the electoral process electing representatives who will have an influence over laws which apply in Gibraltar .
We have voted in favour of giving Parliament 's consent to amending the Act concerning the election of representatives of the European Parliament .
It is good that these changes are coming about , establishing common principles governing the election procedure .
There are also very good reasons for indicating in Parliament 's legislative resolution the importance of the principle of equality between men and women in order to guarantee a balanced representation of both sexes .
We do not , however , consider it unfortunate that the Council chose not to propose a common European constituency for 10 % of the mandates to the European Parliament .
We do not believe that a common constituency of that kind would add anything of great importance at this stage .
- ( FR ) The draft Council decision on the organisation of European elections makes provision for the possibility of regional constituencies , on the initiative and at the discretion of each country .
To the extent that this is a simple option , which in any case is already in use in a minority of countries , this provision may be accepted .
As far as France is concerned , however , we are opposed to such a reform , which would encourage the fragmentation of the country with regard to Brussels .
That was the meaning of the amendment which I had proposed , and which I spoke about during the debate .
The Council has explained that the creation of territorial constituencies within a country should not , overall , undermine the proportional nature of the voting ( Article 2 ) .
Parliament has clarified this ' overall ' by explaining that it must not ' undermine the proportional representation of political families at Member State level ? ( Recital C ) .
We conclude from this that , when territorial constituencies are created , the effects of thresholds must be avoided , for example by introducing a system of ' recovering the residues ' at national level .
However , all that would be very complicated .
The current system is simpler , clearer and more effective for the purposes of representing France .
I am of course in favour of direct universal elections to our Parliament and I congratulate the rapporteur on the hard work he has put in to increase the authority and credibility of our Assembly .
There is , however , one fatal flaw in this Parliament 's approach to the whole question of universal suffrage .
The problem is that the five European Parliament elections that have so far taken place since 1979 have not included one particular part of the European Union .
I have in mind the 15,000 voters of Gibraltar .
Member States ' exclusion of this small territory from the right to vote reflects no credit on them .
And I have in mind successive British governments as well as others .
This report leaves open the question of the Gibraltarian vote .
Although some progress has been made on this matter since the decision of the European Court of Human Rights in 1999 , the matter is still unresolved .
No Council decision on European Parliament voting can be complete without recognition of the Gibraltarians ' rights .
That is why I shall be voting against this report .
. ( NL ) Within society , there are clashing views of society and opposing group interests .
All these arrogant politicians , from both Left and Right , have , with authoritarian means , tried to forge unity and lay down definitive end conclusions from the top down .
We have witnessed time and again that this is eventually fought by the majority of the people .
Politics is the organisation of differences of opinion that exist within society , as a result of which they become more readily understood by the public .
Electoral systems that are only intended to form a stable government majority hinder the free forming of opinion from the bottom up .
All structures that try to exclude existing movements from the political debate , however controversial these may be , are objectionable .
This is why I opt for proportional representation .
For the time being , this new Council decision is obstructing cross-border , proportional representation , with multi-national lists for 10 % of the European Parliament seats , something that was requested by the European Parliament in 1998 .
Despite this , I endorse the decision because public opinions happen to be formed not at European , but national , level .
A major improvement is the fact that territorial constituencies for elections are no longer imposed on the larger Member States and that maximum expenses for the election campaigns can be prescribed .
I totally reject the rapporteur 's conclusion that the election campaigns in all Member States should mainly be about choosing a President for the European Commission .
. ( PT ) Although some progress has been made in negotiations with the Council , there are still aspects that need to be clarified , studied in detail and improved .
One such aspect is the priority ' Global change and ecosystems ' , given that the fisheries sector was subjected to swingeing budgetary cuts under the Sixth Framework Programme for research , with its budget being reduced from EUR 880 million under the previous programme to only EUR 570 million .
It is equally important , however , that we pay full attention to soil , which is also a component of terrestrial ecosystems and a crucial factor in their sustainable development .
Soil also constitutes the world 's greatest reserve of biomass and this being the case , its protection in terms of CO2 retention and also so that it can be harnessed in the long term .
Hence the importance of engaging in research that seeks to provide a better understanding of the functioning of terrestrial and marine ecosystems .
Furthermore , it should be noted that enormous pressure is being exerted by the chemical and pharmaceutical industries , which are attempting to strengthen their influence over the programme . This could distort the balance of the final version .
Mr President , we have just voted in favour of a monthly plenary session reduced to four days .
Four days , which means three days of work - is that serious , is it effective ?
No , of course not , and in any case those people who proposed it were also proposing to extend other sessions , even though they are aware that the extravagant use of time which we experience during those sessions , and the frustrations caused by the little time that Members have to express themselves , are not reasonable .
The problem is , however , that , using the length of sessions as a pretext , it is the Strasbourg sitting that is being called into question .
In my view , the basic problem , and I am determined to say it because I opposed this decision , lies not in any opposition between two cities , but rather in the opposition between two visions of Europe . There is the centralising vision , which wants to concentrate on a single place , Brussels , on the grounds of alleged rationality , of self-styled efficacy , a technocratic vision if you like , and then there is the decentralised , pluralist vision , the vision of a multi-dimensional Europe which has to be able to work from several centres of decision-making , thereby recognising and respecting the cultural diversities and identities of which it is composed .
After enlargement , it will be not only Brussels , but also Strasbourg , Luxembourg , Frankfurt , and perhaps another location which will have to be established and promoted in order to meet the needs of the enlarged Europe which we are creating .
That is why I opposed this reduction in the length of the plenary session .
Mr President , Mr Cox has apologised to me because I had asked to draw the attention of the House to the Rules of Procedure , which have not been followed .
In fact , I believe that we have contravened our Rules of Procedure .
It is quite legitimate for a fifth of Members to request a secret ballot , even though I , like Mrs Brs , think that it was not at all advisable in the circumstances .
Having said that , however , Rule 136 ( 4 ) lays down a specific procedure for such secret ballots .
The counting of any secret vote is carried out by between two and six tellers , drawn by lot from among the Members .
That means that we have here a solemn procedure , a cumbersome procedure , a procedure which is intended precisely to discourage any inopportune requests for the use of a secret ballot .
One does not vote by secret ballot in the same way as one would change one 's tie .
We also find that , in the Corbett report on which we have just voted , Rule 136 was not amended .
Therefore the President was wrong not to apply the procedure laid down in Article 4 , which is intended precisely to avoid using secret ballots , for tactical reasons , at every opportunity .
Mr Dell 'Alba , we are not having a debate on a point of order .
This is just explanations of vote .
Mr Bourlanges can say what he likes in his explanation of vote .
No Mr President , you would have said it yourself , but I am saying it to my excellent fellow Member who is generally always to the point in what he says .
In this precise case , Mr Cox applied the rule .
If he were to consult the rule preceding the one he quoted , he would see that this provision derogates from Rule 136 and allows precisely the procedure which the President followed .
Working in two different places is an operational nightmare for the European Parliament and , more importantly , an unbearable burden on the European taxpayers expected to back the ultimatums of governments in certain Member States of the European Union .
That money should be squandered like this on working premises is intolerable , especially when attempts are being made to cut back on the number of languages used in the work of the European Union , which are vital if every citizen is to be able to enter Parliament , irrespective of his or her level of education , and every citizen in the European Union is to have a full understanding of the work of Parliament .
I believe that the European Parliament should have one seat , especially following the enlargement of the European Union , and that this seat should be located as close to the geographical centre of the enlarged EU as possible and should be more politically balanced between north , south , east and west than it is at present .
- ( FR ) The European Parliament has just expressed , yet again , its opposition to the Friday morning part-session in the plenary weeks held in Strasbourg .
It does not have the right to do this , because it has to obey the Treaty .
It is , in fact , infringing the Treaty on two points .
First of all , as the Court of Justice pointed out in 1997 , when the Treaty refers to the twelve periods of monthly plenary sessions , it is referring to existing practice , which is that of periods lasting one week .
Secondly , the additional plenary sessions which may be held in Brussels are intended to provide a supplement when working time in Strasbourg is fully occupied .
It is therefore not possible to get rid of Strasbourg weeks while at the same time adding on mini-sessions in Brussels .
Nor is it correct to plan the Brussels sessions a year in advance , without knowing whether or not the Strasbourg agenda will be full .
I deplore the fact that the previous French Government did not bring the matter before the Court of Justice when the Strasbourg Friday sessions were omitted in 2000 and 2001 , and I hope that the next government will do better .
- ( FR ) Given the low attendance at the Friday morning sittings when they were in force , the question of whether or not to return to five-day periods would seem to be by and large hypocritical .
Moreover , we refuse to take part in the acrimonious little war between Brussels and Strasbourg which lies behind the positions adopted on this subject .
Consequently we have abstained from voting .
On the other hand , it is unacceptable that the staff should suffer the consequences of choices made by Members , resulting either in a reduction of their wages or of certain bonuses , or in an increase in their workload .
If the European Parliament makes the decision to carry on using four-day sessions , we ask that all wages should be returned to the level they were at when there were five-day sessions , and that any resulting disadvantages to staff , whether civil servants , auxiliary staff or temporary workers , should be eliminated .
I was not in favour of the two recent ballots on the calendar of sessions 2003 .
I voted in favour of both amendments 1 and 3 for the self-evident reasons that Brussels is a far better place to conduct our business economically and efficiently than Strasbourg .
I will always vote to reflect that view and try to end the mindless and expensive perigrinations around Europe that John Major 's government imposed on the Parliament at the Edinburgh Summit in 1992 .
- ( FR ) The UEN Group and the French delegation of the RPF are opposed to any manoeuvre which would reduce the length of plenary sessions at Strasbourg .
In order to correct the annoying precedent of last year , when Mrs Fontaine was President , namely the omission of Friday from the timetable of plenary sessions , I requested , on behalf of my group , the reinstatement of the five-day week at Strasbourg .
We know perfectly well that a plenary session reduced to four days does not allow us to work properly .
However , in addition to this purely technical aspect , which is in itself not a negligible one , I refuse , for serious political reasons , to see a day ( whether Monday or Friday ) chopped off the Strasbourg sessions , while at the same time the number and length of extraordinary sessions in Brussels are being improperly increased .
In actual fact these practices are covering up an obvious desire to transfer Parliament 's headquarters definitively from Strasbourg to Brussels , in spite of what is laid down in the Treaties .
Strasbourg must not be downgraded to become a mere annex to Brussels .
Strasbourg is and must remain the seat of the European Parliament .
- ( FR ) Once again , the anti-Strasbourg lobby is on the rampage , trying to shorten and devalue the Strasbourg sessions and , in the end , to abolish them .
Anything goes , from the use of the secret ballot to the threat of legionella .
I should like to remind the House that it is not the responsibility of an assembly to decide itself where it should sit .
It is not up to Members to decide , on whatever grounds , whether of comfort , whim or gastronomic preferences , on the place where they legislate .
Just imagine , for a moment , a situation in which the European Parliament decides , because it is more pleasant , to sit in Courmayeur in winter and in Saint-Tropez in summer .
An assembly can only submit to what has been fixed by governments , and therefore by the people , by means of basic texts .
In the present case , the texts in question have laid down that the European Parliament shall have its seat in Strasbourg , and the Flemish-soup lobby cannot be allowed to make Strasbourg its seat in name only .
Mr President , I wanted to say to our rapporteur that his report , as many people wanted it to , has been greatly reduced in the manner of Balzac 's peau de chagrin .
I do not know whether that is the correct term in French , but anyway I wanted to emphasise that , thanks to the efforts of a certain number of Members who have Parliament 's interests at heart , a number of amendments which were not in Members ' interests have been rejected .
Some of those amendments were absolutely ludicrous .
For example , we would no longer have been able to ask for split voting , even though we are a Parliament consisting of experienced Members who just this morning , because urgency required it , had to table an oral amendment .
We therefore had to limit ourselves with regard to the separate votes and other aspects , and to limit the urgent business .
Consequently we are very pleased , even though there are still a number of black spots , that the adopted version of the report constitutes a clear retreat from what Mr Corbett wanted to impose on us .
This report endeavours to rationalise the work of the European Parliament in the run up to the enlargement of the ? U , inter alia by reinforcing the role of parliamentary committees and reducing the work of plenary .
Although the report contains a number of good ideas , it also contains proposals which are particularly worrying , such as :
increasing the powers of the President , who will be allowed to give the floor to those who catch his eye , without abiding by any rules , or decide on the admissibility of questions or amendments , which could well lead to high-handedness ;
the need for groups to represent one-fifth of the Member States , thereby discouraging convergence in the European parliamentary area ;
restricting the use of all languages in all the work of the European Parliament , irrespective , including representations and so on .
- ( FR ) The revision of the Rules of Procedure proposed by the Corbett report will have the effect , on the pretext of simplifying and reducing procedures , of strengthening the duopoly of the major groups with federalist majorities within the European Parliament .
In effect , the conditions for forming groups have been tightened up , which makes it more complicated to create small groups .
At the same time , parliamentary life will be made more difficult for minorities and Non-attached Members .
Up to now , the latter have been able to express themselves via explanations of vote in writing .
Yet the tolerance which was traditionally shown with regard to the length of those explanations has been withdrawn by the administration without any clear justification having been given .
This reversal actually penalises minorities and Non-attached Members much more than any others .
Here , as elsewhere , the sense of deliberate manoeuvring is quite clear .
A witch hunt is being carried out against anyone who does not bear the federalist stamp .
Finally , as I said in the debate , this revision of the Rules of Procedure expands the rights of the European Parliament beyond what is allowed by the Treaty , and apparently no Member State is worried by this .
I wish to place on record my support and appreciation for the hard work and expertise Richard Corbett has put into reforming Parliament 's rules .
As a result of his efforts , Parliament should now function better and hold more interesting debates .
It should now be able to cope with enlargement .
This is a first and important step in making Parliament a more effective voice for the people in EU decision-making .
. ( NL ) A parliament can only function well if at least the following three conditions are met .
First of all , it must be a recognisable reflection , constantly nourished by society , of the clashing views and interests in that society .
Secondly , there must be sufficient opportunity to make this clash visible in the public debate , which is achieved most effectively if , before the decisions are taken , the Members can react to each other or can ask for clarifications by means of interruptions and a second round of debate .
Thirdly , the electorate must have the certainty that Parliament itself can take initiatives , and takes the final decisions on legislation , budget and coalition forming by simple majority .
Unfortunately , the European Parliament meets none of these criteria , a fact that is not altered by the proposed amendments to the Rules of Procedure .
These amendments mainly relate to restricting speaking time , to time-consuming procedures for selecting more rigorously the amendments to be voted on and to opportunities for presidents , on their own initiative , to give the floor to backbenchers sympathetic to them .
These changes benefit the two largest groups , but are disadvantageous to anyone who wants to show what alternative decisions are desirable and possible .
As a result , the European Parliament remains a kind of senate that is far removed from the people , where the tenor of the meetings is the explanations of vote and the communication of faits accomplis .
I am sorry that Parliament has today voted against a proposal concerning the option of six months ' parental leave in connection with the birth or adoption of children .
Under this option , a Member of the European Parliament would be replaced in accordance with rules governing definitive dismissal .
Under the present Rules , an MEP can certainly be on leave , but he or she is not entitled to be replaced .
In that way , the political group has one MEP fewer , with the same workload having to be distributed among fewer MEPs .
That is especially hard on parties from smaller states with few MEPs .
There is therefore pressure on the MEP concerned to take up his or her place again as soon as possible , to the detriment of the MEP 's family and children .
In Parliament , we often state that it must be possible to combine work and family life , and we urge governments to take measures to make that possible .
The same thing must also apply , of course , to Parliament as a place of work .
Just as new parents in other types of work are entitled to leave , so too should Members of the European Parliament be .
We must have Rules of Procedure which reflect a positive view of family and children , something not expressed by the present Rules .
It might , moreover , be questioned whether the latter really are democratic , because they make it more difficult for people who are at an age when they might want children or a family to stand as candidates and assume the responsibilities of MEPs .
Mr President , on this point I should simply like to emphasise - and I say this very seriously - that , like the losing fleet after a war , the Socialist Group has scuttled the report of one of its eminent members , Mr Corbett .
Thus the group voted deliberately against all the amendments to the Corbett report , which can now be summed up in a single sentence .
The European Parliament , through the will of the Socialist Group , is responding to the expectations of the Court of First Instance of the Communities by voting against the report of one of its eminent Members , namely Mr Corbett , and allowing a report consisting of a single sentence to be adopted , at the end of two and a half years of work by the Constitutional Committee .
I wanted to emphasise this point so that it will appear in the Minutes .
Perhaps the cowardly vote which has taken place this morning will be referred to again later , within other bodies .
. ( NL ) On account of the guarded resistance to the forming of small groups , there are fewer groups in the European Parliament than in some national parliaments .
The advantage is that international groups combine adherents of more or less the same political persuasion , instead of 150 groups of individual national parties .
But it also has disadvantages , such as the position of individual Members who do not belong to any groups or who switch groups from time to time .
In the Netherlands , I am used to a system where parliamentary groups are formed on the basis of the election result .
Every list that obtains seats , even if this is only one , is recognised as a group .
In the European Parliament , on the other hand , groups are not formed until after the elections , and the switching of individual Members to another group is not considered as theft of seats .
Since a large number of Members from different Member States are needed in order to be recognised as a group , there will be political movements left over that are too small for this .
This leads not only to the setting up of ideologically-connected groups , within which , based on differences of national public opinions , Members do not always see eye to eye on practical choices , but also to artificial , technical groups , in which parties work together that do not know each other .
In my view , an obligation for all Members who cannot find any groups to join , to take part in a mixed group based on a Spanish model , is complete madness .
The Inglewood motion for a resolution contains mainly technical arrangements concerning the justification of amendments which rationalise how we work , which is why the GUE / NGL Group will vote in favour of it .
However , I should like to take this opportunity to draw attention to the need for proper justification of proposed amendments , which may cover issues which are extremely important to European citizens . This is being jeopardised , especially within the context of the information industry , which alienates Members of Parliament from what they are voting on , often without their knowledge .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.40 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

I wish to welcome to the Tribune this afternoon the Chairman of the Russian State Duma Delegation to the EU-Russia Parliamentary Cooperation Committee , led by Vice-President Vladimir Lukin , Mr Alexander Belousov and Mrs Valentina Demina from the Russian Federation Council .
You are extremely welcome here .
In particular , I am pleased to welcome you here , as today Russia celebrates its Independence Day , in commemoration of the adoption of the declaration on Russia 's state sovereignty on 12 June 1990 .
So you are welcome and congratulations !
Mr President , I think it is well worth restating once again the historic significance , the political importance and the irreversible nature of the process of enlarging the Union .
Having said that , I believe , when it comes to assessing the prospects for the process of enlarging the European Union with a view to the next European Council , that we must begin with the objectives we had set at the start of our Presidency so that we can then consider what we can expect of Seville in light of what has been achieved so far .
You will remember , Mr President , that in the debate we held this morning on the preparation of the Seville Council , I avoided dealing with enlargement issues , specifically so that we could reserve them for this debate , in which we are going to deal solely with those issues .
It is clear that the issue of enlargement is one of the fundamental subjects for the Seville European Council and I therefore believe that the information I am going to give will indicate the key elements of what the Presidency and the Council are going to propose to that Council .
At the beginning of the Presidency we presented a working programme entitled ' More Europe ' ; that document naturally included the enlargement of the European Union as one of our fundamental priorities , or more than a priority , one of the Union 's fundamental objectives .
It stated that the Presidency 's objective was to contribute decisively to concluding the negotiations with all the candidate countries which are prepared by the end of the second half of 2002 , thereby following up on the conclusions of the previous European Councils of Gothenburg and Laeken .
More specifically , our main task consisted of achieving common positions between the 15 countries on the most complex chapters of the acquis , that is to say , those which fall to us according to the ' road map ' , those which are most significant from a financial and budgetary point of view .
According to the famous road map agreed in Nice , those chapters - which have fallen to the Spanish Presidency - are agriculture , regional policy and the financial and budgetary provisions , to which we can add another sensitive chapter , which is not sensitive financially , but because of its highly political nature ; the issue of the institutions .
In parallel , we thought that we were going to proceed to the provisional conclusion of all those chapters pending at the beginning of the six-month period because - as you and the House know , Mr President - Spain was not only faced with the ' road map ' , but also with a huge number of euphemistically named ' leftovers ' , which in fact are unfinished negotiations , extremely important negotiations , which remained following the Swedish and the Belgian Presidencies .
Two fundamental principles must continue to inspire and underpin the entire negotiation process and they are that the negotiations should be carried out on the basis of the current acquis and that the financial perspectives approved in Berlin in 1999 will have to determine the upper limits for the accession of the new Member States between now and 2006 .
In this negotiation we also tried to prevent any overlapping or interference by the enlargement process with any possible reforms of the common policies , because if we try to make the reform of common policies conditional upon enlargement we will risk creating a delay with regard to the scheduled timescales .
In other words , the Union has an objective that has the full support of Parliament : that accession should take place during 2004 .
As well as this general objective , the specific working programme of the Presidency for enlargement , which was presented to the Council last January , included a whole series of related tasks .
Firstly , compliance with the third requirement for accession which relates to the administrative and judicial capacity to effectively apply the acquis .
Not much is said about this , but it is a very important issue .
This is the famous so-called ' Madrid criterion ' which is absolutely essential if enlargement is to work .
During this six-month period , the Commission has drawn up and implemented an action plan for each of the candidate countries and will present a report in this regard in Seville .
Furthermore , a group drawing up the Accession Treaty was scheduled to be set up during the Presidency , and it began its work in March .
Together with the Commission and the Secretariat-General of the Council , we came up with the idea of beginning to think about a working group to draw up the Accession Treaty , so that the drawing up of its text and its relevant annexes should run parallel with the negotiations in order that , when the negotiations are concluded , we would not waste time drawing up the text of the Treaty , because we all know , Parliament in particular , the difficulties involved in the national ratification processes .
We do not therefore have much time if we want to achieve our objective in 2004 , especially in order to have everything ratified so that all the candidate countries can participate as full members in the elections to the European Parliament .
Therefore , we had that purpose - which , incidentally , we have fulfilled - and , as has been the case with previous presidencies , the Spanish Presidency has also paid particular attention to four specific cases , because it seems as if the ten countries designated for the first wave are the sole object of our enthusiasm , which is not true .
We must pay attention to Bulgaria and Romania , two countries which have made less progress and to which we have to lend specific support in order to open as many negotiation chapters as possible , and we also wanted in some way to contribute to the efforts to find a definitive peaceful solution to the issue of Cyprus .
Finally , neither must we forget that somehow we must promote the pre-accession strategy with Turkey .
On the basis of these initial approaches , we must ask ourselves what we have achieved so far during our Presidency , since what we have done over these months will dictate how the situation and the perspectives between now and the end of the year are assessed by the coming European Council .
I am pleased to tell you , Mr President , that , with the invaluable help of the Commission - and I would like to pay homage publicly to Commissioner Verheugen , who is in charge of enlargement , who has been truly instrumental in all the progress we have made - the progress made during the Spanish Presidency can be summed up as follows : the Council , in its various guises , has begun to examine the notes presented by the Commission on 30 January on the general financial framework and agriculture , on which there was a clear lack of consensus .
The fundamental difference of opinion - and we are still negotiating in this regard - relates to the provision by the Union of direct agricultural aid to the candidate countries and the fact that this aid may , according to some countries , prejudice the future reform of the CAP .
As a result of these disagreements , we have not yet achieved a common position on the agriculture chapter ; I would say we have achieved 95 % of a common position , but there is still 5 % , relating to direct aid on which we have yet to reach a consensus .
We are trying to promote a compromise formula because we understand the reasoning of the four countries which are blocking the common position , but we also believe those countries must understand that , in agriculture , there are certain fundamental principles relating to respect for the acquis , respect for equality between the member countries and the candidate countries and above all the fact that the ' road map ' cannot be delayed .
That is to say that all those countries which for certain reasons are hindering the adoption of the common position on direct aid will have to answer for their political responsibility before this Parliament - and I hope that you will demand it - and before public opinion , for not having made possible a common position which would finally conclude the entire ' road map ' for the enlargement negotiations .
We are making efforts , we held a General Affairs Council on Monday , we are dealing with this issue today in Coreper ; there will be another extraordinary Coreper on Friday ; we are going to deal with the issue again at the General Affairs Council on the 17 June and , if necessary , we will have to take it to the European Council .
We do not want the European Council to become a battlefield for these issues , but everyone must be aware that we have to make a collective effort to completely conclude the agriculture chapter ; we cannot say that 95 % is concluded and we will conclude the 5 % on direct aid later .
It cannot be delayed because it is a question of principle : we must accept the principle although the methods can be discussed later .
Following the first two negotiation conferences in March and April , and the ministerial meeting we have just held , with Commissioner Verheugen and myself , on Monday , and also with Mr Piqu , on Monday and Tuesday of this week , a total of 83 chapters have now been negotiated , of which 49 were provisionally concluded and another eight were opened .
Furthermore , in April , for the first time we dealt with and concluded with certain candidates countries three of the four chapters which the road map assigned to the Spanish Presidency , that is , regional policy , financial and budgetary provisions and institutional provisions .
With regard to the fourth and final chapter , and no doubt the most complex , agriculture , the debate is ongoing in the Council , we have yet to reach a common position and therefore have not been able to conclude it .
Our objective has been to reach a consensus , as I indicated previously in the General Affairs group of 10 June ; it has not been possible and we are continuing with our efforts .
With regard to the countries which are most behind , with Bulgaria all the pending chapters have opened , while with Romania seven chapters have been opened , with just 6 still pending ; I would like to inform the House that , together with the Commission , we expect to be able to make even more progress this month and certainly before the end of the Presidency , on 27 or 28 June , we are going to hold a new negotiation conference at Vice-President level and it is possible that we will be able to conclude more chapters with Romania and , naturally , conclude a few more other than the ones concluded at ministerial level .
It is therefore very possible that the Spanish Presidency will end with the opening of all the chapters relating to Romania and with the conclusion of between 90 and 100 chapters with the rest of the candidate countries .
Therefore , if we look at the general picture , as I said this morning , the majority of countries have concluded between 25 and 28 chapters ; so if we consider that the number of chapters for negotiation is 31 , in reality there will only remain 3 or 4 chapters per country to negotiate during the second half of this year , and they are final chapters which , as soon as we have a common position on agriculture and as soon as the Treaty of Nice is ratified , we will be able to conclude immediately since they are the institutional chapter and the financial chapter , which can be concluded very easily .
The committee drawing up the Treaty , which I mentioned earlier , has been working since 13 March on the technical adaptations and the legal details of the commitments agreed so far during the negotiations .
We are leaving the Danish Presidency with a good legacy and we are making it possible for them to conclude the drawing up of the Accession Treaty by the end of the year .
With regard to Turkey , the Association Committee and Council met in January and April respectively .
The most significant element was the adoption of a programme of meetings of the eight sub-committees charged with carrying out the detailed ' pre-screening ' of its legislation , in accordance with the Laeken mandate .
The European Union has been insisting on the need to intensify the internal political reforms with a view to full compliance with the Copenhagen criteria .
Ankara is reiterating its desire to establish in December a date for the start of accession negotiations , but clearly , however much good will it may have , the European Council cannot set dates for the start of negotiations until the Copenhagen criteria have been fully complied with .
Our position will be very clear on this .
We cannot act in any other way .
This is not a case of wishful thinking , but it is an exercise that consists of truly applying the principles which all the institutions are attached to : the Commission , the Council and the European Parliament .

With regard to Cyprus , the ordinary negotiations have continued normally ; I must say that Cyprus is an excellent candidate , the southern part of Cyprus , the Republic of Cyprus , is certainly the candidate for whom the greatest number of negotiation chapters are concluded and which has made the most progress in the negotiation .
Naturally we are still monitoring the development of direct contacts between the leaders of both communities , the conversations which began in January between Mr Denktash and Mr Clerides , which have yet to yield tangible results .


I was in Cyprus myself last Thursday and on behalf of the Presidency I spoke at length with Mr Clerides and with Mr Denktash and we informed them of the Union 's position and of the importance we attach to the programme announced by the Secretary-General of the United Nations , the importance of there being an agreement on the core issues , that is , on the issue of forms of government , property , territory and security .
Some progress has been made but there have also been some dramatic setbacks in recent days , and therefore I have been there on behalf of the President of the Council , not only to send them a message - a message which will be expressed in some way in the Seville conclusions - but also to listen , so that the northern part of Cyprus can never accuse us of not having been sensitive to their arguments or of not having had time to listen to all their arguments , because , naturally , either party can be either right or wrong , but they each have their views and they deserve to be heard .
I therefore believe we have done everything we can to assist the process and we have supported lvaro de Soto , the representative of the Secretary-General of the United Nations , in every way possible .
We believe that things have gone well , but we have sent them a very clear message : we know that the objective of June which they had proposed and which the Secretary-General had confirmed has not been complied with , but we have told them that we cannot wait forever and that we need a clear political signal and that , before 24 October , when the Brussels European Council of the Danish Presidency takes place , the Union needs to see this agreement between the two parties , in order to include the whole issue of Northern Cyprus in the mainstream of the negotiations .
In accordance with the Laeken mandate , the Seville European Council must also give its opinion on the report which the Commission is going to present on development and on its action plan for institutionally strengthening the candidate countries , and the General Affairs Council of 17 June will carry out an initial examination of that report , presented by the Commission on the 5th .
Also in relation to enlargement , the Spanish Presidency introduced for the first time in history the institutional innovation of allowing the candidate countries to participate actively in the Spring European Council - everybody remembers how they participated in the session , not only in the closing dinner , but also in the session itself .
That offered the opportunity to visualise the new Union for the first time .
We have seen , for the first time , a Council with 25 Members and furthermore within a concrete context that affects all of us and affects them , that is to say the Lisbon process .
Finally , I wanted to refer to the bilateral technical cooperation and assistance which has been carried out and intensified by the Member States with the candidate countries in order to prepare the latter for the application of the Community acquis .
Not much is said about this , but we must bear in mind that the progress made , in all the programmes the Commission has implemented , essentially in the twinning programme - which is an extremely important programme , which is really worthy of a debate in this Parliament at some point ; and in the ISPA and Sapard programmes there has been spectacular progress both in terms of the Union 's cooperation with these countries , and in terms of the bilateral cooperation of the candidate countries .
Given all these factors , and without prejudice to the results of the tour of the Spanish Prime Minister , which is taking place at the moment , we should be able to take the debate on enlargement at the coming Seville European Council much further .
While waiting for the General Affairs Council to adopt a Resolution , the European Council will examine a note to the Presidency on the state of the negotiations which will serve as a basis for the debate in the European Council .
By way of illustration , that project could be based around the following elements : firstly , the recognition of the considerable progress made so far during the various presidencies ; we can say that during the Spanish Presidency we have reached a point at which the negotiations are practically finished from a technical point of view .
We have fulfilled the road map and this has allowed the Commission and the Council to bring all 30 chapters with the first ten Laeken countries to the table ; the negotiations have entered the final straight .
It is now reasonable to expect that the Danish Presidency may , in accordance with the wishes of Parliament and the European Council , conclude the negotiations by the end of December .
As I have said , we have now begun to draw up the Accession Treaty and it can now enter a final drawing-up process following the Copenhagen European Council .
I do not believe that a fourth period will be necessary , because its drawing-up is now at an advanced stage .
The Council will refer to the adoption of common positions both on those chapters pending from previous Presidencies and on those which are more complex in terms of their budgetary implications .
Naturally , the specific financial aspects will be looked at at a later date , at the end of the negotiations , as is always the case .
We shall reiterate the general principle that any solutions must conform to the current acquis and the Berlin financial framework .
Let there be no doubt that this is extremely important .
We also require a constructive and realistic approach aimed at concluding the negotiations with the ten candidates so that they can also demonstrate that they are fully prepared to take on their obligations .
There will be an assessment of the report to be presented by the Commission on the development of its action plans for the administrative and judicial strengthening of the candidate countries with a view to effective application of the acquis .
In relation to Bulgaria and Romania , we must recognise the significant progress made during this six-month period , reiterate the principle of inclusivity in the enlargement process and commit ourselves to fully supporting their preparation efforts .
With regard to Turkey , the European Union should encourage the Ankara Government to intensify its reform efforts and express its conviction that that would help to consolidate its accession ambitions .
Meanwhile , the Council would invite the Commission to present concrete measures including , where relevant , additional financial assistance aimed at strengthening the pre-accession strategy for Turkey in line with the rest of the candidate countries .
Furthermore , the Council will encourage Turkey to use its influence to promote a speedy solution to the issue of Cyprus .
And , specifically , on the issue of Cyprus , the European Council will urge the two parties to continue the direct talks between Denktash and Clerides and will encourage them to take this opportunity to find a definitive and global solution as soon as possible , as I said , before 24 October if possible , under the auspices of the United Nations .
In its capacity as a Member State , a unified Cyprus will have to speak with one voice and this is an issue which we will stress in particular ; that is to say , a future shape of the State of Cyprus is something for them to decide , but we have to make something very clear : any type of State that they decide on between the two communities must be a unified State which speaks with one voice and which is able to apply the Community acquis in a uniform manner , both in the North and in the South .
Of course the European Union , as stated by the Commission , which has set aside additional funds , has committed itself to contributing to the economic development of the northern part of the island , if the negotiations bear fruit .
Apart from dealing with all these issues , I believe that the European Council must now begin to discuss the new ' road map ' , the political one .
In other words , the technical part is finished , or is being finished , and now we must look to the future , to see what will happen in 2003 when everything is concluded , to say what plan we have for the signature and ratification of the Treaty , to send a clear message to the national parliaments that this issue is urgent , to see how the candidate countries can participate in a future Intergovernmental Conference , to see how they can participate in the European Parliament elections , in a nutshell , to see how , in a political sense , all the results of the negotiations can be put into practice in accordance with the programme which we have drawn up and the ideas we have re-affirmed so many times in this House and also in the European Council .
Mr President , this is a summary of the outlook which is of course approximate , since I cannot anticipate what the Heads of State and Government are going to say .
I can only present what the Spanish Presidency is going to put before them . But I believe that , apart from any modifications they might make , this will be in general terms what the European Council will say on enlargement .
I hope that what I have said on behalf of the Presidency will be a final contribution to the debate in Parliament today on the basis of so many reports , the authors of which - Brok , Bge , Sommer , Turco , Grlach and Olsson - I congratulate on behalf of the Presidency , since they have been extremely useful in terms of clarifying our ideas about what we need to do within the enlargement chapter .




I would finally like to thank the Commission for the support they have given us at all times , right from the beginning of our Presidency .
Thank you for a comprehensive and , in the concluding part , an appropriately political summary of what lies ahead .
Mr President , honourable Members , I welcome today 's debate on enlargement as an opportunity to send out a clear message in the run up to the European Council in Seville .
The various resolutions to be put to the vote today bear witness once again to Parliament 's vital contribution to the quality and pace of the enlargement process and I am grateful for the reliable meeting of minds between Parliament and the Commission on this issue .
I should like to take this opportunity to thank all the parliamentary rapporteurs for working so constructively with the Commission .
I should also like to address a particular word of thanks to your presidents , whose presence in the future Member States is having an encouraging effect and building confidence .
The resolutions and today 's debate mark the end of a very intensive procedure in Parliament over recent months , resulting in a clear ' Yes ' to the enlargement strategy and timetable .
Our assessment that ten countries will be in a position to conclude negotiations at the end of this year , provided their reforms stay on course , has been confirmed and I am much obliged for the far-reaching consensus in the analysis and conclusions .
Parliament has called on both sides , the European Union and the future Member States , to make good use of the coming months , to keep up the pace and to mobilise all forces in the sprint to the finishing line , so as to ensure that the jointly set targets are achieved .
I would like to join them in that call .
I have referred on several occasions to the period from 2002 to 2004 as a window of opportunity .
A window that is wide open but which could close again if we fail to make good use of the opportunity it offers us .
We must not , under any circumstances , throw this opportunity away .
Everything we have already achieved is at stake including , last but not least , confidence in both the European Union and the candidate countries .
Clearly , we are up against a head wind at the moment .
A chill has set in , the sceptics agitating against Europe in general and enlargement in particular are becoming more vociferous , feeding on uncertainties , fears and prejudice .
My view is that we should join forces to convince the citizens of Europe of the historic need for enlargement and allay their concerns .
Since the Iron Curtain fell in Europe and in this globalised world , European integration is the only way to overcome the problems which are making people twitchy and causing them concern .
The point is , we need more Europe : for peace and security at home and abroad , for growth and employment , for environmental protection , for the highest possible social standards , for equal opportunities for all .
The message must be unequivocal : European integration and enlargement are not the problem , they are a fundamental , inalienable part of the solution .
We have the best arguments on our side .
The Europe of the past has left a trail of deep wounds and scars behind it .
The generation in Europe whose towns were razed to rubble and ashes , who went hungry and experienced the misery of war , flight and persecution , is still alive .
It is the generation which suffered under the most violent ideologies of the twentieth century .
Alongside the memory of this suffering , however , there is another memory still alive in Europe : the memory of good neighbourly relations , of public-spiritedness , of human decency , of resistance against inhumane systems and of individual bravery .
There can be no doubt that , with very different nations living cheek by jowl , all with different memories and ways of life , Europe is a fragile continent .
The wounds have closed , to be sure , but the scar tissue is thin and they still ache . The re-opening of the debate on the so-called Bene ? decrees has made that clear .
Parliament still has to look at all the legal implications .
All I want to say is that the fundamental correlation between this issue and successful enlargement lies in how we talk about it .
The debate must be held in a spirit of mutual respect and with respect for everyone 's suffering and different experiences .
It must be held so that it heals instead of inflicting new wounds .
It is precisely because of the tragedies which have marked Europe in very different ways that there is only one reasonable way forward , the way of reconciliation .
That is what European unification is all about .
Anyone in Europe today who wants to ensure that old wounds are not re-opened , anyone who wants to ensure that no future generation ever has to suffer what earlier generations suffered must stand for a common future , be prepared to look a truth which has many facets in the eye and hold out a hand to integration and cooperation .
Honourable Members , Parliament and the Commission are agreed : the efforts of the candidate countries to date and the results of the negotiations give us good cause to believe that we shall be able to bring one of the most difficult projects which Europe has undertaken in its whole history to an initial , important conclusion in Copenhagen .
We are on schedule .
The Spanish Presidency has performed exceedingly well and I should like to take this opportunity to thank the Spanish Presidency and Foreign Minister Josep Piqu and my old friend Ramn de Miguel for an unbelievably ambitious presidency .
The Spaniards drove us hard - but they are allowed to do that and it is good that they did .
That is what the Presidency is there for and the results were worth it .
As Ramn de Miguel has already mentioned , we have just returned from the latest round of ministerial-level negotiations in Luxembourg .
At the end of this round , the state of play is as follows . We are now entering the final round with ten countries .
The EU has common standpoints on all the chapters being negotiated , including all the chapters in the financial package , with the exception of agriculture , although in fact there is only one point here on which no agreement has yet been reached and that is the question of direct income support .
The fact that considerable difficulties have now arisen on this question comes as no surprise but they are coming to an end .
It is a question of dividing the burden .
I think we have to say in all honesty to the citizens of Europe that the enormous political and economic benefits of enlargement come at a price , as the Member States fully recognised in Berlin in 1999 .
Yes , we are being called on to demonstrate solidarity now and it is in our interest to do so .
We need to discuss the costs of enlargement thoroughly , but then , excuse me , we also need to discuss the cost of not enlarging .
The message which came out of Luxembourg last Monday has triggered insecurity in the candidate countries .
There is no point in denying it .
According to the candidate countries , they have been given a promise and they are banking on it .
The promise is that , if they meet the conditions , they can accede .
Obviously , delays can never be completely ruled out but be warned : we do not want any delays because the Member States cannot agree among themselves .
I should like to take this opportunity to add two brief comments . There are two arguments in the current debate , which the Commission cannot accept .
The first is that we cannot conclude enlargement negotiations because we do not know what the financial impact will be post 2006 .
That is an argument that belies a very modest intellectual approach , because it applies to all European Union policies .
( Laughter , applause )
There is not a single European Union policy , the financial future of which after 2006 is already known to us today .
I remember quite clearly what the Presidency had in mind in the first half of 1999 following the outcome in Berlin , namely the unification of the European Union on the basis of the financial conditions for enlargement before 2006 .
What I want to know is , if we were satisfied with the figures in 1999 , why should we no longer be satisfied with the same figures in 2002 .
The second thing I want to say is that the argument that direct agricultural payments - leaving aside for the moment whether you like them or not - are not a part of Community law , is one that really cannot be taken seriously .
You just have to read Community law .
It is there in black and white .
Passed by unanimous agreement .
If you say that direct payments are not a part of European Community law , you might just as well say the moon is blue .
You can say it , but it does not change anything .
Honourable Members , 14 technical negotiating chapters have yet to be closed for the first ten countries we hope to sign up in Copenhagen .
I am assuming that this number will be even lower by the end of the Spanish Presidency , by which I mean that we shall achieve our target of making sure there are no technical chapters left on the table for the final stage of negotiations .
That will be a huge achievement .
I am pleased to report that we managed to resolve one of the most difficult and perhaps most important issues in the entire process at this week 's accession conference , namely the question of the closure of the Ignalina nuclear power station in Lithuania .
I must confess I am somewhat surprised at public opinion in Europe .
To see how much attention was paid to the Temelin nuclear power station in the Czech Republic , which is generally considered to be safe , and how little attention was paid to the fact that Lithuania has a Chernobyl-type nuclear power station which represents a danger to both Lithuania and everyone else , and a considerable one ?
( Interjection )
Yes , like Chernobyl , a Chernobyl-type nuclear power station .
( Interjection from Mr Cohn-Bendit : like in the Ukraine ! )
Yes , but the Ukraine is not a candidate country and I have no opportunity to exert any influence on the Ukraine .
What we were looking to do here was to get rid of this Chernobyl-type nuclear power station during the course of the enlargement process .
This is an incredible achievement on the part of Lithuania , because this nuclear power station is about as important to the Lithuanian economy as the automobile industry is to Germany .
I think that Lithuania deserves a great deal of recognition for the courageous and far-reaching decision which it has taken in the interest of the whole of Europe and I for one am very , very grateful to it .
Honourable Members , we now need to clarify how many countries we can count on for the final round of negotiations in Copenhagen .
This is also crucial for the chapter on institutions .
The Commission will submit its appraisal of the situation in October , together with its recommendations as to which candidate countries we should be able to sign up by the end of the year , shortly before the European Council in Brussels .
I expect that the European Council in Brussels will then take its decision on that basis .
The Commission will be guided in its proposal solely by the negotiating principles .
There will be no political preselection .
The only criterion will be whether or not a country really has met the conditions for accession .
At the same time , we should also have clarified the financial framework and all the related issues by the time the European Council meets in Brussels .
This will ensure that negotiations between October and the beginning of December focus on the few outstanding issues , one being the question of the overall sum in financing .
Once this sum has been set , dividing it up between the individual candidate countries and individual policy areas will be more or less a purely mathematical exercise , thanks to the excellent preparatory work carried out under the Spanish Presidency .
Secondly , and this is closely related to agreement on the overall budget , we need to consider the configuration and size of the budget mechanism already decided in principle under the Spanish Presidency .
Thirdly , we must be prepared for individual issues in the agricultural chapter - I am thinking in particular of quotas and direct income support here - to remain on the table right through to the end .
The months of negotiation ahead of us will be hard work .
But I am positive that , with flexibility and political perceptiveness , reasonable solutions can be found .
But I should like to take this opportunity to state quite clearly that the conclusions of the European Council meetings in Gothenburg and Laeken cannot be interpreted to mean that the European Union will not agree on its common standpoints until Copenhagen ; the conclusions of Gothenburg and Laeken can only be interpreted to mean that actual negotiations with the candidate countries will be completed in Copenhagen , so that , as the European Parliament hoped , they can accede in time to take part in the European elections in 2004 .
Mr Ramn de Miguel has already referred to Bulgaria and Romania on behalf of the Spanish Presidency .
I can confirm what he said .
Both countries still need more time to meet the accession criteria .
Which is precisely why they need a clear signal that they have not missed the boat in Copenhagen .
The Commission will therefore submit proposals to improve and strengthen the accession strategy for the countries which will be unable to sign up in 2002 .
Where possible , we should push ahead with negotiations with Bulgaria and Romania and mobilise additional help .
Honourable Members , it is clear - as expected - both from the most recent progress report and from your resolutions that correct application is the biggest obstacle in the candidate countries on the road towards the Copenhagen criteria .
In most candidate countries , the cause of these difficulties is rooted in their past and in the difficult transformation process .
Last year , the Commission proposed mobilising additional funds and announced action plans in order to provide better support for candidates .
A report on the action plans on administrative and judicial capacities , adopted by the Commission on 5 June , will be tabled at the European Council in Seville .
The report states quite clearly , without pulling any punches , which areas in the candidate countries still show signs of weakness which need intensive work in the future .
May I also say at this point , however , that the report also clearly states what complex and differentiated instruments for analysis , verification and control of administrative developments and legal practice have been developed in the candidate countries .
No other candidate even came anywhere close in earlier enlargement rounds .
Never have candidates been so thoroughly tested .
Never before was a prospective Member State exposed under such a harsh light to the critical eyes of one and all .
I think I can also say that never before has a future Member State been better prepared for its new role .
Which is another reason why the current enlargement round cannot be compared with previous rounds .
We are making very high demands .
This approach , however , has borne considerable fruit and has set standards in the candidate countries themselves .
If we keep on working here , and the Commission has proposed that we do so to accession and beyond , it will have lasting effects which may even act as an incentive in the present-day EU .
I know that the Commission reports on preparations by candidates , on technical assistance , on institution building , on twinning , on monitoring and control instruments etc. are not of any particular interest to the public .
But woe betide if we were to dispense with these efforts !
In fact , the credibility of the entire process is at stake here .
We want to be sure that all avoidable risks are pre-empted .
Apart from the negotiations and tasks which are the preserve of the candidate countries , there is homework which we still have to do .
We still have to ratify the Treaty of Nice .
We have known that for a long time .
The European Council in Barcelona confirmed once again that the Treaty must take effect .
But , unlike many observers , my money is on the Irish experience of integration , on Irish support for European integration , on the knowledge that the integration of Ireland has made development possible which nobody dared hope for thirty years ago .
The point is , will the countries of central and eastern Europe be able to catch up as Ireland has done .
That will be decided during the second referendum .
Nor must we lose sight of the fact on our way to Copenhagen that enlargement will bring important partners in eastern Europe closer to home .
In future , the EU will border on Byelorussia and the Ukraine , as well as Russia .
In a few years ' time , we shall be neighbours with the Republic of Moldavia .
It is the Commission 's stated objective to make full use of the positive effects of enlargement and to further the development of democracy and the market economy in the countries destined to become our future neighbours and we have created the foundations for this by developing a strategic partnership with Russia and the Ukraine .
However the results of the last EU-Russia Summit did not only fill me with joy , mainly because discussions in Moscow on Kaliningrad were confined to the overland transit problem , a question which concerns not just the EU , but Lithuania and Poland also .
As you know , Russia is calling for visa-free access rules ; however , Poland and Lithuania have rejected this , as do Parliament and the Commission .
The European Union will decide its final position here at the European Council in Seville .
But I will say that the real problem of the geographical location of Kaliningrad is how the European Union and Russia can join forces to ensure that the situation in Kaliningrad improves and the area can profit significantly in the long term from the development of its neighbours .
I would be delighted if we could start an intensive dialogue with Russia .
Nobody is indifferent to the public 's opinion on enlargement .
It depends on a great deal , on information , on presentation , on our ability to give convincing answers .
We know that from our own political experience , which is why the Commission started a communication initiative , with the support of the European Parliament , for the Member States and the candidate countries alike , an implementation report on which will be presented to the European Council in Seville .
But here too we must be honest .
Commission , Parliament , Council , we can all do a great deal .
But there is no substitute for the effort needed by towns and communities , regions and Member States , the economy and science , art and culture .
Recent surveys have shown that there is still an information deficit on enlargement , which is why I urgently call on you to engage in conversation with our citizens , to answer their questions and allay their fears wherever this has still not been done .
Our strategy is the right one and has already had impressive results .
The same applies to enlargement and European integration as a whole . We also have to stand up for this Europe outside the institutions .
Risks and problems must not be swept under the carpet .
But , the fact remains that the greatest risk to the future peace and security of Europe , which is what we all want , the greatest risk would be to miss this historic opportunity to unite our continent because our courage failed us at the last minute .
( Applause )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank the Commissioner and the Commission as a whole , but also the Spanish Presidency , for the very positive progress made in the negotiations in recent months .
After talks with the future Presidency , I hope that the road map originally devised by this House can be adhered to , because the political will is there .
I think that as Parliament , we must attach great importance to ensuring that appropriate pressure is brought to bear .
As Mr Ramn de Miguel has rightly pointed out , a solution must be found in agriculture too , since there will be no chances later .
There is no excuse for delays .
This also applies in many other areas which the Commissioner mentioned , such as institutional issues .
We must put our house in order , whether this is achieved through the ratification of the Treaty of Nice or by other means .
This is the homework which we have to do .
Whether or not it involves a common position in the Council on agricultural policy , budgetary issues or institutional issues , we have an obligation in this regard .
This must not be used as a reason for delaying the enlargement process , for this would meet with incomprehension in the accession countries .
We cannot allow a further delay which is due to our own failings .
Similarly , of course , we must assess the accession candidates by what they have achieved .
As things stand at present , we have thirteen candidate countries ; we are negotiating with twelve of them , and ten have a chance of concluding the negotiations this year .
In my view , we should thus be in a position to conduct the negotiations in a way which makes this possible .
That means - as the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy makes very clear in its report - that we must not invent any new conditions , whether they are imposed either by the European institutions or by the Member States .
The basis for negotiations is the acquis communautaire , not whatever else might be desirable .
We cannot make additional demands .
These can only be formulated in a political process which involves the future Member States ; they cannot be a condition for accession .
Sometimes we must conduct our debates in this house in frank terms as well .
When I look at some of the motions tabled by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , they are all very commendable , like some of the other motions .
I can even endorse them politically .
However , they have absolutely no relevance to the theme of " negotiations on the adoption of the acquis communautaire " .
The only issue of relevance is the acquis communautaire .
If the environment chapters are closed , for example , we should not reopen them because we think that a particular road or canal should not be built in a particular country , which is the thrust of some of these motions , if my analysis is correct .
In my view , we ourselves should be precise , honest and coherent here so that progress is achieved .
By adopting this approach , however , this also means that the accession candidates must understand that each individual country will be assessed on its own merits to determine whether it is able to fulfil the conditions .
We recognise that ten of them have the chance to do so .
We also recognise that they are in a position to achieve the smooth functioning of the internal market , fulfil the political criteria and achieve legislative compliance with the acquis communautaire at the same time .
We will also , though , have to look very carefully at which countries are able to guarantee judicial and administrative compliance by 2004 when accession takes place .
This is a key issue .
On these issues , too , no political discounts can be granted .
We must ensure that this is accepted and enforced appropriately .
In the same way , we have a request - for it can be no more than that - to countries which will be part of the first round . We would ask them not to take an ' I 'm all right , Jack ' attitude once they are part of the European Union .
In other words , they must not take the view that the boat is full after their accession and possibly veto other countries which are scheduled to join in the second round . We should also ensure , in political terms , that candidates which are not part of the first round do not face additional hurdles .
The Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , which is the committee responsible for this policy field , is deeply concerned about a number of problems .
We see that in some areas , minority issues have still not been resolved . Corruption and organised crime are still major problems .
We attach priority to compliance with the Schengen criteria , because it is also important to make clear to our own citizens that no additional insecurity is being created here .
In my view , we must also recognise that Kaliningrad must not be a reason for enlargement to fail .
However , we must also recognise that the sovereignty of Poland and Lithuania must be accepted , and that an alternative solution must be found , for I see the corridor option as being unacceptable for both legal and historical reasons .
There are so many practical ways of satisfying Russia 's justified concerns .
I believe that here , too , we will find an appropriate solution , just as I believe , on a general note , that only Members of the European Union and the various accession candidates have a right to decide who should join the EU .
This is my response to the Cyprus issue as well .
When we discuss issues of discrimination etc. in relation to enlargement , we must also ensure that it is made clear that all citizens of this European Union are equal . There must be no discrimination , either against nationals of EU states or against citizens living in the European Union .
This is the only aspect of the debate about the Bene ? decrees which interests me .
Our task is not to examine the past from a legal perspective , but to ensure that no discrimination arises as a result of the current application of the law .
I believe that this should be possible for a country under the rule of law , and if my reading of the Verheugen-Zeman paper is correct , I see opportunities to achieve openings and agreements here too .
Mr President , Commissioner , I support your positions on this issue wholeheartedly , for this is a matter of historical significance .
I would also like to endorse what was said before .
There is no attempt to use issues of history as new combat instruments in the European Union ; instead , we must ensure that we learn from history to prevent the suffering , expulsions , murders and wars which occurred in the past from ever happening again , and we must capitalise on the unique opportunity afforded to us through the unification of our entire continent .
From the Coal and Steel Community to European integration , the goal has always been to end the cycle of violence , not to settle old scores . The cycle of violence in Europe must cease once and for all .
The objective is not to abolish the nation-state - the nation-state will retain its identity - but to water it down in such a way that it is never again able to wage war against others .
This is why the legal order established by the European Union is our continent 's future .
Mr President , I would like to thank the Council for the diligent way it has pursued this complicated dossier and most especially Commissioner Verheugen and his staff for the phenomenal amount of work they have done on monitoring the progress that has been achieved in the candidate countries .
This has actually brought us to this debate here today .
Without that effort , we simply would not be in this situation now .
On 6 July 2002 a very famous world sporting event will start .
I refer not to the World Cup , the final of which will have been contested between England and Ireland long before 6 July , but to the tour de France .
In many ways the enlargement of the European Union is comparable to the tour de France .
If we were to look at ourselves now we would find ourselves at the last climb , in the mountains , with most of the gruelling race behind us and very much with the finishing line in sight , with the Champs Elyses in Paris waiting for us .
We have some tough and difficult climbs to get through at the moment .
As anyone who has been on a bicycle knows : if you stop , it falls over .
So now is not the time to stop .
We have to keep moving forward .
The message from my group is very clear , we must keep following that road map .
It is a good road map and it will get us through this process .
We must stick to the timescale that we have set ourselves .
My esteemed colleague , Klaus Hnsch , first raised in this House the date of 2004 as the date for the completion of the first new accession and we must stick to that date .
We must allow no new conditions to be introduced .
Questions of history are important but questions of history are exactly that , historical questions .
Britain and Ireland joined the European Union at the same time , yet the Irish constitution at that time had a claim over British territory .
That did not stop us joining this club together .
Britain and Spain are still trying to resolve the question of Gibraltar that has gone on for three centuries .
These are important historical issues but they are not conditions for accession to the European Union .
Those who use issues of history to try and create new obstacles on our road to the accession of new Member States of the European Union must appreciate the damage that they are doing to public opinion .
I was in Prague recently where there has been a 6 % fall in public support for joining the European Union just as a result of the debate over the Bene ? decrees .
Both the Commission and the Parliament are doing their work .
We will rigorously assess the case of each individual country to make sure that the tough questions are answered and that we do not shirk our responsibilities .
When we say we agree to a new country joining , we will have done all the hard work so that our citizens can be assured that this is a safe accession that we can all agree to .
While I appreciate the work that has been done in the Council , I have to say there is a great worry within this Parliament that it may now be the Council that is starting to drag its feet .
The Council often talks a good fight on many issues but sadly , in our experience it is often the Council that finds it the most difficult to take the final decisions .
While we understand and appreciate that many issues we tackle over the next few months will be very difficult , please do not let us delay .
Do not try and negotiate , or re-negotiate , the common agricultural policy in the space of two or three months to get us to October and the Brussels Summit .
Do not allow the xenophobes and the anti-Europeans to slow us down .
And , for heaven 's sake , do not let us turn around and start blaming you for not actually getting to 2004 on time .
Working together , we can achieve this but I have to say in all honesty that we have worries at the moment about when the Council is actually going to deliver on this .
My one disappointment about the enlargement process is that the passion has gone out of it .
At the beginning of the 1990s , we were all passionate about enlarging the European Union , particularly in the accession states .
It has now become some sort of pragmatic , technical exercise .
We , and the people in the gallery here , ought to be more passionate and expectant about the enlargement of the European Union because it is a historical goal which we can all be justly proud of .
We need to reintroduce that element so that from Galway to Gdansk and beyond we secure that reunited continent .
In 1990 , Helmut Kohl and Franois Mitterand made a promise that we would have the enlargement of the European Union completed by the year 2000 .
We are failing singularly to do that .
The finishing line is in sight , this time it is in Copenhagen .
It is not Paris , but let us keep the peloton together .
There are many candidate countries that would like to be wearing that maillot jaune , I think they are all wearing them .
The important thing is to make sure we get to Copenhagen as a finishing line , not just another stage on our route to the successful completion of enlargement .
Mr President , I thank the President-in-Office and the Commissioner for a helpful introduction to this debate and I congratulate the rapporteurs for their good work on the reports before us today .
I also take this opportunity to welcome to this House the parliamentarians from the Liberal family in the applicant states who are watching this debate from the gallery and have joined us to debate the issues this week .
That parliamentarians from Bulgaria and Romania are here today is a welcome reminder that we are negotiating enlargement with 12 applicant states , even if the timescales for accession may differ a little .
Those of us from countries that were not founder members of the European Community remember only too well the anxiety and sense of expectation which surrounded our entry negotiations and the decisions to ratify our application .
Coming from a country which had its application vetoed twice , I know of the enduring damage done to perceptions of European integration when a country is rejected .
We should bear this in mind in assessing the current applicants .
We must recognise that the applicant states have worked hard in recent years to reform their economies and consolidate democracy in order to join the Union .
While we expect them to redouble their efforts in the run-up to and after accession , we must also reward those efforts .
That is why Liberal Democrats insist that both the criteria and the timetable must be respected .
We should not apply stricter standards than for previous enlargements , nor pretend that everything in our own gardens smells sweet .
Enlargement is a process of continuous assessment , not a one-off exam .
There are hotheads and faint hearts on both sides who will seek to exploit difficulties in meeting the Copenhagen criteria .
We must not allow them to derail enlargement .
It is far better to overcome outstanding problems through the enlargement process .
What is important to the health of a country is the direction in which its face is set and the screening of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms must be an ongoing process , part of a wider scrutiny of all Member States - old and new - in a European Union with the Charter of Fundamental Rights at its heart .
Liberal Democrats deplore the abuse of enlargement negotiations to reopen old wounds and animosities .
The infamous Bene ? decrees are a good example of this .
It serves no useful purpose to inflame tensions on this issue , which is why my group has tabled amendments to Mr Brok 's report to seek to lower the temperature of the debate .
The refusal of four governments - including Mr Murphy 's - at the General Affairs Council this week to reach agreement on a common position on agriculture stems in part from the inadequacy of the financing package agreed in Berlin .
We are constrained to live within Berlin 's limits , but if a deal is postponed until autumn - as some propose - this would jeopardise the prospect of admitting new Member States in time for the European Parliament elections in 2004 .
We support the Commission 's proposals to phase-in direct payments but , as soon as enlargement is agreed , we must take forward reform of the CAP .
We need to shift the focus away from the producer onto the consumer , from quantity to quality .
On the controversial issue of free movement of persons , I urge all Member States to follow the lead of Denmark , Sweden , Ireland and the Netherlands , which have said they will apply no restrictions to free movement .
There are no rational grounds for believing that enlargement will be followed by the mass migration sometimes feared by our citizens .
It is precisely these fears which we , as politicians , have to tackle head on .
We have a responsibility to make the case for enlargement to our electorates and we must not shrink from that challenge .
The adoption of the report to be voted on tomorrow will give the green light to enlargement .
The historic prospect beckons of a wider , stronger Union - a bulwark for freedom and democracy in an uncertain world .
Let ours not be the generation which flunks this opportunity .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , no one , particularly not the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , is calling into question the historic opportunities linked to enlargement .
It is exciting , it is fantastic , but this window of opportunity also implies a need to carry out reforms .
If we do not do so for enlargement , we shall be placing Europe at risk .
We shall run the risk of producing a chaotic Europe which will place enlargement at risk .
In addition , Mr President , do not tell us that the principle of direct payments to agriculture is fair , because it is an unjust principle and it must be reformed .
That does not mean that it is not necessary to help farmers , but it means that we must have structural aid for rural development , that we must follow a policy of sustainable agriculture , something which we have not done for years .
We failed to reform agriculture in Berlin .
We failed .
We failed to carry out the reforms .
That does not mean that we are against enlargement , quite the contrary , but we must make the granting of aid subject to certain social and ecological conditions , which we are not doing .
That does not mean that we should spend less money .
We had a financial framework in Berlin , and we reduced it .
We could invest in the countries which are applying for accession , but we have not done so , because of the selfishness of the rich countries of the European Union such as Germany , France or Spain .
Everyone says that they are in favour of enlargement , but when it comes to paying the price of solidarity , political selfishness rears its head .
We are not telling lies here .
These are the difficulties which you will come up against in Seville , the same difficulties that we encountered in Berlin on the subject of fisheries .
The thing that annoys me , frankly , is that everyone says yes to enlargement , but when it comes to paying the necessary price of solidarity , in other words the price of implementing reforms to the way in which the European Union functions , then we are much more pedestrian than in our historic , Sunday-best speeches .
I do not want enlargement to be a political undertaking reserved for Sunday-best speeches , while on Monday , Tuesday , Wednesday and Thursday we pursue a policy which is opposed to enlargement .
That is why I say , and why I defend the idea , that in the window of opportunity described by the Commissioner , there is no mention of the need to complete the necessary reforms of the European Union so that the enlargement of the Union to twenty-seven countries can be made to work .
That is what we , the Greens , are defending , because we are keen supporters of enlargement , and keen supporters of internal reforms to the European Union , so that enlargement can work .
That is our task , and we have not yet completed it .
Mr President , EU enlargement is entering its crucial phase .
The reports before us and the speeches by Members do not draw a veil over the unresolved issues , but do endorse the candidate countries ' accession .
Our group also supports this position .
The current state of play in the negotiations and in the adoption of the acquis communautaire implies that there are no alternatives .
Yet if we look at the quality of integration and the problems arising in the EU itself , it is possible to arrive at a different view .
My group , for example , does not believe it is right that , as part of the accession process , candidate countries are urged to join the NATO military alliance .
This should not be part of the process , which involves accession to the EU and nothing else .
The EU sets conditions for the accession candidates which are not fulfilled by many of its own Member States .
There is a tremendous backlog of reform in the EU .
The willingness to show solidarity in the distribution of resources is far from overwhelming , and citizens ' support for accession has recently been on the wane .
Ascribing these problems to ignorance and a lack of transparency is , in our opinion , too simplistic .
The citizens ' debate on Europe which was called for after Nice has yet to take place in any meaningful way , while the burdens associated with the pre-accession adaptation process are becoming increasingly onerous .
The reports quite rightly call upon the candidate countries to adopt more rigorous anti-corruption measures .
What is never mentioned , however , are the causes and sources of corruption , which is due , among other things , to capitalist privatisation and the growing social inequalities between a handful of increasingly wealthy people and the vast majority who face poverty and unemployment .
The lack of impact of the Commission 's strategic positions in the accession process is particularly apparent in agriculture .
Anyone who warned early on that some of the elements contained in Agenda 2000 were quite unrealistic was criticised as a troublemaker , but the much-vaunted open 5 % have negative and disproportionate repercussions on farmers .
Yet anyone who assumes that , with the exception of agricultural policy , the process of enlarging the EU by up to ten states has been resolved is nave , in my view .
Social inequality is present to a far greater extent .
There is very limited willingness to show solidarity , and in many areas , the Commission 's work is much too superficial and bureaucratic to do justice to the new demands of integration .
A considerable number of key issues are unresolved , and what is required is a change of direction .
I hope that this will be achieved in good time .
Mr President , there is no doubt that , between them , the Council and Commission statements and Mr Brok 's valuable work have painted a full picture of the enlargement process and the progress of the negotiations with the candidate countries .
The concerns voiced here , however , although , it is true , expressed by confirmed believers in the historic importance of the enlargement process and strategy , relate to the apparent haziness of the situation surrounding the process itself .
To be sure , almost all the candidate countries have put up a commendable performance in developing their legal systems and economies quickly .
In any case , respect for the Copenhagen criteria and assimilation of the Community acquis - which , however , we feel should be interpreted in general terms - are compulsory .
However , what we do not fully understand , less than two years off the first wave of entries , is whether the final decision will depend on practical results or whether it will be affected by the pseudopolitical , not to say paternalistic attitudes which have reared their heads , which are not indicative of the great overall willingness to cooperate which the Union ought to be showing .
Moreover , it is not clear what the result of the entry of - presumably 10 - countries in 2004 will be , in the sense that we do not know what impact the overspending on the part of four countries will have on the current financial planning and therefore on the treatment that will be reserved for the new Member States .
Certainly , a sure response needs to be given at least with regard to the size of the Structural Funds commitments that will be set aside for them in the short- and long-term future , not least to give them time to find responses to the respective problems of social and economic cohesion which are emerging in some of those countries and develop an effective social and employment policy and a code of good practice for undertakings .
Border security , respect for minors , civil rights , the own-resources funding system and an effective judicial system are certainly extremely important , but it is equally important for each of the candidate countries to involve its citizens in the process , to provide them with the right information and to be able to convince them that it is worth making temporary sacrifices now as an investment for future prosperity , if this last is actually the object of the exercise .
The European Union is about to carry its title with far more justification thanks to its predominantly eastern enlargement .
Along with the Brok report , we would underline the strategic goal of this historic process , namely a peaceful and prosperous co-existence of the peoples in our Continent .
I have already brought to your attention the fact that a primarily financial approach to enlargement does not do justice to its importance and character .
Hence my appeal to the Member States not to raise any new obstructions in respect of enlargement .
This appeal includes the demand to review the agricultural policy prior to enlargement .
However , when a common position is adopted on the agricultural chapter , a fair prospect is required for both the candidate countries and the current net payers .
Net receivers could show - more so than is the case at the moment - financial solidarity with the future Member States .
Paragraph 8 of the Brok report is being slightly over-demanding of the candidate countries .
It is downright unrealistic to expect the governments in central and eastern Europe to have resolved the extremely complex Roma issue by the end of this decade .
This , of course , does not detract in any way from the appeal for a liveable situation , where the Roma have their own responsibilities .
As we are now discussing the political criteria of Copenhagen , I should like to ask Commissioner Verheugen another question .
Various radio stations in the candidate countries are indulging in hate campaigns against Roma and the Jews .
Would you mind bringing this to the attention of the competent authorities ?
After all , the fight against racism , xenophobia and anti-semitism are core values of the EU Member States .
Mr President , the theory of enlargement should naturally be put into practice , for agriculture and in other areas , by the application of identical game rules in both old and new Member States , whilst at the same time managing the necessary transitions in order to avoid , in both old and new Member States , the destabilising consequences of the practical implementation of this historic political imperative .
There are two particularly delicate problems which arise with regard to agriculture .
First of all there is the opening up of the markets of the West to the products of the East .
This opening up has to be conducted industry by industry and country by country , as and when producers are in a position to place on the market products which meet the same quality and safety criteria as those that we already impose on our own producers .
The second issue is that of the first pillar of the CAP , in other words market support and compensatory aid .
Here it is necessary that the principles which govern the CAP , the aid and support which are justified by the environmental , social and health constraints and requirements which our farmers are bound by , should be applied , without discrimination , to both old and new Member States , as long as the latter observe the same constraints .
How long will it take before they are able to do so ?
In other words , how long should the transitional period be ?
The Commission is proposing a totally uniform transitional period for all countries , as far as the timetable and implementing rules are concerned , which would result , first of all , in an extremely brutal and painful restructuring operation for those countries which have a large number of agricultural holdings .
It seems to us , on the contrary , that this question should be answered on a country-by-country basis , taking into account the special situation and specific structure of farming in each country , as well as the social impact of their suddenly finding themselves in the CAP and the speed which is desirable , desired and bearable for each country 's farming sector .
To tackle this problem solely from an accounting point of view , which is what certain Member States , such as Germany and the Netherlands , tend to do at present , shows a narrowness of approach which is dangerous to the future of the Union , because these are essential issues for the future and the equilibrium of societies in the applicant countries .
The enemy of the Greater Europe of the future , Mr President , is the desire for uniformity .
Mr President , the reduced time allotted to the co-rapporteur means that I have to reduce the problem of the accession of Cyprus to a Shakespearian question : one State or two , that is the question .
Obviously accession to the European Union is open to only one Cypriot State as far as international law is concerned .
That means that the representatives of the two communities on the island will have to agree on a constitutional formula which will enable the new Member State to participate in the decision-making process and to assume all its obligations under Community law .
Only a federal model , in other words the model which is recommended in the United Nations Security Council Resolutions , fulfils this objective .
Any theories based on the existence of two sovereign States which would be linked together by a vague treaty of partnership rather than via a solid , democratic and freely accepted constitution , would give rise to fictitious and inoperable structures which would be unacceptable from the legal viewpoint .
We are now entering into the final stretch of the negotiation process .
The current window of opportunity , the opportunity to resolve a forty-year old conflict , will close at the end of this month .
I should like to emphasise here that it is precisely the European dimension which provides the opportunity to transcend the old quarrel about sovereignty .
Jean Monnet said that in order to change the facts of a problem it was enough to change its framework .
As the rapporteur , I hope that the negotiators will find , in the words of Jean Monnet , the inspiration for a final effort .
If not , the Republic of Cyprus would be admitted by the European Council of Copenhagen on the same terms as the other candidate countries .
Cyprus fulfils all the required conditions , and has now completed twenty-four of the thirty-one chapters of the accession negotiations .
There is therefore no doubt but that it will form part of the first wave of accessions .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , since time is short , I should like to focus on just one issue which has been mentioned several times already today , namely the presidential decrees .
In this context , the Czech Parliament 's declaration of 24 April 2002 is helpful , since it states that the presidential decrees cannot be the basis for any new legal relations today .
However , there is one issue which concerns us , and that is whether discriminatory elements still exist in current Czech law , such as an act dating from 1992 on the restitution of property confiscated from its owners under Communism , which makes the restitution of property contingent on continuous Czech citizenship .
We must establish whether this provision conforms with European law . The same applies to what is known as the 1946 Criminal Indemnity Act .
In addition to clarifying these and other issues , a number of other problems will arise even after Czech accession to the EU .
I am convinced that a clear signal from those who were expelled in 1945 and from their descendants would be helpful .
This signal should make it clear that the property relations which emerged after the Second World War are inviolable , and should not be violated .
If this signal were sent out , Czech fears could be assuaged , and people who are currently consumed by these fears could use their energies productively to prepare the Czech Republic for EU accession in 2004 .
Mr President , I have been a member of this Chamber for seven years and am now making my last speech because I shall be a candidate for the Swedish Parliament this autumn .
The fall of the Berlin Wall and the reunification of Europe constitute the most important issue in my political work .
As rapporteur where Estonia is concerned , it feels good to be able to note that , finally , we shall now soon be there .
Estonia , which has closed 26 of 31 chapters , has fulfilled all the necessary conditions for becoming a member of the EU in 2004 .
Estonia shows how quickly a country which has freed itself from a long occupation and has restored democracy has also succeeded in completely reorienting its policies and building up a strong , market-oriented economy with well functioning institutions .
The Estonian economy has produced fantastic results , and 4.5 % growth is anticipated this year .
The Estonian kroon has been tied to the Deutschmark and , subsequently , the euro for almost ten years .
When Estonia joins the EU , I hope that the country will continue its work in favour of less bureaucracy and better basic conditions for businesses .
Estonia also has a belief in the future and a capacity for change that are needed by the EU .
During the Swedish Presidency , the Social Democratic Government spoke proudly of its timetable for enlargement .
We do not , however , build the EU with plans alone .
Timetables presuppose action .
That is why it is disgraceful that Sweden is now putting the timetable at risk and making enlargement conditional upon agricultural policy .
Agricultural policy is actually being reformed , albeit modestly , and it is important that there should be radical changes .
As the Council representative pointed out , those countries which are now using the agricultural chapter to delay the work on enlargement are assuming a big responsibility .
There can be nothing more important than that the EU honour its pledges and that the last chapter in the reunification of Europe be written in Copenhagen this autumn .
I want to express my congratulations to all those who have the privilege of working in the EU 's different institutions and to express my thanks for some very close cooperation in the course of the last few years .
Mr President , this report represents a politically significant boost by the European Parliament to the enlargement process .
It is also a sign of encouragement at this crucial time when the Commission , the Council and the Member States , as well as the candidate countries , are preparing to open negotiations on the chapters which are most complex and which have the greatest budgetary implications .
We cannot ignore the fact that the chapters on agriculture and regional policy and financial and budgetary considerations alone account for 80 % of the Community budget .
This was certainly what led the Commission prudently to propose a system of gradual implementation for the direct aid paid to farmers under the CAP and for the allocation of structural funds to the new Member States .
We are in no doubt that it was similar reasons that led some of the current Member States to call for a thorough restructuring of the CAP as a prerequisite for reaching a common EU starting position for negotiations on the agricultural chapter .
If we add to this the - to us obvious - need to continue to uphold the policy of economic and social cohesion between the current Member States , because otherwise enlargement could conceivably exacerbate existing disparities within the Union , it is easy to understand the words spoken on this matter this morning as a warning by the President-in-Office of the Council , Ramn de Miguel .
The planning stage is over .
Where enlargement is concerned , real political planning has begun .
Mr President , the most significant landmark in Hungary 's current political situation has undoubtedly been the legislative elections held in April .
In a coalition with the Liberal Party , the Socialist Party achieved a victory which gave it 198 seats in Parliament , as opposed to the 188 won by the party of the previous government .
It seems certain that the change of government will not affect Hungary 's strategic objective of joining the European Union .
The winning parties have always maintained this aspiration .
Nevertheless , and bearing in mind the differences of opinion between the previous government and the election-winners on a whole range of issues , such as the Status Law , social dialogue and public procurement for example , the possibility of changes in Hungary 's position on the accession process cannot be excluded , although I do not believe that they will jeopardise this process .
From the economic point of view , Hungary is maintaining a viable market economy and its economic performance is one of the best in the region .
Furthermore , Hungary has to date closed 24 chapters and has made more progress in negotiations than almost any other candidate country .
On the chapter dealing with culture and the audiovisual field , I am pleased to see that the government and the opposition have finally reached agreement on the representation of parliamentary parties on the Media Council - covering radio and television - which means that we will soon be able to close this chapter .
Let us hope - and we do hope - that the shortcomings seen in the field of public procurement will also be remedied and that the rules of competition will , at last , be fully complied with in the areas covered by this major market .
The announcement that anonymous deposits , even already existing deposits , are to be abolished , starting in the next few days , is also very much to be welcomed . The adoption of such a measure demonstrates the consistency of the Hungarian authorities ' initiatives to combat corruption and money-laundering .
It is this progress , of which I have given only a brief overview , and the trend that it reveals , which give us continuing grounds for optimism that the negotiations for Hungary 's accession to the European Union will be concluded within the deadline that has been set and , consequently , that we will see its 22 Members in this House for the next legislature in 2004 .
Mr President , the Member States really do seem to have forgotten that enlargement is a continuation of the historic project which began with the fall of the Berlin Wall .
I share the Commissioner 's view , and above all his concern , that it is apparently the Member States ' failure to recognise their responsibility which is causing the project to founder .
Have the Member States only just realised that these problems in agriculture would arise , and that a solution must be found , first and foremost , by the European Union ?
Do you really not realise that delays in the timetable are grist to the mill of nationalist forces and actually encourage their emergence in these countries ?
I therefore call on all the democratic movements here in this House , in the Member States and in the candidate countries to ensure that this major and historic project , which so many people in Europe have worked so hard to achieve , does not fall into the hands of election propagandists .
I have just had an opportunity to see for myself how difficult it was to fulfil the Copenhagen criteria item by item in Latvia .
For historical reasons and due to the great efforts made by Latvia , it would be impossible to explain to the local population that Member States are not prepared to do their homework here .
It is clear that the obvious deficiencies in European agricultural policy cannot be allowed to continue indefinitely without a reform .
It is also clear that Europe needs a constitution .
It is essential that this takes place in parallel to , and does not delay , accession .
After all , it was the prospect of enlargement and accession to the European Union which gave the crucial impetus to the reform movements in Europe and encouraged them to embark on a course towards a democratic Europe .
Let me cite Latvia as an example .
Although the majority of its political elite opposed this move , Latvia has amended one of its electoral laws and granted the Russian-speaking community an unlimited right to stand for election .
This is accepted as a matter of course in our own countries .
Yet in Latvia , this was a highly sensitive issue , just as agricultural policy is for us .
So if Latvia can do it , why can not we ?
This comparison may not seem relevant to you , but it is relevant in terms of the candidate countries ' expectations .
What we expect from them are the qualities which we ourselves should be displaying , namely a willingness to move towards integration , and an enthusiasm for reform .
Without constitutional reform and financial solidarity , Europe cannot progress .
The tasks to be resolved must be resolved here .
We cannot point the finger at the enlargement countries and tell them that they should be doing this and that if we cannot manage to do the same things ourselves .
I would certainly recommend that Latvia 's accession be planned for the end of 2002 , for I am convinced that this country can resolve its remaining problems .
The European Commission must also continue with the process of decentralisation and pursue policies which are close to citizens in order to shape this process successfully .
Mr President , I am optimistic and I am certain that what Commissioner Verheugen has repeated on numerous occasions will in fact happen and that , at the beginning of next year , the first accession agreements will be signed with the new Member States of the European Union in the Pnyx beneath the Acropolis , in the precincts of the church of the parish of direct democracy in which Saint Paul himself preached .
I am sure that this new historic reconciliation , which is good news for all of us , will look to the future and that we shall all dismiss the atavism which has been flying around recently as a mere distraction of no importance whatsoever .
We have seen a great number of protagonists along the way .
The twelve candidate countries , ten of which will join us next year , at least on paper , with the other two , I hope , following on a little later .
Along the way , nations have woken up and governments have woken up .
However , I should like to highlight the real efforts made by a number of countries .
Cyprus tops the league of candidate countries .
It has an exemplary economy , an exemplary democracy and its institutions operate in an exemplary fashion .
And hopefully , all these developments will help forces which do not operate as positively as they might to resolve regional problems .
Malta , that unique Mediterranean island , the only one left which will not be a member of the European Union for some time yet and which we need to treat with understanding and on its own merits .
Lithuania , for which I have acted as rapporteur .
This country has forged ahead in leaps and bounds in resolving the problem of moving from a planned economy to a free market economy .
It has made excellent progress on a great many issues .
Taking a decision such as the one about the Ignalina nuclear power station which Commissioner Verheugen mentioned earlier takes a great deal of political courage , especially when you know the regional structure of energy networks in the area and how the economy depends on them .
There are two problems : first the usual problem in these countries , that is , agriculture .
I trust we shall demonstrate the courage needed and the will needed to ensure these issues do not delay the enlargement process .
Secondly , the major political issue of Kaliningrad .
Clearly , these political issues and other issues in Europe must not listen to the urgings of the past .
They must listen to the needs of the future .
In this sense , the political wisdom of the European Union will be judged in Kaliningrad ; it must be true to itself but must understand that the historic reconciliation reached between the 15 , between the 25 , the 27 and the 28 countries has to be a factor in continuing historic reconciliation , a Europe of peace , cooperation and development for everyone .
A Europe in which we feel at home .
Mr President , Mr de Miguel , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , having provisionally closed 22 chapters in the negotiation statistics - although this cannot be taken as the sole criterion - Malta has lost a little of its dynamism .
Like all the other accession candidates , not only are specific chapters open , so too , of course , are the major areas of agricultural , regional and budgetary policy .
However , economic development has been positive , and the budget deficit has been substantially reduced .
In terms of Malta 's alignment with and implementation of Community law , Malta has made substantial progress as regards labour legislation and health and safety in the workplace .
In the area of competition , further efforts are needed to strengthen administrative capacity .
However , Malta is not alone in this respect .
What is also positive is that Malta has created a suitable legal framework for the development of investments and the restructuring of SMEs .
There are still shortcomings in the environmental field and in preparing the structures needed to implement the EU 's regional and agricultural policies .
However , here too , the European Commission is called upon to respond to Malta 's specific agricultural structure , which is based on small farms , its traditional taxation system , or the specific trade conditions resulting from its island status .
We should also support Malta 's claim to six seats in the European Parliament .
I hope that Malta 's accession process will speed up again in the coming months , and that when the Commission 's report is presented on 16 October 2002 , Malta will be included as one of the candidates for the first round of accessions .
Finally , as the Chairman of the Delegation to the EU-Czech Republic Joint Parliamentary Committee , I should like to comment on the highly sensitive issue of the Bene ? decrees .
I welcome the fact that the European Parliament is pointing out that discriminatory provisions which conflict with the acquis communautaire must be abolished before accession to the European Union , and I hope that after the elections in the Czech Republic , this issue can be resolved in an objective way .
As regards the issue of nuclear safety , I would like to emphasise in particular that the European Parliament should maintain adherence to the closure dates for dangerous and non-upgradable power stations - not only Ignalina , but also Kosloduj and Bohunice .
Mr President , Poland has made great progress in its journey back to Europe , at the cost of great sacrifice and the risk of unpopularity on the part of its governments , which have determinedly pursued this objective .
I regret to say that , in Poland , as in the other candidate countries , accepting compromises with Brussels , giving the impression of yielding ground , is seen as extremely negative , and there is now a price to pay for those who do so .
Poland is paying this price with great European determination .
In this regard , I would like to stress how important and useful the information campaign on accession to Europe organised by the Polish Government is proving to be , yielding excellent results .
It could be used by other countries as a model .
I would also like to express my firm support for the Commission and the Council 's refusal - Commissioner Verheugen mentioned this just now - of Russia 's request for transit corridors from Kaliningrad .
Those who are familiar with the history of Poland know what corridors mean for that country .
I would just like to express one concern in what is , on the whole , a positive picture for Poland , regarding what appear to be clumsy attempts on the part of the current left-wing government to influence , or rather to restrict the independence of both the press and television and the National Bank of Warsaw .
I trust that the debate currently taking place in Poland on these two key institutions of any democracy will not result in decisions which mar the esteem in which this country is held in the world .
I will end by sharing a further concern with you , which has already been expressed by Commissioner Verheugen , namely that there is resistance to enlargement in the air .
There is , in effect , something unhealthy in the air : enthusiasm is waning and the anti-European parties are gathering support everywhere .
In my opinion , we really do need to redouble our efforts : it is our duty .
Slovakia has , over the past year , made considerable progress in the negotiations about EU membership , and this certainly deserves credit , also in view of the internal problems which the government coalition has faced in that country .
Slovakia is now , since yesterday , at the top of the list of negotiating countries , which is , given that country 's past , no mean feat .
But in the case of Slovakia too , preparations have not yet entirely finished .
Judging from the schedule , a great deal of work will need to be done this year .
Despite the optimistic note in my report , there are still points of criticism and points that will weigh heavily when this Parliament comes to reaching a final verdict .
They are not new and concern in many cases other candidate countries too .
They involve the fight against corruption which , in Slovakia , is still too widespread .
They also concern improving the government 's implementing capacity , a topic , in fact , to which this Parliament ought to devote a separate debate .
In addition , the problems of the Roma should be tackled more swiftly .
Also , an effective regional policy should be developed as a means of fighting excessive levels of unemployment in that country .
Additionally , effective border control should be implemented in the framework of future Schengen cooperation .
For a number of these points , demands are high .
We do not want perfection but visible progress towards an average level we have in the current EU .
It is precisely the advocates of enlargement , to which , fortunately , also the large majority of this Parliament belongs , who have the responsibility of carefully testing the acceding countries at the end of the journey , on the basis of the criteria formulated in the past .
In September , parliamentary elections will be held in Slovakia and there is already a great deal of speculation about the outcome .
It is up to the Slovakian citizens to decide , but as in 1998 , these elections are , in fact , about Slovakia 's future in Europe .
I hope that the turn-out will be as high as possible , and I expect that the outcome will lead to the forming of a new government that will be able to work with the European Union in a manner that is just as positive as the current government .
Mr President , I feel that the Brok report provides an excellent overview and a method for future similar operations .
With regard to the current operation - enlargement - the sooner it happens the better .
The politicians of the new democracies , although in some cases the public rather less so , are under the impression that outside Europe it is darker and rainier , but many small , developed countries , including Slovenia , are wont to succumb to fears and see complete sovereignty as a way of constraining the globalising force of the strong and the economically aggressive .
I hope that the Brok report will help to set them straight and convince them that they are progressing along the right road .
It appears that the general issues have already been dealt with and I would therefore like , if I may , just to focus on Slovenia .
Ultimately , as far as Slovenia is concerned , there are two sensitive points in particular .
Slovenia , considered to be among the best prepared candidate countries , is making every endeavour to complete the adoption of the chapters of the European acquis .
In practice , however , the problems revealed are the same as those highlighted by other reports .
In some sectors , the efforts are yielding the desired results , but there are delays in others .
Ljubljana looks set to achieve the four Maastricht criteria on target , reducing inflation , and that is a considerable achievement .
There seems to be a certain amount of progress in areas such as the computerisation of the land register and the privatisation of banks , particularly the privatisation of banks , which is an indication of greater openness towards other countries .
The computerisation of the land register , on the other hand , should reduce the number of civil court cases attributable to denationalisation .
The European Union has been urging Slovenia to speed up the procedures and make good the delays in this field for years now .
Brussels , for its part , understands Slovenia 's concern that it will enter the Union under unfavourable conditions or even as a net contributor .
The support for agriculture , which is not sufficiently long-term , does not provide sufficient reassurance .
It would appear that Slovenia 's argument that stable mechanisms need to be found for the Structural Funds , direct payments and so forth is falling on sympathetic ears .
Mr President , as a general point I would first say what a pity it is that we did not use this great opportunity of enlargement to introduce a lighter , less integrative approach to European cooperation , which would be less burdensome to all concerned .
Instead we have the enormous weight of the imposed acquis , which grows by the day and significant elements of which are ignored even by current Member States , let alone the candidate states .
I would also hope that the enlargement report before this House will continue to make reference to all 13 candidates for accession .
This will enable Turkey 's progress to be addressed .
I note Mr de Miguel 's realistic but encouraging remarks with regard to Turkey .
Furthermore , the negotiations for a just , lasting and mutually acceptable settlement of the Cyprus question , which most of us so anxiously desire , are at a very sensitive stage .
Both sides must be encouraged to make the necessary compromises to reach such a settlement .
As rapporteur for Bulgaria , I want to commend that country for the steady progress it is making towards EU membership , with its economic successes , its strategies for administrative and judicial reform , for more effectively dealing with the problems of its minorities , for tightening its borders and for fighting corruption .
We now need to translate these strategies into more effective action which produces tangible results so that Bulgaria will be in a position rapidly to close all the negotiating chapters with a view to accession in about 2007 or 2008 .
Such a positive outlook , backed up by what must be well targeted , well managed European Union assistance , would help sustain support for modernising governments and reformed public institutions in Bulgaria - support which is frail at the moment .
We need to send a positive signal to Bulgaria with a clear road map for accession .
I welcome Commissioner Verheugen 's promise of additional aid and a reinforced approximation strategy .
Mr President , Romania has made exceptional progress in recent months .
The magnificent efforts by the Prime Minister and his team have created laudable results .
NATO membership in Prague this autumn is now a certainty and the impact of that body of work on European Union enlargement will be wholly beneficial .
Romania now stands at the crossroads .
It is a European nation , yet European standards and our fundamental values are still not fully adhered to by all levels of society .
The government 's strong fight against corruption is hampered by lack of financial , human and material resources , with the inevitable knock-on effect of a low absorption rate of EU funds .
Thus new methods are needed to boost Romania 's progress in the coming months after the big bang .
We must take new initiatives .
It is imperative that the newly emerging political map of Europe , with its plague of unhealthy nationalism , does not threaten Romania 's entry into the European Union .
If the enlargement window of opportunity starts to close , I urge the Union to lead Romania more swiftly through the narrowing gap of full EU membership so that she is not left languishing on the margins .
Romania should be guaranteed early membership even if some of the acquis communautaire is not wholly complete .
Surely we can find an entry date with the aim , say , of completing negotiations by the end of 2006 .
Surely that is within our grasp .
Under Ceaucescu , many hundreds of thousands of Romanians showed incredible courage based on their deepest attachment to our core values of truth , freedom and respect for the human dignity of every individual .
I recall that in Bucharest in 1990 the main streets were dark , unlit and the only vehicles were driven by the secret police .
Last week those same streets were alive and buoyant with a massive international trade with traffic jams , shops and offices , and the bustle of normal life .
Romania 's bloodless revolution has brought her through into the free world .
She still has some way to travel to be with us here today but exceptional efforts surely deserve exceptional responses .
I congratulate the Commission , with Romania 's people , the primary architects of the country 's success , for bringing her to that level of integration today .
I look for new thinking and creative achievements in the months ahead to give Romania the tools she needs to finish the job .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , from the Committee on Budgets ' point of view , we want to send out two signals to the Council , the Commission , the European public and the accession countries today .
Firstly , we want to make clear our desire to put the budgetary conditions in place so that enlargement can go ahead in 2004 , involving up to ten candidate countries .
Secondly , we want to make it very clear to the Commission and the Council that according to Paragraph 25 of the Interinstitutional Agreement and on the basis of Article 272 , the adjustment of the financial perspective is undertaken on the proposal of the Commission together with Parliament and Council , namely with a qualified majority in the Council and , in Parliament , a majority of its Members and three-fifths of the votes cast .
Let me add that everyone involved should work towards ensuring that the outcome is capable of securing a majority in both the current EU and the new Member States .
This is a major challenge and obligation for us .
The original financial perspective contains an indicative financial framework , initially for six new countries from 2002 .
However , this framework should serve as a basis for the negotiations , so that the decisions taken in Berlin , Agenda 2000 and the acquis communautaire might be adhered to .
Based on the plenary 's decisions of September 2001 , we greatly welcome the approach involving progressive integration in agricultural and structural policy , simply taking account of the pre-accession experience , budget discipline , and WTO rules , but also the candidate countries ' own domestic situations .
We also welcome the fact that the agricultural subsidies available to the new Member States are to be increased to reach the level of 100 % of direct aid by 2013 .
It is clear that if necessary , we must start discussing the European Union 's development after 2006 today .
Will the financial perspective be extended or revised ?
What will happen in agricultural policy and the structure of direct payments , rural policy , and society 's new demands regarding international competitiveness and the WTO ?
Then there is the issue of introducing a comprehensive reform of the structural fund mechanisms due to the experience of absorption , the simplification of procedures , greater consideration of local conditions - all this is necessary .
I would like to take up what the Presidency has said : let us not overburden the accession negotiations , and let us stop and think for a moment .
Taking decisions today for the period after 2006 also means anticipating the recommendations of the Convention on the future of the European Union .
In my view , this is unacceptable .
The simplified model of direct payments in agriculture , and the concept of special financing arrangements via a Fund which is defined and managed separately from the Cohesion Fund , offering very favourable conditions to the new Member States , is the right approach .
However , let me add this : alongside improved utilisation of structural fund resources in the accession countries , the possibility of phasing out the special conditions must also be discussed .
In particular , we wish to endorse the comments made by Mr Verheugen in connection with aid to the new Member States , especially as regards improving administrative capacities and the closure of nuclear power stations , with specific closure criteria being a precondition for this aid .
New Member States will also entail new external borders . This means new partners on the EU 's external borders , which will raise new issues concerning cross-border cooperation and the European Union 's foreign policy .
It has also implications for heading 4 of the budget , and we therefore wish to be consulted on these issues at an early stage . The provision of budgetary compensation to the accession countries through a lump sum on the expenditure side of the budget , which should be temporary and degressive , in order to prevent any new Member State being a net contributor during the first years , is something which we would certainly support .
Naturally , the fact that the administrative costs may reach the upper limit stated in the financial perspective is a cause for concern , and we will have to look at whether we are in a position to abide by this limit by streamlining work processes and competences or whether we have to accept what the Commission has defined as additional costs of some EUR 500-600 million in this area during the first years .
Finally , I should like to mention one very important point .
If there are any net contributors who believe that we should already be setting a framework for the period after 2006 in all policy areas , I should like to remind them that a new financial perspective , whatever form it might take , must ultimately be decided on the basis of unanimity . This makes it clear that in the future , too , based on the Commission 's proposals for the enlargement process , we have the opportunity to maintain budget discipline while having a responsibility to achieve a balance in this negotiating process and find a solution which is in the interests of the current Member States but also takes account of the equally justified interests of the accession countries .
Let us all get to work to achieve this outcome .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the forthcoming enlargement which is the subject of our debate today naturally poses a unique challenge to the European Union .
The number of Member States will virtually double .
The EU 's population will increase by almost 50 % .
What will not increase substantially , however , is the Gross Domestic Product of this new enlarged EU .
It will only rise by about 10 % .
The prosperity gap between the current EU , with its fifteen Member States , and the accession states is enormous .
This enlargement will entail major burdens for us all .
Nonetheless , we all agree that these burdens are immaterial in light of the historic opportunity afforded to us to unite Europe in peace and democracy and in political and economic stability .
Yet already , many of our regions bordering candidate countries are experiencing a foretaste of enlargement .
It is precisely these border regions which will face tremendous problems in the wake of enlargement . They will bear the brunt of enlargement for us all .
These border regions need our solidarity .
We must help them to cope with this difficult situation .
Certainly , not all the border regions are the same .
Some of them are prospering more than others .
Nonetheless , many of them have been in decline for some time .
These regions have been on the absolute periphery for decades ; indeed , from our perspective , they are almost at the edge of the world .
It is not a particularly attractive situation , and this is reflected in the fact that many of them are still areas covered by Objective 1 .
They still have a major deficit compared with the EU average .
What are the key features of the situation in these difficult border regions ?
High unemployment , a lack of prospects and even resignation , the drifting away of young people , inner city decline , decaying villages in rural regions , and a resulting loss of infrastructure - for no one contemplates expanding the road network if it seems that no one uses it any more .
These regions ' loss of infrastructure , their loss of quality of life and their declining attractiveness and quality as a location for industry create a vicious circle .
Then there is the competition from the accession regions on the other side of the border , which are quite rightly pushing westwards .
It is a fact that the borders have been semi-permeable for a long time .
This is not necessarily a fair competition , for we all know that the prosperity gap is wide between these neighbouring regions on either side of the border .
It results in major differences in the cost of living and in labour and social costs , as well as highly disparate environmental standards , which are likely to continue for some time .
This situation substantially distorts competition .
It is particularly difficult for small and medium enterprises in the trades and service sectors , which is why , in my report , I have focussed especially on support for SMEs in the border regions .
Indeed , I would have liked to set up a separate budget line for this area in order to guarantee that the support genuinely reaches its target .
However , I was forced to recognise that this was unlikely to be supported by a majority in this House , for of course it is quite correct that setting up a new funding instrument takes a great deal of time , and time is running out for these SMEs .
They need assistance urgently .
I therefore abandoned my idea and agreed that the well-established , tried and tested funding instruments such as Interreg should be used instead .
In the end , I also had the impression that the Commission recognises the urgent need for strong support to SMEs in these problematical border regions .
We ourselves should also recognise the need for short-term transitional measures relating to the freedom to provide services and the free movement of workers .
What is needed , please , is a gradual opening and a cautious approach .
Naturally , therefore , I do not support the amendments before us which dispute that these measures are necessary .
Incidentally , it is also important to stress that we are focussing on our border regions very late in the day , and that the financial resources available are completely inadequate .
This is described in my report as well .
It would be unfair to use the lion 's share of these meagre resources to expand the Trans-European Networks .
These TENs are in Europe 's general interest .
They are only of limited benefit to the border regions .
In the border regions , what is required are regional transport links and , in particular , cross-border transport services .
There is virtually nothing available at present .
The measures which we are now initiating through this Community action for border regions are really only a start , a first step .
Let us recognise that dismantling the existing deficits is likely to take several generations , and so further measures must follow .
Of course , the border regions are now moving to the heart of Europe , and this naturally offers them great opportunities for the future .
There is a chance for them to become a model of best practice for European regional cooperation , that is true , but this is likely to take many years .
Until then , we must help them .
Let us send out a signal and endorse this report by a broad majority in this House .
Let us send out a signal to the citizens living in these difficult regions that we are not sacrificing them to the enlargement process , and that we are not abandoning them . Instead , we are taking them by the hand to progress together towards a positive future .
Mr President , after the fine proposals for our dream Europe , we must come down to earth to the bad news of Europe as it is at present . The report of which I am the rapporteur examines three annual reports by the Commission relating to the year 2000 : the report on the Structural Funds , the report on the Cohesion Fund and the report on the Instrument for Structural Policy for Pre-Accession .
If Commissioner Barnier , the Commissioner responsible for regional policy , were here , I would have read him what he said before this House during the year 2000 , but he is not here so I will not bother with that .
The year 2000 was the first year in which the coordination of Structural Funds and Cohesion Fund interventions laid down by the 1999 regulations was actually implemented .
In the light of the report by the Commission itself and both the annual and special reports of the Court of Auditors , we have noted that the simplification and speeding-up of implementing procedures for structural measures promised by the Commission in Agenda 2000 and implemented through the adoption of new regulations did not have any effect .
As was pointed out , again by the Commission , with regard to the rates of implementation of the Structural Funds objectives overall , there were delays similar to those recorded in 1994 .
It was only thanks to the 7 % advance and automatic annual commitment that it was possible to attain rates of implementation of 13 % for commitments and 5 % for payments .
If we consider the objectives , Community initiatives and innovative measures as a whole , only 51.8 % of the appropriations available for the year 2000 were committed , and that is without taking into account the situation of the new Community initiatives , which is truly unbelievable .
Despite the fact that the Community initiatives were scaled down and simplified with the intention of making them more effective and were thus reduced to four - Leader , Interreg , Equal and Urban - the rate of budgetary implementation was zero for both commitments and payments , and no measures were approved .
Furthermore , the guidelines for the innovative measures were not adopted until the beginning of 2001 .
Clearly , these data induce us to raise the purely rhetorical question of whether the new programming rules really make it possible to ensure transparency of budget management and avoid liquidity bottlenecks .
We cannot conceal our fear that the delays that affected the implementation of Structural Funds and Cohesion Fund resources in 2000 might jeopardise the attainment of the goals charted for the crucial 2002-2006 programming period , and that is without even considering the measures from the previous periods .
We were surprised to learn that , at the end of 2000 , 11 years after the closure of commitments and nine years after the final date for making payments , as many as 35 programmes from before 1989 were still open .
Moreover , there were as many as 73 operating programmes from the 1989-1993 period still open too .
What can we say ?
We note that the non-extendable deadlines and the threats of stringent coercive measures repeatedly proposed by the Commission were once again disregarded .
Moving on to monitoring and evaluation : in its annual report for 2000 and its Special Report for 2001 , the Court of Auditors has detected serious shortcomings in the management and control systems of the Commission and Member States .
The seriousness of the errors in intermediate payment declarations is the same as in previous years and the most frequent errors are similar to those previously recorded in various Member States .
Lastly , we agree with the opinion of the Court of Auditors that checks should meet internationally accepted standards , including provisions stipulating that those carrying out the checks should be independent of those implementing the project , which is not the case at present .
I will end with ISPA , which would appear to be the reason my report has been slipped into the enlargement melting pot .
We note that the Commission committed approximately one third of the funds earmarked for 2000 during the first year of programming and we wish to see implementation stepped up considerably so as to guarantee full use of these resources , which are vital to the balanced development of the candidate countries .
Lastly , I am absolutely astounded that , in a debate on enlargement which includes a discussion on Hungary , not one Member has mentioned that , on 7 September 2001 , Hungary appeared on the updated list of countries and territories which were not cooperating with the FATF , the Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering , a group which is part of the OECD , which is a body to which the European Union itself belongs .
Fine , we did not realise what was going on in Hungary and we will continue to pretend that everything is going well and that our dream Europe will be better than the one we have today on which I have reported .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , before I come to the Sapard report in this related debate , I would like to say a few words about the enlargement negotiations .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development wholeheartedly supports the Commission 's line in the agriculture negotiations with the accession candidates .
We call upon the Council and especially some Member States to give their support to the course adopted by the Commission on agriculture .
As many of you are aware , I have been a fervent supporter of reform in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development for many years .
I will carry on being one in future , and we are looking forward to the Commission 's communication on this issue with great excitement .
However , one thing must be clear : the reform debate must not interfere with the negotiations .
No premature conditions must be set at this stage which might delay the accession negotiations .
Conversely , of course , the accession negotiations and the accession candidate countries ' demands which understandably arise must not be allowed to impede the reform debate .
The two must run in parallel , but must not block each other .
We feel that this is a very important point .
Naturally , there is conflict : some Member States are not in favour of any direct payments , while the recipient countries would like to receive 100 % - and let me say to the candidate countries that they will yet again have cause to be grateful to the Commission for its proposals .
On the issue of Sapard : while we spend our time arguing in the accession negotiations about the level of payments , we are failing to exploit the opportunities for pre-accession assistance that Sapard offers .
We are pushing substantial amounts of money around as if we were a snow plough .
Of course , there are reasons for this .
I am not trying to apportion blame , but it is important to analyse the causes clearly and decide what else we can do .
Of course , the decentralised management of the programme which we have opted for is a very demanding method of management .
I am sure that money would have been paid out to projects much more quickly if we had had a centralised administration with management by the Commission .
For sound and well-intentioned reasons , things were done differently .
However , we must accept that we should have foreseen that these generous arrangements involving a decentralised structure and increased individual responsibility on the part of the accession countries were unlikely to achieve the rapid outcomes which were desired .
We hope that there will be a major step forward this year .
Unfortunately , however , we cannot make up for lost time .
This is why the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development recommended to the Commission last year that since we have opted to manage the programme in this way so that it involves a learning process which will ultimately be of benefit to the candidate countries after accession , why not implement other elements of rural development which we have tried and tested in a European Union with fifteen Member States ?
Why not include a Leader-type programme , which we have christened INPARD ?
Now , of course , this proposal by the committee is being dismissed by the Commission , which tells us that we have run out of time and that we do not have the right legal framework .
The Commission often uses these arguments when it does not want to adopt a particular measure !
It may well be the case that if we now motivate the organisations and local populations by offering them a Leader-type programme and encourage them to develop their own ideas creatively in rural areas , things will not really get off the ground until they are full members .
Nonetheless , we would win some time if we try to involve them pro-actively in this way .
What is more , this type of programme might give us an opportunity to channel all the money that has been lost - not down the Swannee , I would not say that - back into the Finance Ministers ' coffers .
We are not happy with the situation , none of us , we know that .
The Commission is not happy either since the Sapard funds have not been used in the way we wanted .
Nonetheless , let us at least put on a spurt over the final metres so that we can see something for our efforts , and so that all the Member States - and there are differences between the accession countries in this Sapard programme - so that they experience the EU and so that the money which is urgently needed for reforesting around agriculture , and for slaughter-houses and dairies etc. can genuinely help them to attain the quality needed to make their products marketable in Europe .
We must also make it clear to the accession countries that it is not only a matter of quality : once they have full membership , they must supply the EU market .
We cannot make distinctions in terms of the quality of agricultural products depending on whether they are destined for the EU 's internal market or for export .
The excuse used by some candidate countries - that we should not get excited about it because they are not exporting to the EU at present , and are actually buying products in Ukraine and Russia - will no longer be relevant .
We cannot accept it .
This is why money and prompt assistance are needed .
Money now being spent on Sapard and other programmes in the accession countries will save us money later when these countries are full members .
Let us try and make the best of it !
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council and Commissioner , I believe that we should sometimes stop and pinch ourselves and reflect upon how privileged those of us are who are permitted to work on European issues right now .
To unify Europe and finally incorporate the countries of central Eastern Europe into the European Union is the historic challenge of our time .
Sometimes , I see this as unreal because , for a very long time , I had got used to there being a dividing line running right through Europe , which would remain in place .
Fortunately , it did not do so .
Now , however , I feel that unification is taking an unduly long time , with many years already having passed since the dividing line disappeared .
As Mr Brok said , there is no longer any excuse for delaying enlargement .
To provide their people with safe and nutritious food has always been an important ambition for all states .
That is why agricultural and food policies play such a large role , both in areas of the world with surpluses and in those with shortages .
Agricultural policy is a knotty problem in the accession negotiations .
The EU cannot reasonably meet all the wishes of the candidate countries .
In the negotiations , we must , however , create a feeling of understanding and community within the framework of the EU 's long-term economic and political commitments .
The Council ( General Affairs ) was unable to achieve agreement on the issue of direct payments .
I wish to take this opportunity to state clearly that I do not support the Swedish Government 's view , but am in favour of the Commission 's policy when it comes to the phasing-in of direct payments .
One Paragraph of our report proposes that the Commission should provide help and support on the issue of Romania 's and Bulgaria 's continued work with a view to accession .
I would therefore thank the Commissioner for having already begun by explaining that this should be done .
It is very pleasing when we are agreed in our endeavours .
We are also addressing a number of points which may perhaps make the negotiations a little smoother .
It is possible that the Commission has already come up with these ideas .
Regarding the establishment of quotas and volumes , we believe that , within the framework of the quotas and volumes proposed by the Commission , account should be taken of the candidate countries ' situation during the reference period , their production potential and their consumption trends .
We also believe that those countries which , for various reasons , have exposed their agriculture to a tough market in recent years should not be treated unfairly .
In countries with low direct payments prior to accession , it should moreover be possible to provide the option of exceeding that level .
I do not say that that should apply generally , because it is sensible not to allow any increase over and above previous levels .
There should nonetheless be an opportunity and scope for discussion about the option of exceeding that level in those cases in which the economy permits this and in which competitiveness will not be harmed .
Given that the candidate countries are undergoing major readjustments , it would also be appropriate after a little while to review how the common agricultural policy is to be applied .
The President-in-Office of the Council is right in saying that enlargement is one thing and agricultural policy another .
There are , however , connections , and we believe it is a matter of urgency for both EU and candidate countries directly to begin to discuss how a future agricultural policy might look .
We are all aware that it must be changed , and such discussions would perhaps facilitate acceptance by the candidate countries .
I believe that the EU , in accordance with the discussions now being conducted at the World Food Conference and in accordance with the WTO 's ambitions , has a crucial interest in being able to sell its food on a functioning world market .
Hopefully , it will then be possible to exploit its production potential .
I want to make a recommendation to the Council and the Commission : negotiate with knowledge , sensitivity and love , and we shall achieve a good result .
Madam President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office , honourable Members , on 18 April 2002 the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities adopted an opinion drafted by Mrs Dybkjr on the basis of the Commission reports submitted in November 2001 .
Unfortunately , Mr Brok 's otherwise very important report does not include any of our proposals on the legal and social position of women in the candidate countries and , as chairman of the Committee on Women 's Rights , I should like to express my committee 's acute displeasure to the House .
Naturally I hope that the amendments tabled by my committee on the subject will be adopted tomorrow .
In its opinion , our committee stressed that adopting the acquis communautaire on equal opportunities for men and women is a sine qua non to accession because this is a basic human rights issue .
Institution building and strengthening institutional and administrative capacities in this area are basic prerequisites to full application of the European acquis .
Equality of the sexes is a fundamental and integral part of economic , social and democratic development , which is why it must act as a guideline in the development and accession process .
In other words , the candidate countries must ensure that the acquis on equal opportunities for men and women is applied fully and effectively before they accede .
As you know , the acquis communautaire on equal opportunities consists of nine directives on equal pay , equal treatment in the workplace , health and safety , work for pregnant women , parental leave , the burden of proof in cases of discrimination and equal treatment under social policy .
We also feel it is very important for the candidate countries to develop or reform their judicial and administrative structures , in order to create the right conditions for applying the acquis communautaire efficiently .
The Committee on Women 's Rights has of course taken account of progress already made by the candidate countries and has identified areas in which further improvement is needed .
It is important , in our view , for the enlargement procedure to include the application of efficient measures to prevent and combat trafficking in women , prostitution , sexual abuse of children and child pornography in the candidate countries , given that many of these countries are still the countries of origin , transit and destination for international organised crime networks in the modern slave trade .
In addition , problems persist in certain candidate countries as far as children are concerned , as a direct consequence of weaknesses in social protection systems .
The Commission is called on to step up its efforts to wipe out all forms of violence against women as part of the accession strategy , in order to ensure that women 's personal rights and dignity are safeguarded and , of course , to act as an incentive for improving children 's rights and child protection .
We still need a broad programme of institutional intervention and economic support in order to incorporate the gender equality dimension in the economic guidelines for the accession process and counterbalance the negative impact on gender equality of privatisation and cuts in public spending .
As you know , the transition to a market economy is exerting huge pressure on all aspects of employment in many of the candidate countries .
We are particularly concerned about the adverse impact which this transition has on women , given that they are always the first to suffer from cuts in the budget in the areas of child care , education and the social protection systems which allow them to combine working and family life .
The Commission needs to promote suitable public and private investment in social sectors in the candidate countries , in order to make it easier for more women to enter representative institutions and the centres of power .
There is a serious democratic deficit in this sector in all the candidate countries .
This being so , we call on the Commission to tell us what has been achieved in the candidate countries as regards adopting the social acquis communautaire on equal opportunities .
We should also like to know what progress the candidate countries have made in constructing the relevant framework over this period .
( The President cut off the speaker )
Thank you , Madam President , this ' debate ' speaks volumes about the chasm between Europe and its citizens .
While we know that there is little public support for enlargement , there is hardly a critical noise to be heard in this House .
This confirms the impression that this is the umpteenth European project that is being forced through by a European elite instead of holding an honest , open dialogue with genuinely concerned people .
Honourable ladies and gentlemen of the Council and of the Commission , these people are not only rightwing-populist and anti-European types , they are also ordinary citizens with real concerns .
In order to give this honest dialogue a shot in the arm , the Liberal Group is asking why the EU is granting asylum to people from countries with whom we are round the negotiating table ?
Either those countries are safe , in which case we should not accept any asylum seekers , or they are not safe , and they need to be taken to task over this in the framework of the political criteria .
The Liberal Group is taking the asylum obligations arising from the Geneva Convention very seriously .
We want a humane and just policy .
How can we achieve this following enlargement ?
This is our question .
Madam President , today , we are once again discussing the imminent fulfilment of a very deeply cherished wish .
Many realise this .
Others prefer to speculate about uncertainty , fear and alleged dissatisfaction .
More than ever , it is the politicians ' responsibility not to pander to that populism .
It is our task , and that of the media , to offer the people a true picture of reality , whether this is beneficial or not .
Parliament and the Commission largely agree on the policy to be adopted .
I would thank Commissioner Verheugen for his very committed speech .
He has always approached this matter with due thoroughness , with a critical eye and with a great sense of responsibility for the European Union and for the candidate countries .
This is how we as Parliament would have wanted it , and this is how it has been all these years .
The evaluation of progress and of shortcomings in the candidate countries has always been clear and detailed .
In the interest of the enlargement process , we have always said to our friends in the candidate countries that we want to see what their suffering is rooted in .
We can use this knowledge in order to aim our policy effectively .
We would like to point out that a great deal is yet to be done in the area of public freedoms .
This is only natural , on account of the rule of law being prioritised with good reason .
A great deal of money has been , and still is being , pumped into improving the capacity of governments to enforce and apply their adapted legislation .
In the recent Commission communication on administrative and judicial capacity , it is noted that a great deal of work still needs to be done .
I would like to ask the Commissioner what the odds are of a timely completion of a necessary improvement and further development of the rule of law in the candidate countries , so that these can function effectively after 18 months to two years .
The Commissioner , particularly the Commissioner for Justice and Home Affairs , has an important role to play in the field of monitoring and guaranteeing the smooth running of things , also in future .
In this area , a yellow card will probably be issued more frequently in future than we were used to in the past .
In my view , the idea of perpetuating back-door politics by appointing a high official for this policy in the Council is highly astonishing .
I experience this as a slap in the face of the Commission and Parliament .
What kind of example is this supposed to set for the candidate countries ?
Apparently , it is one of the Council 's fondest wishes to avoid parliamentary control , certainly in the form of the capacity to remove a political official from office .
Finally , the idea of a referendum is frequently being mooted in a few countries .
A referendum would possibly have been appropriate at the outset of the whole process , but then the surveys were so positive that nobody was ever in any doubt about the fact that the European citizen really wanted this enlargement , by way of paying off a debt of honour to Central Europe .
A survey now would be very odd indeed , because that would give the impression that after this enormous amount of work - which , very often , was also very unpopular work - after compliance with all the requirements , it would be possible yet again to be faced with a ' no ' from the Member States , based on a referendum which would be very difficult to interpret .
This is why I think that we as politicians must find our way to the people , as we have always done , with the sense of criticism that we have always had .
Madam President , every line of the important opinion of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedom and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , drafted so courageously by Mr Oostlander and Mrs Berger , is a matter of concern and frustration to us .
From the lack of the judiciary 's independence from the government to the situation of minorities , from the limited access to justice , to crimes and acts of violence going unpunished , from religious persecution to discrimination against homosexuals , from trafficking in human beings to organised crime , police corruption and inefficiency at the borders , from the limited independence of journalists to the weakness of the judicial system , all of these are problems on which progress has been limited and almost imperceptible .
Europe cannot be held responsible for this , because this year alone , we will be spending EUR 1 billion on a fast-track approach to help the legal and administrative apparatus of the candidate countries improve these disastrous situations .
As the Copenhagen doctrine established , in the field of freedom , democracy and human rights there can be no exceptions , transition periods or  la carte Europe .
On these matters , Madam President , countries must either put up or shut up .
Let us hope that they put up and do so in the best possible way .
Madam President , in the space of one minute I shall mention five points in order to remind the House of the position of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
The first point is our concern over the evaluation report which we asked for from the Commission , on the needs of the applicant countries with regard to general-interest services .
Then there is the idea that in the case of the applicant countries we should regard their economic capacity with a certain degree of flexibility , taking into account the need to create in those countries the conditions for continuous and sustainable economic growth .
Then there is our concern , again , about the campaign against money laundering and tax havens , which in our view constitutes a real preliminary condition for accession , as other speakers before me have already pointed out .
In addition there is the need to encourage these countries to have more regional cooperation , and finally there is the idea that the accession of these countries to the Union will make it easier for them to achieve the objectives pursued by the European Union .
Madam President , the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market is very pleased that the chapters on the internal market and the related chapters have already been negotiated successfully .
In this respect , we can claim that the internal market already exists .
However , we are still concerned about the shortcomings in the administrative and judicial systems in the future Member States .
I would like to tell you something which I found out at the weekend in Prague , namely that the process of registering a foreign commercial company in the Czech trade register takes about a year - unless you are prepared to pay EUR 2000 .
In the internal market , no gap should open up between rights and duties as a result of the failure to enforce environmental , social and consumer standards .
We need fair competition , also in the enlarged internal market .
I should like to thank Mrs Sommer for her report .
It provides a strong impetus towards fruitful cooperation and cohesion at the interface between East and West in the border regions .
Giving priority to SMEs is something we strongly support , and we hope that this will be implemented in forthcoming calls for proposals .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , my task was to draft a horizontal report on industry , external trade , research and energy for twelve candidate countries .
That was difficult enough in itself .
Providing a comprehensive overview of the report in just one minute now is impossible .
I therefore draw attention to the short justification provided in my report .
Anyone interested should have a look at it .
I should like to mention one issue which is very close to my heart , and wish to underline rather more pointedly than my colleague Willy Grlach that as I come from a region which has been part of the European Union since 1990 and has experienced a great deal of solidarity in the last twelve years , I have a very clear appreciation of the efforts made by the candidate countries , especially the Central and Eastern European countries , to become eligible for accession .
What I would now ask of us all - from the European Union , especially the Council and particularly from two countries which have always been the driving force in this European Union , namely Germany and France - is to remove , as soon as possible , the obstacles which stand in the way of union with these countries and enable us , myself included , to conduct a European election campaign on both sides of the Oder and Neisse in 2004 .
. ( NL ) Thank you , Madam President , I would also refer to my report and would like to specifically emphasise two points .
The first point is the high level of unemployment in a number of the candidate countries .
In Poland , for example , the employment figure is 19 % and is not showing any signs of abating .
This requires support for the most heavily affected areas and an effort by private investors , who should , at the same time , invest in training and in-service training .
I would ask the Commission to throw its weight behind this plea too .
A second point is the fear among our own citizens of losing their jobs or of large flows of immigrants from the candidate countries .
This should be removed .
There are plenty of arguments .
The candidate countries are enjoying strong economic growth and will be able to accommodate their own citizens .
The average monthly income in the enlargement countries is rising sharply , and exports from our countries to them is rising more steeply than the import from those countries .
Belgium , for example , enjoys an annual increase of 15 % .
Moreover , all the figures bear out that immigration to the European Union is restricted .
Commissioner , you have done sterling work at the summit of entrepreneurs , and many statistics have made their way to the press .
This is vital , because we must dispel people 's anxiety .
I would urge you to continue in the same vein for all these social issues .
Madam President , when you stand in a derelict asbestos factory in Poland and taste it on your tongue , when you hear a debate in Malta about how they dispose of waste on a small island made of hard rock , and when you stand in a yard in Bulgaria and see where the offenders with mental disorders are expected to exercise for one hour a day , you see some of the challenges that some of our European family have to meet as they seek to join the European Union and adopt our acquis .
Our Committee on the Environment 's enlargement reports have highlighted concerns on nuclear safety , stocks of obsolete pesticides , food and feed safety , habitats and wild bird protection and human rights in mental health systems .
We want to see compliance with the acquis , but we understand that the acquis has standards that we are all seeking to implement .
We want candidate countries to have access to advice and support from specialists and funds available to us already as Member States to meet our obligations and we ask the Commission to ensure that we are not asking candidate countries to meet standards that our own Member States are failing to meet themselves .
Madam President , I was just about to impress the Commissioner , Mr Fischler , but unfortunately , he is absent at the moment .
However , if all goes to plan , we can land a very big fish at the end of the year , which makes a change .
In fact , the fisheries sector is ahead of agriculture in the enlargement process , which also makes a change .
The fisheries chapter has already been closed with all candidates , albeit with some restrictions in the case of Poland and Malta .
Nonetheless , here too , some positive developments are emerging now that Poland has withdrawn its demand for special rights of access , for example .
As a result of enlargement , the coastline will increase significantly in length and the number of actors in the fisheries sector will increase .
On a day-to-day basis , we do not anticipate any major problems , but there may be some difficulties which we will have to take on board .
In particular , there is a lack of more effective administrative structures , a standard register , effective controls , genuinely harmonised hygiene and environmental standards , and measures to tackle flags of convenience .
However , we should be able to deal with these .
I am confident , therefore , that we can resolve these problems and set a course towards an enlarged European fishing industry .
Madam President , my opinion dealt largely with the technical progress of the Commission 's negotiations with the candidate countries on the relevant chapters , but it also called on both the Council and the Commission to redouble their efforts to raise awareness of public opinion .
I wonder whether in their summing-up replies both Minister de Miguel and Commissioner Verheugen might refer to progress , as far as public opinion is concerned , and any further initiatives they have in mind .
We all pay lip service to this - bearing in mind the referenda - but much greater practical application is required , in particular from the Member States , not simply from the institutions of the European Union itself .
I have three thoughts concerning action in the Member States .
Firstly , further public platforms should be given to leaders from the candidate countries , not only political but also cultural leaders - writers , film-makers , and musicians .
Secondly , the links between the institutions of civil society should be publicised .
Thirdly , something should be done to overcome the collective amnesia which was imposed by the Soviet tyranny on western Europe , allowing us to forget the thousand years of cultural , political and commercial links which we are now in the process of restoring .
- ( DA ) Mr President , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities , I should like to thank Commissioner Verheugen for his efforts in the area of equality .
Every single time the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities has spoken with the Commissioner , he has not hesitated to state that the ' acquis communitaire ' , if I may use that term , should also apply in that area .
The Commissioner cannot be reproached for the fact that the ' acquis ' was only introduced at the last moment in a long list of countries .
It means , however , that I should like to call upon the Commissioner and his colleagues to continue to monitor this area so that we do not only consistently obtain the necessary facts but also ensure that the countries supply these .
To the President-in-Office of the Council , I should like to say that , in my opinion , the Member States have a special obligation towards women , for it is one thing for us to get the governments to accept membership and something else to get the people to do so . Women form more than half of the population , and what women in the candidate countries have so far had cause to note is high unemployment affecting women in particular .
It is very important that attention be given specifically to the area of women 's rights when we come to the next phase : that of convincing people that enlargement is in actual fact a good idea . I believe that the Member States have a contribution to make to this area and that they and the Commission together have a special contribution to make .
Madam President , the Committee on Petitions considers this report to be extremely important .
Enlargement is the most exciting , difficult political challenge of this century and cannot just be addressed from an accounting perspective .
We need more political ambition and a less parochial , more global vision of politics .
The quality of the European Union 's politics must be enhanced too , and the Union must become more than just a large market .
Only political stature can make us credible interlocutors in the western world as difficult processes of cultural , economic and , above all , judicial integration are developed .
Small-minded , petty egotism will be of no help to us ; conservatism is in danger of making us introspective and isolated , with serious medium- and long-term consequences .
The enlargement process is now underway .
The slow , gradual adjustments that are being made in the candidate countries , as we have heard , must not just be encouraged but supported and not just at the top but with appropriate budgetary policies in a climate of solidarity and rigour and with a view to safeguarding development and peace , if we are to avoid the danger of Eurosceptic reactions .
Madam President , the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy has examined the financial framework 2004-2006 for accession negotiations proposed by the Commission and considers that , generally speaking , the Commission proposal is a balanced and realistic proposal .
The needs of the candidate countries have been taken into account , especially as their take-up capacity will be limited during the first years following accession .
Similarly , no call is being made on the present Member States to increase their contributions .
Certain Member States maintain that this proposal is overly generous in the initial stages of negotiation and have countered by proposing that the amounts for which provision was made in Berlin for 2002 should be used for 2004 .
This criticism is unfounded because , first , a more restrictive proposal would be rejected outright by the candidate countries .
The danger here is that negotiations will be derailed and we shall fail to find any common ground by the end of the year .
Secondly , it is estimated that the take-up capacity of the new Member States will be such in 2004 that we shall be able to give them far more resources than those for which provision was made in Berlin for 2002 .
The present negotiations on enlargement should not be confused with other negotiations or endeavours to amend Union policies .
Madam President , we would stress that the principle of solidarity and economic and social cohesion must be the basis of the Community institutions ' political action if it is to achieve the goal of a European continent based on shared values , and we would also like to mention the great importance our group attaches to the impending enlargement , to the pillar of economic and social cohesion and to the ever-increasing endeavours in the field of cohesion .
We therefore feel that the proposal , already called for by Parliament , to phase in the Structural Funds and to introduce the Cohesion Fund in the new countries at a level of at least a third of the total allocation for structural measures is highly appropriate , for it will be a considerable contribution towards improving the absorption capacity of these countries which are , still today , effectively without genuine administrative capacities .
We have already , on other occasions , requested increasingly careful monitoring of the committed resources on the part of the Commission , and this is becoming still more urgent and pressing if we consider that prolonging access to the Cohesion Fund in this way to improve implementation of structural measures in the candidate countries must be seen as a completely new strategy and that it therefore cannot be understood to be a permanent facility .
We therefore support Mr Bge 's proposal to monitor the trend of improvements in Structural Funds implementation carefully , proceeding , where implementation is improving , to reduce the Cohesion Fund quota gradually .
We hope that the problems encountered in the implementation of the ISPA , Sapard and Phare instruments , for example , despite the fact that the Funds were trebled as of 2000 , can be overcome or , at any rate , diminished as the institutions are strengthened too .
I will conclude by saying that , while , on the whole , we welcome the Commission 's action , we share Mr Bge 's concerns and confusion regarding the financial perspective , which does not necessarily have to cover the 2007-2013 period if we take up the option of prolonging by a short period the current interinstitutional agreement and financial perspective .
Madam President , the border regions adjoining the future Member States of the European Union need our undivided attention now and even more after enlargement .
Everywhere , especially in my country , the border regions are marked by extremely high unemployment and dying villages and towns .
Young people are leaving because they see no future there .
The only way we can halt this negative trend is to support those regions , modernise the infrastructure , create transport links and make small and medium sized enterprises fit to meet the challenge .
Because it is they who create the most jobs .
If the EU and the Member States themselves encourage and support the border regions , which are suffering massive problems , and that help must include preventing low-wage dumping and unfair competition , then a sense of cross-border neighbourliness will grow and that will be to everyone 's advantage .
The historic task of enlargement must succeed .
We have no alternative .
Madam President , on the subject of fisheries , this report does not carry out a detailed analysis of the overall advantages of the structural funds and of the amounts allocated for each programme , for example the management of fishing fleets , decommissioning , fish farming etc .
The Green Paper asks whether the FIFG has contributed to the sustainability of fish stocks or whether it has introduced a distortion into the industry .
Have all the resources allocated to the restructuring of the fleet contributed to the creation of a fleet which has selective fishing methods , high-quality products and a maximum employment rate , or have they simply had the effect of speeding up the process of industrialisation , squeezing out the small vessels and turning them into large vessels , with all the social and economic consequences that that implies ?
The Commission will have to try to answer this question during the current debate on the common fisheries policy .
Madam President , as many colleagues have pointed out , the pace of enlargement varies from country to country and month by month .
It is no secret that the modernisation of the agricultural industries of the candidate countries is proving to be one of the most difficult issues .
Clearly support under the Sapard scheme is of vital importance in assisting that process .
However , the take-up of this and other schemes is patchy .
Expectations in those countries are universally high .
There is a continuing problem that these expectations may not be met , producing the inevitable political and social fall-out .
In the past months I have visited Poland , the Czech Republic , Slovakia and Hungary and once you get away from the main roads and railway lines it is easy to see how much has to be done .
I share Baroness Nicholson 's fear that the often superhuman efforts by the governments will not be met by flexibility from our side .
May I urge that such EU operations are carried out with flexibility and tact and encourage the process rather than inhibit it .
Madam President , from the Committee on Industry , External Trade and Energy 's point of view it is of course important , now that Sapard is entering its operational phase and money is actually flowing , that that money should be used for developing the rural environment and less for agricultural production capacities .
I would like to mention just two key figures : one is the 15 % of agricultural production in the candidate countries , and the other is the 50 % of cultivated agricultural area that can be further capitalised .
So it would be wrong to continue trying to improve production structures .
It would be better to create alternative sources of employment in rural areas , either crafts or small-scale industries .
All in all , it is important that any possible expansion of production should not add to the already high levels of overproduction in our agriculture but that we should in that event find the right ways of developing craft trade and small-scale industry structures in the candidate countries ' agriculture and rural areas .
Madam President , we in the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism and in the Group of the European People 's Party believe that enlargement is a worthy objective in itself .
It must not therefore be used by the Council as a bargaining chip to obtain strategic positions which have nothing to do with the actual political process of enlarging Europe .
It must not be a bargaining chip to obtain certain modifications of the agricultural policy or to resolve other problems , and I therefore congratulate the Spanish Presidency on having done such good work and I directly condemn those governments , with Socialist majorities , which are exploiting the enlargement procedure , which this Parliament and European society are very attached to , to obtain agreements on other issues which they have few reasons for , by trying to strengthen their case by making their position conditional .
With regard to the Turco report , which examines how the Structural , Cohesion and ISPA Funds were spent in 2000 , I must repeat once again that the internal cohesion policy , the regional policy , of the European Union must not be changed as a result of the fact that poorer countries are entering .
The internal cohesion between the richest and poorest regions and countries must be maintained , regardless of the fact that ten countries about to enter are clearly poorer .
I believe that more of the Community budget should be spent and it should be better spent , in that order , and we must continue to try to ensure that executing the Community budget is not an obstacle course .
We must simplify the procedures and trust in the executors .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we are on the verge of a really historic round of accessions .
The European House can and will be extended eastwards .
At the same time , a further southwards expansion will enrich the European Union with two beautiful and culturally valuable island states , Malta and Cyprus .
It will not surprise you , however , if I now discuss one of these two states , namely Cyprus .
Cyprus is the candidate country that has made the most progress in adapting to the acquis communautaire .
That has already been pointed out .
We can therefore safely assume that Cyprus will be included in the first round of accessions and that the next European elections will also take place in Cyprus .
The question is : will all Cypriots , Greek and Turkish Cypriots alike , be able to take part in those elections ?
In other words , will the division of the island , which is contrary to international law , be overcome prior to accession ?
We want it to be .
We hope it will be .
It really is time that Europe 's last divided capital at last became a living capital again and that Cypriots of both ethnic groups could live together in Cyprus in peace .
I very much hope , as the President-in-Office of the Council has also made clear , that a political solution will be found by October at the latest .
The fact that direct negotiations are now taking place for the first time in many years shows that the accession process is having the catalytic effect we hoped for .
I also hope that Turkey , which is also a candidate country , understands that a solution for Cyprus is very much in Turkey 's interest and that Denktash cannot insist on a two state model .
It is in Europe 's as well as Cyprus ' interest that the solution should result in a state that is capable of acting and taking decisions at international and European level .
Cyprus must speak with one voice .
If such a solution is not achieved by October , then we must try to ensure that Cyprus ' accession or membership acts as a catalyst for a solution , because the overwhelming majority of Turkish Cypriots want to belong to the European Union and they also want to be able to live in a free Cyprus after accession .
Madam President , now that enlargement is approaching , a lot of people are getting cold feet , and concern is growing in both the present EU and in the candidate countries .
What we have all dreamed about and fought for over so many years - a unified Europe - is on the verge of being achieved , and there is nothing odd about the fact that the questions are accumulating .
In the candidate countries where referendums are to be held , a lot of people are probably wondering what they are getting themselves into .
Many questions are being raised within the EU about costs and about how the EU is going to be able to function .
Extremist parties are exploiting enlargement in their policies and playing upon people 's fear of the unknown .
Political leadership is therefore required more than ever .
The leaders of the candidate countries must resolutely continue with the required reforms before the negotiations can be concluded .
They have done an impressive job , and a number of questions still remain .
It is a question of never giving up and of being honest .
A number of domestic problems will still remain following membership , for there is a life after the accession date too .
Those of us within the EU also have a big responsibility : to tell people about the huge importance of enlargement and about what is at stake .
Who believed that enlargement would be cost-free ?
Clearly , enlargement has its price , but in the long term we are all winners .
We must also prepare a reserve plan to cover the contingency of there being a ' no ' vote in Ireland .
I believe the European Parliament has accepted its responsibility .
We have stubbornly pushed ahead with the enlargement process , set a definite date for this and carefully reviewed progress .
In the report we are now adopting , it is crystal-clear that we support enlargement , at the same time as highlighting a number of problems .
We too have a responsibility to convince people of this historic task .
It is an historic opportunity to unite the whole continent .
Together , we can solve common problems relating to environmental damage , crime , growth , security and the safeguarding of democracy and human values .
A short time remains , and I am convinced that the Copenhagen Summit in December will be an historic occasion and lead to the EU 's biggest and most important enlargement so far .
Enlargement is irrevocable and absolutely necessary .
The alternative is chaos , uncertainty and a fatal division of Europe .
Madam President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , we as the European Free Alliance are in favour of enlargement .
This is not so much because we would like to have a bigger market , but because the European Union appears to be capable of guaranteeing peace and stability , albeit within its own borders , but not outside of those , unfortunately .
It could serve as a model for conflict prevention , in other words , and we would like to see this model enlarged .
Mr Brok and the co-rapporteurs , whom we would like to congratulate , have demonstrated in this report the enormous progress that has been made , but unfortunately , many candidate countries are still facing shortcomings in terms of administrative capacity and independent jurisdiction , but also in terms of independent police and independent media .
Mafia and corruption still remain a curse .
Many countries have regional differences in fighting these , for which no instruments are actually available .
We would draw your attention particularly to human rights and minorities .
One of these minorities who live in abject misery are , of course , the Roma in various candidate countries .
They often live in appalling conditions with poor housing , a high level of unemployment and low educational standards .
Although plans are in preparation in most countries , the effective involvement of this minority often remains a problem .
The positive regard for the Roma culture could be a key to the emancipation and integration of that community .
Accountability of the Roma and their participation in the implementation of the projects which are set up by the European Union itself should be the norm .
Furthermore , the Roma are , of course , a European nation without a state , and they are , as such , our joint responsibility .
But other minorities too often experience a lack of appreciation and recognition of their identities .
Their fate is often heavily marked by history .
There are scars and wounds that have not healed .
One of the consequences is the criticism of some of the effects which the Bene ? decrees have had , to which also Commissioner Verheugen referred .
Accession to the Union can offer minorities hope for the future in which borders become less important and peoples can join forces across the borders .
Finally , a whole host of small countries will be joining after the accession , and this will place the need for a new view of peoples without a state and regional participation in a new light .
Madam President , it was decided in Nice that accession negotiations must be completed by the end of the year so that , if required , the necessary codetermination rights can be exercised in the national parliaments in the course of 2003 .
In the complex documentation accompanying accession negotiations , the chapters on agriculture , finance and regional policy in particular have attracted a lot of public interest .
People - by which I mean explicitly the citizens of the EU - are paying more attention to these things than ever before .
At this point I would like to ask the Commission to give the Info-Points Europe , where they exist , more money so they can perform their current tasks .
The present proposal to phase in direct aids to farmers by 2013 cannot be the last word .
This model is not convincing because it lacks sufficient justification .
The European reference yield , only 2.96 in Poland 's case for example , used as the basis for payment of direct aid is more than just an ugly detail .
That is not the way to encourage viability and sustainability of agriculture in the candidate countries .
My group believes that European agricultural policy cannot operate two policies in the long term .
My group also wants to see the candidate countries ' integration into the common agricultural policy organised in tune with those countries ' specific macroeconomic trends with special attention paid to social needs .
EU enlargement can be achieved only by the EU , the Member States and their regions working together .
Development of the border regions is particularly important here .
All involved must intensify their efforts , but they need the close attention of the European Union and the nation states .
The current programme of economic development for the border regions , amounting to EUR 245 million , is not enough .
Its availability is tied to other flows into and out of the regions , placing an even greater burden on already weak local authorities .
But the EU budget is not under such pressure .
If the Council Presidency under Spanish Chairmanship is unable to agree a final figure for direct agricultural aids - because of impending elections as , alas , in Germany - then the last few months will be spent trying to catch up , and in my opinion there will only be losers .
Madam President , I shall deal with two main points in this question of enlargement .
Firstly , I should like put on the record of this House that the Treaty of Nice needs to be adopted by all existing Member States of the European Union to facilitate the enlargement of the European Union by ten countries , which we hope to see in the not too distant future .
I would hate anyone to misunderstand or misinterpret the decision of the Irish electorate not to approve the Treaty of Nice , because the Irish population in general , even those who oppose the adoption of the Treaty of Nice , is in favour of enlargement .
This House , as an institution , and the Irish people , need to guarantee that we can deliver on ratification of the Treaty of Nice in the short term .
The Irish Government will therefore be proposing a declaration in Seville on traditional Irish military neutrality , which I hope will be approved by other Member States .
My last point is that , in our negotiations with the accession countries , we should not stand in the way of their progress towards the adoption of the acquis communautaire .
We should not set up unfair barriers to their accession .
When these countries join the European Union they will bring a new impetus , a new ideology , and a new belief in the vision the founding fathers of the European Union had of a Europe of peace , prosperity , progress and respect for Europe 's diversity .
Enlargement is a great challenge that can only be met if all the players are ready .
I regret to say that this is far from being the case at the moment , particularly in the agriculture sector .
We want to integrate countries in which agriculture and exports are very important into the European Union , even though they have not to date adopted the Community acquis .
The Sapard programme has effectively failed and its future prospects are slim as certain countries will be unable to fulfil their cofinancing responsibilities .
At the moment , the farmers are worried .
Some of them , from both Member States and candidate countries , came to tell us this yesterday , and we must listen to them .
The candidate countries are afraid that the process of modernising agriculture might destabilise the rural economy .
They are opposed to the Commission proposals with regard to both direct payments and setting quotas .
Farmers in the Member States cannot agree to seeing their products rivalled by products that do not comply with the same health or environmental requirements .
In asking for transition periods , the candidate countries have acknowledged their difficulties , yet what will happen if the objectives of protecting biodiversity and fauna are added to the agricultural constraints prior to accession ?
In this context , it is difficult to assess the success of enlargement .
Exceeding the financial perspectives will not solve this .
I ask you , what purpose would be served by favouring a timetable ?
Therefore , let us be sensible and take the time to create the conditions necessary for successful accession .
By acting hastily , as is being proposed , we could ruin agriculture in both the Member States and the candidate countries .

Lastly , in Mr Olsson 's report , I cannot support item 24 , as I reject the idea of turning our farmers into gardeners and riding instructors , as it stipulates .
Our smaller farms participate fully in and are essential to production diversity , supply and rural development .
I think it is important , however , to emphasise item 20 , which reminds the Commission of the need to develop other activities in rural areas .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it is beyond question : there is no doubt as to the historic necessity of enlargement .
It is coming , that is a fact , and it is good that it is .
But it will not be a tragedy if we fail to stick precisely to 2004 as the accession date .
It is the quality of the process that is crucial , not the tempo .
The project 's success must be assured .
The report has many merits .
But I wish it had shown more political courage and been open about the problems we face .
I will mention two examples .
Firstly , there are no definite plans in place for financing enlargement beyond 2006 .
I think the practical constraints method is a dubious strategy .
The public needs to know what to expect .
They have a right to know .
This is not an intellectually specious argument , Commissioner .
Secondly , at the heart of it , the dispute about the Bene ? decrees is about the 1946 amnesty law .
We cannot allow history to be misused as an obstacle to enlargement .
But the amnesty law legitimises expulsion as an instrument of conflict resolution and expressly exempts crimes from punishment .
That is contrary to the ethical foundations of the EU , the principles of the European community of values and the Copenhagen criteria .
The Balkan conflict was about precisely the same thing : ethical and ethnic cleansing .
Anyone who plays down this conflict of values does Europe a disservice .
Right and wrong are indivisible and non-negotiable , whether in the past , in the present or in the future .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in my opinion there is still a great need for information about eastward enlargement in the EU Member States .
At least , that is what I find when meeting citizens at events in my constituency .
Today I would like to speak in particular about the challenge of agriculture and eastward enlargement .
I would like to congratulate Mr Olsson on his very good report on EU enlargement and agriculture .
How can the new Member States be successfully integrated into the common agricultural policy ?
That is a key question for most of the candidate countries and it is crucial because in the countries of central and eastern Europe agriculture accounts for a larger proportion of national income than the EU average .
The same is true of employment in the economy as a whole .
The accession of ten countries in 2004 will increase the agricultural area by 29 % and the number of agricultural holdings by 74 % .
But the number of consumers will increase by 24 % .
How can we best shape accession and integration in the long term ?
In my opinion , the countries of central and eastern Europe will and must press ahead with changing the structure of their agriculture .
The European agricultural model where farmers have the twin tasks of producing in some places and caring for the countryside in others must be applied in those countries too .
In my view , the high standards of hygiene in production and processing must apply from the first day of accession , otherwise European consumer policy will become a farce .
Environmental concerns and alternative jobs in rural areas must be funded from the second pillar of the common agricultural policy .
We agree that the Commission is taking the right approach there in aligning financial compensation payments gradually .
If we allowed too much money in at the start , agricultural structures there would be ossified , and that cannot be the right way for those concerned either .
While I believe our citizens do not know enough about eastern Europe , I also noted during the hearing that farmers in the candidate countries , too , still have a lot of public relations work to do at home .
Mrs Keppelhoff-Wiechert , you have by far exceeded the time allocated to you .
I hope that your fellow Members will not do the same .
Madam President , I wish to begin by paying tribute to Commissioner Verheugen , because it is down to his industry and determination that we are so close to grasping the prize of the reunification of Europe .
Credit should be given to his efforts .
I should also like to echo his opening words in relation to Lithuania .
The decision taken by the Lithuanian Government in relation to the closure of the Ignalina power station is an extremely brave one , as it is not in accordance with general public opinion in Lithuania , and illustrates just how determined the Lithuanians are to fulfil the EU entry requirements .
They have moved at tremendous speed in order to catch up , and it has been very difficult for them .
However , if accession were suddenly to disappear off the horizon , that decision by the Lithuanian Government and Parliament could well rebound on them and we could find accession moving further away and not closer .
It is vital to keep to the timetable and the road map .
We must not allow that timetable to be eroded .
If we slow down , some of the accession countries - for example , Hungary - will turn elsewhere , perhaps towards the United States rather than the European Union .
Political movements that we see within the European Union could well mean that we will be unable to proceed if we miss the Copenhagen Summit deadline .
As Commissioner Verheugen quite rightly said : we must take advantage of this window of opportunity before it is closed .
Or , as the late , great Elvis Presley said : " It 's now or never , ....
Tomorrow will be too late " .
History will not judge us extremely well if we fail to show the leadership and courage required at this moment .
That is not to suggest that we should somehow weaken our position in relation to our demands on the countries .
Each country must be judged on its own merit and keep to the criteria , in particular in relation to implementation and administrative capacity .
Let us look at individual countries .
The Czech Republic needs to reassure us that competition policy will be in line with EU competition policy and that public administration will be reformed .
Latvia has to make serious advances in the reform of its judicial system and in dealing with corruption .
I welcome Commissioner Verheugen 's plans in relation to Bulgaria and Romania , but we must also send out a message to Romania that it has to get its act together , otherwise it will seriously fall behind schedule .
The Brok report should be a warning to them in relation to corruption and reform of public administration .
Let us not forget that we have to convince the people that enlargement is in their interests .
We should stop talking about the problems of enlargement and remind people that enlargement is a solution to many of those problems .
Madam President , firstly I would like to thank the rapporteurs for their excellent reports .
Enlargement is a huge political and historical event but it is also the biggest objective regarding development cooperation the Member States have ever committed themselves to .
For that reason its success requires mutual cooperation and trust .
The Commission 's proposals on financing enlargement are realistic and even rather shrewd .
The new Member States need support ; the principle whereby they immediately become net beneficiaries is the correct one , as it takes into consideration their solvency rating .
Likewise , there is no intention to reduce the income of farmers in the new Member States but put it on a growth track . It is just as clear , however , that the financial burden of the present Member States cannot be suddenly increased .
For that reason , phased-in implementation is the right way to proceed .
I wish to draw attention to one matter .
The new Member States are attractive agricultural countries in terms of their natural conditions . The price of land is low in these countries .
Rates of pay are 10 - 20 % of the EU average , and the EU is furthermore intending to support up to 80 % of investments in association with the Member State in question .
For that reason my question relates to family farming .
Does the EU intend to support industrial agriculture in the same way as family farming or is the intention to implement aid and modulations in one form or another that decrease with size ?
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , sometimes , it is time to dust down the old classic .
A spectre is haunting Europe , the spectre of fear , the fear of enlargement which is trapping an increasing number of politicians in its power .
Fear that enlargement will be too fast after all , or that it will be too costly after all , or both .
Politicians across the political divide are starting to become anxious .
Old and new arguments are being tabled , often under the guise that we now finally want to listen to the voice of the people , thus reinforcing the impression that many politicians do not know exactly what they have been doing up to now and are now starting to tense up right before the final exam .
They tense up because they are starting to realise that they have done too little to convince their electorate that enlargement is very much a positive step , both for the inhabitants of the Member States and those of the candidate countries .
In this chorus of sceptics , a number of voices are becoming ever louder .
One objection , for example , is that agricultural reform should be complete before we can enlarge .
Let there be no mistake about this : reform is desperately needed .
The common agricultural policy must be reformed .
The European Parliament should continue to demand this , without any concessions .
However , without enlargement , the reform of agricultural policy will not take place .
To prescribe this reform now as a condition for approval of enlargement is tantamount to creating not a win-win situation , but a lose-lose situation .
Who would benefit from this , except for those opposed to reforms and to enlargement ?
Another argument which is heard increasingly frequently is that the EU itself should undergo internal reform first .
This too is desperately needed , but please let us not resort to blackmail .
It is unacceptable for the candidate countries to be taken hostage because we have not completed all our tasks .
Here too , delay of enlargement means delay of necessary reforms .
After all , these have never come about without extreme pressure yet .
I would like to quote another argument that is increasingly common these days , namely that human rights are being violated in the candidate countries .
That too is true , let there be no misunderstanding about this .
In those countries , the rights of the Roma and those of homosexuals , for example , leave a great deal to be desired .
It is extremely important for this to be denounced .
My group has been doing this for years ; this is something altogether different from brushing problems under the carpet .
But here too , it is true , and I am convinced of this , that these problems that are very much there can best be solved if those countries become EU Members and if they are not kept in isolation .
We are not bureaucrats , we are politicians .
This is not about ticking a list and automatically giving a fail if five minuses appear on that list .
We are in favour of weighing up the situation .
What has happened , what needs to happen and what is the most demanding part ?
Ladies and gentlemen , Madam President , we should all ensure that the completion of enlargement in the next few months does not lead to one large European coitus interruptus , because that would be wholly unsatisfactory .
Madam President , three points .
First , enlargement is in fact an historical venture , but for a new Europe , not so that certain factions can rewrite post-war history .
Any attempts to do so must be rejected ; they are odious , irrespective of whether they emanate from the candidate countries or from members of the Union .
I detected a great deal of anxiety in Mr Verheugen 's speech ; I only hope it will prove to be unfounded .
My second point is that we are negotiating with twelve countries .
Does that mean Bulgaria and Romania have no further prospects of accession ?
Will their accession depend at some point on the veto of one of the present candidates ?
You said , Commissioner , that we have to give them some sort of clear signal , but what exactly ?
This lack of clarity pains me , as does the fact that nothing has been said about the accession prospects of the rest of the Balkans in the more distant future .
My final point concerns Cyprus .
The Commissioner has asked for Turkey to exert its influence so that some sort of solution can be found .
Who is it supposed to exert this influence on ?
What a pity Mr de Miguel did not meet the commander of the Turkish forces when he visited the occupied part of Cyprus .
He might have been able to tell us more .
Mr President , I compliment Mr Olsson on his work and may I commence by again putting on the record my support , and that of my Irish colleagues , for EU enlargement .
For the candidate countries of central and eastern Europe , the academic debate should be well and truly over .
We must now proceed in a planned way with their integration .
I compliment the candidate countries on their efforts to conform to the stringent requirements for entry .
For some of them it has been , and continues to be , difficult .
From an agricultural perspective , Mr Olsson has addressed the challenge of enlargement in a reasoned and practical way .
For me , integration depends on our success in fusing the agricultural economies of candidate countries with existing Member States in a manner that causes least disruption to both and in time provides for their full participation in the common agricultural policy .
Anything short of that would undermine the principles of CAP that , by and large , have served European farmers and consumers well .
As we face a mid-term review of the Berlin agreement and the inevitable long term CAP reform , we must not allow the review to deviate from what was agreed in Berlin or to contemplate a move towards re-nationalisation of CAP in future reform .
Farming in Europe as evidenced by yesterday 's 15,000 farmer demonstration continues to be difficult .
With the benefit of hindsight we have not in the context of world trade provided the degree of protection necessary for our farmers from the obvious unfair competition and market manipulation by our competitors .
With the completion of enlargement , Europe has the potential to be a dominant player in world trade .
We will only succeed , however , if we are committed in the short term to supporting the European model based on family farming .
I alert the House , not for the first time , to the serious threat to the survival of that model because of long-term uncertainty and the availability of alternative , attractive and more financially rewarding employment for young people who would in normal circumstances take up farming as a career .
Madam President , it is a measure of the ideological poverty of the European Union that anyone can , with a straight face , still talk about success and the CAP in the same sentence .
As the common fisheries policy is widely acknowledged as having been disastrous , so too is the CAP .
The central fault of the CAP is that it is a common policy , and it is not possible to have one policy covering sub-Arctic Finland , the temperate grasslands of Cheshire , the wine growers of Bordeaux , the arid near-subtropical vegetable growers of Catalonia , or the sheep producers of the mountains of Greece , much less the highly populous Denmark which produces more pigs than people .
But the other major fault of the CAP is that it is an agricultural policy .
As demonstrated during the foot-and-mouth crisis in our country , agriculture is an integral part of the rural economy .
There is massive interdependence between farming and its rural infrastructure .
Support one part without taking into account the needs of the other and you can create damaging distortions , which is exactly what has happened .
Enlargement would have been an opportunity to have started with a clean sheet , but it was missed with Agenda 2000 's so-called reforms ; and it will be missed again .
Now the disaster is to be imposed on the enlargement countries .
This you will have cause to regret .
Madam President , incoming members need to realise that their membership of the EU will not remove the great difficulties they already have in their agriculture industries .
Farmers already in the EU are facing terrifying difficulties .
In Northern Ireland we are going through a grave crisis .
As a result of five increases , export refunds on skimmed milk have risen from EUR 0 to 650 per tonne .
55 percent of all our milk is processed as skimmed milk .
Milk prices have plummeted to 14.5 pence per litre , a loss of 4 pence per litre for all milk producers .
Only a breakthrough into the export market can save us .
Agriculture is facing catastrophe in Europe , both inside and outside this Union , and it should be at the top of the agenda in this discussion .
Madam President , I am delivering an opinion of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development on the Bge report , and this gives me a further opportunity to speak about the transfer of direct payments .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development welcomes the Commission proposal that there should now be some phasing-in of direct payments , but it also believes that this must not be allowed to stand in the way of a restructuring of aids in the upcoming reform .
We do not believe it will , however , because the 35 % given leave room for manoeuvre .
The report speaks of reaching 100 % by 2013 , but it does not say what reaching 100 % in 2013 means .
If the last reform had had the 45 % modulation in the upper range that was once mooted , we would now have a difference of 35 % to 55 % .
That would not be so great .
We are therefore looking to the Commission to make proposals towards reform in the near future , which , as Mr Cohn-Bendit has said , will make enlargement both possible and stable .
We also believe the proposal to make direct payments to semi-subsistence farmers is a sensible one , but we suggest this be raised from EUR 750 to EUR 1 500 .
That would entitle 5-6 ha holdings to the full compensation payment .
In Poland that would be approximately 50 % of holdings .
So it includes the phasing-in , the social component .
We can see there is room for manoeuvre here .
Something we particularly welcome and call for is greater investment in the second pillar when money is reallocated .
That is money that is needed first and foremost in the candidate countries .
It is palpably obvious that rural areas there need development .
Commissioner Fischler , I am referring here once again - as I think Mr Grlach has already done - to the ' bottom-up ' approach and to our Sapard programme in Leader form , where the Commission has so far stubbornly refused to underpin this with legislation .
We say it is urgently necessary that civil forces in the candidate countries should also be involved in the work of these projects so that people will feel happier about the European Union and we can lean back rather more contentedly and calmly when they come to vote on it .
So I urge you once again , Commissioner Fischler , to get your bureaucracy moving .
There are precedents .
You only need to follow them .
And we are always ready to help you .
Madam President , first I should like to congratulate the rapporteurs on their overall presentation of progress in negotiations with the candidate countries .
However , we must also congratulate the candidate countries on the results of their efforts , from Cyprus for being at the top of the league , to Turkey on the constitutional reforms which it has started and which we must encourage it to continue if the Cyprus question is to be resolved and peace restored to the area .
Ladies and gentlemen , the announcements and positions we have heard reflect the commitment of all of us to the historic venture which the enlargement of the European Union represents .
But we also have a vision of this venture as a humane , democratic and just venture for all the nations and citizens involved .
This being so , we think it is very important , nay vital that we examine the issue of gender equality in the candidate countries .
We need to promise to make this issue an accession criterion , not put it on the back burner until after accession .
Similarly , we need to promise to assist with the policies and funds needed to encourage and facilitate reform in the candidate countries in this sector .
In its opinion , the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities identifies the problems which women face today and the policies which need to be applied in order to wipe out discrimination in all sectors , so that more women are involved in shaping and making decisions on social , political and economic life .
We should also point out that , where reforms are being introduced , suitable institutional and administrative mechanisms and the funds are lacking or the laws passed are not applied .
We need to voice these concerns and our commitment to promoting gender equality as an accession criterion in tomorrow 's vote .
This new European world which is being born also belongs to women and we must give them every opportunity to make a contribution to it and enjoy their fair share of the benefits of this joint endeavour .
Madam President , enlargement is work on behalf of peace , stability and civil rights .
If the applicant countries were not to be included , Central and Eastern Europe could see unrest , dictatorships and large-scale uncontrolled migration start to emerge .
Let us not forget how , for what appear to be insignificant reasons , racism , xenophobia , and discrimination can flare up in democratic elections in democratic countries , such as Austria , Holland and France .
If we cannot effect controlled enlargement , with the approval of the people , there is a danger that we will see the Union rocked by extremist political eruptions .
These may well be something even bigger than the current policy on immigration or questions of security .
I would remind everyone that we are admitting around 100 million people to the Union at one time .
That is almost 30 % of our present population . They will represent approximately 5 % of the figure for GNP .
Significantly poorer people will therefore be amongst us and also competing for jobs .
To prevent the populist extreme right from rising any further it is vital for the new Member States to be admitted as members in a controlled way that benefits everyone .
Some very well educated people from the new countries will also be joining us .
We shall be greatly enriched culturally .
That will be important in a time of content production and an information-based economy .
We shall also have to deal with a negative tradition : there is no great respect for the law everywhere as , during the time of the Soviet Union , it was interpreted arbitrarily .
By the end of the year the candidate countries should have produced a report on the corruption and crime that exist there .
The implementation of EU legislation must likewise be properly verified .
Finally , as a solution to the heated argument over Kaliningrad , I would propose that the Russians should go there by train .
We have seen that before .
The buses could also be watched .
I would have asked Commissioner Verheugen about this but he has just gone to the swimming pool . Perhaps his advisor will take this question .
Would that be all right ?
Many Russians are in favour of this idea .
Madam President , I want to highlight Paragraph 26 of Mr Olsson 's report on agriculture and enlargement .
It is a question of taking the initiative and holding talks with the candidate countries about what a reform of the EU 's agricultural policy is to look like .
Having myself worked on the food safety package for nearly three years now , I have reflected upon the incredible degree to which the reform will affect each and every one of the candidate countries .
It is important that they should be involved now and that they should be able to contribute to shaping the European Union and the policy they will in actual fact have to live with .
I am sure they all realise that the form of the policy that is to replace Agenda 2000 is more important to them than which cash subsidies they receive in the course of the year or two prior to the changeover .
Madam President , what is happening with the agriculture dossier in the negotiations for accession is a clear example of the insistence on pursuing a process of enlargement on the basis of a Community financial framework that does not guarantee the principle of economic and social cohesion , given that the financial framework of Agenda 2000 was only designed for six candidates - whereas there are now ten - with a per capita income of around 40 % of the European Union average .
This situation affects farming , in particular , because of the well-known weaknesses of a sector which is important for employment and the economy of various candidate countries .
The situation has a considerable socio-economic impact on the candidate countries , entails additional costs and also requires a revision of the financial perspectives in order to ensure that it is not the most badly affected or least developed countries that foot the bill .
This is why dividing Member States into first and second class when it comes to aid is unacceptable , as are quotas that fall well short of their capacities and needs .
The consequences of this situation would be an increase in unemployment and poverty - something we cannot accept .
Rural development and the protection of a high-quality farm production system require a revision of the CAP and not the renationalisation of its costs , which would harm not only the farmers of those countries but also the farmers of countries such as Portugal , whose system of farming is more vulnerable .
Madam President , I fully agree with the rapporteur that the package of measures from the Commission is a first step towards tackling the specific problems of the border regions , because we are taking a step back into the past , when the current borders of Member States were in many cases inside the old Austro-Hungarian and Ottoman Empires .
Though the Regio projects cited by the rapporteur as good examples to be followed might be of some help , it is clear that a broader approach is needed to the specific problems of some of the border regions .
We have to be aware that , as was previously emphasised by Mrs Maes , ' border regions ' is often a euphemism for national minorities .
Madam President , the financial and budgetary consequences of enlargement must be debated in the light of the fact that we are facing a moral imperative and an inalienable political priority , because this project of living together goes beyond the fields of business and finance .
The difficulties do not come from the Spanish Presidency or from the Commission or from this Parliament .
The Spanish Presidency has kept to the road map and is making every effort to unblock the unsettled matter of agriculture and to leave the timetable clear , in order to comply with the timescale proposed in Gothenburg .
As has been pointed out , the countries that put obstacles in the way of a consensus to adopt a common position will have to explain why enlargement should take place not according to the established timetable but at a speed dictated by their interests .
At these times , we must clear away doubts and help change a negative attitude , which is strongest in those countries which , right now , are blocking agreement in the chapter on agriculture and calling into question direct aids for agriculture , either through attempting to clear the financial horizon beyond 2006 or by questioning their inclusion in the Community acquis .
The proposal which Parliament supports , following the Commission 's line , and which is contained in the Bge report , is balanced , complies with the acquis and is compatible with the budget ceilings set in Berlin .
It includes highly positive aspects , such as support for the phasing-in model for including the new Member States in direct aid payments , remembering that they form part of the acquis , and the phasing-in of the structural operations , but this must be compatible with an effective absorption capacity of the new Member States .
A few years ago , Madam President , the Eastern European countries were totalitarian dictatorships with planned economies .
The changes that have taken place are so profound that we cannot allow ourselves to paralyse this march towards freedom just because some wish to ensure a reduction in their contribution to the Community coffers after 2006 .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , enlargement of the European Union is for me one of the greatest challenges of the next few years .
I agree with the Commissioner that we should not get cold feet now , simply because we now have the difficult chapters to negotiate and each of the members and candidates are of course defending their own interests with vehemence and conviction .
We should not lose sight of 2004 , because the new Commission starts work in 2005 and the new commissioners from the new Member States would already have to be represented here by then .
Whether there will be a ' big bang ' - as we say - with the ten familiar countries , we do not know , but we should not cherish the hope , either , that we will be able to conduct several mini-rounds in the next few years .
A bold step must be taken in 2004 .
At any rate , that remains our objective .
Of course it would be easier for us if we had already implemented many reforms .
But I do not see that as a major problem , because the fact that we are faced with the great task of enlargement may perhaps even result in reform , especially of agricultural and regional policy , being carried through with greater vehemence .
I do not see any contradiction here .
Have the candidate countries now satisfied all the criteria ?
As we see it , there is certainly still a lot to be done .
In many countries transposition of the acquis communautaire is still far from adequate .
Deciding things is one thing , putting them into practice is another .
Many countries still have discriminatory rules regarding origin and gender , but that can be dealt with .
Poor use is sometimes made of financial resources .
But I also recall that even after accession my country , for example , did not take up and use all the financial resources it could have had from Brussels .
We should not apply over strict criteria here .
Something needs to be done about the promises concerning the environment , especially about the restructuring and closure of nuclear power plants , but some good progress has also been made .
With good will , all these problems can be overcome in the months ahead .
And I want to expressly say that I do not regard history , which in many cases was one of conflict and not of commonality , as a reason to block enlargement .
If , on the one hand , the nationalists there are can see that the expulsions after 1945 were a consequence of the terrible Nazi dictatorship , and if the others recognise that today , I stress today , the expulsion of minorities as happened by the consensus of the victorious powers after the Second World War , is no longer consistent with our present understanding of minority rights , then this question , too , does not stand in the way of enlargement .
Finally , we will not move forward without compromise .
If , as sometimes happens , the EU Member States demand that the candidates fulfil all the criteria and that they reach the level of the Member States one hundred percent , or if they sometimes go even so far as to demand that they do better than the Member States , then of course enlargement will fail .
It will also fail if the candidates demand to receive the full extent of all support measures right from the start .
But we want success , success in 2004 , no failure and no delay .
Mr President , while fully supporting the accession of Cyprus , I question whether the Union is trying hard enough to bring about a settlement of the dispute .
The minister says that he supports the UN and is monitoring the talks , but why is he not offering the services of the Council in trying to broker a solution ?
Why are the Commission and the Council blocking the opening up of trade with the North ?
It is only the pro-active involvement of Europe that will assure the two sides that Union membership profoundly and radically changes the context of their mutual relationship .
Conflict resolution should be at the centre of the Cypriot accession and the Union should prove itself far more creative , and even ingenious , than it has been so far .
Mr President , the enlargement of the Union is a political project .
The states that have applied for membership will start to say from the beginning of autumn that the terms and conditions of membership suit them and at that stage the process will be unstoppable .
The EU will then have to yield to the terms imposed by Poland , the last country to resist acceptance .
As for the question of financing enlargement , many net beneficiaries might feel that they are the ones that are having to pay for it .
The amount they receive in net benefits from the Union will fall .
In fact the budget frameworks for the years 2007 - 2013 should be drawn up while the enlargement negotiations continue so that they are aware of the situation before the decisive decisions are taken .
The Treaty of Nice makes that difficult , of course , as certain net beneficiaries saw their demands for unanimous decision-making accepted at Nice .
In connection with enlargement , the insistence that Ireland should hold a new referendum on the Treaty of Nice is putting unreasonable pressure on that country and clearly shows how undemocratic the EU is in its attitude to small Member States .
All the necessary regulations can be recorded in the accession treaty and to Ireland we send our friendly greetings : no means no !
Mr President , enlargement is our way of demonstrating our solidarity with eastern Europe , Malta and Cyprus , which will soon be members of the European Union .
As regards Cyprus , which the previous speaker mentioned , I should like to say that the faster Turkey understands where Europe stands today , the more it will be able to help , not just in resolving the problems in Cyprus , but with its own European prospects .
The universe is not conspiring against it ; on the contrary , sometimes Turkey itself undermines its own European prospects .
Now , one specific European Union policy which illustrates the solidarity of the richer with the poorer is obviously the policy of the Structural Funds , which apply to both present and future Member States .
So , to turn to the report by Mr Turco , and may I offer my congratulations to Mr Turco , what I want to say is that , clearly , the current Member States were slow getting started in 2000 - it was mainly the Member States which were to blame , although I do not entirely absolve the European Commission - and Community initiatives are even slower getting started .
As regards the pre-accession instrument , the ISPA , unfortunately this too has been slow getting started , although we must admit that it strikes a balance between measures on transport and measures on the environment .
However , what we must bear in mind is that the ISPA is not just a funding instrument , it is a way of familiarising these countries with the European Union 's way of thinking .
So , as far as funding is concerned , whether we are talking about the Structural Funds or farming , we must demonstrate our support for those who are shortly to become members of the European Union by being generous up to a point ; however , they too must do what they can , not just in taking up the funds but in making the best possible use of them .
Mr President , I should first like to thank both the Presidency and the Commission .
In my opinion , they have both done a splendid piece of work over a long period . I find it very encouraging that the timetable for the negotiations with the candidate countries looks as if it will be kept to , so that the negotiations concerning ten countries can be concluded by December under the Danish Presidency .
The candidate countries have made a great effort to comply with the Copenhagen Criteria and implement the EU 's regulations .
One crucial thing is now missing , namely a strengthening of the administrative capacity or management structure so that the legislation can also responsibly be put into effect .
I would again praise the Commission for its action programme for developing administrative capacity . In my view , this has been a big help to many candidate countries .
The ten candidate countries will probably be ready , but rather more doubts can be entertained about the EU 's own preparedness .
I think this is cause for concern , not because of either the Commission 's or the Spanish Presidency 's handling of the matter but because we are in the grotesque situation in which the Fifteen have still not been able to reach agreement on a common position regarding the issue of direct aid to agriculture , and the divisions between the EU countries are particularly striking in this area .
Until such time , furthermore , as there is a common position , we must stick to the Commission 's proposal in the area of agriculture , which I should like , moreover , to applaud .
It is a sensible and very balanced proposal which can also ensure that the competitive situation for both Polish and other farmers is fair and just , without the EU 's funds drying up in the course of a few years .
I think it is also right constantly to emphasise that enlargement and the forthcoming agricultural reform should be kept separate .
In my opinion , it would be an historic mistake if the candidate countries were to be turned into hostages of the Member States ' own internal disagreements .
I have great confidence that the Danish Presidency , together with the Commission , can take over the issue and that , jointly , they will do their utmost to remove the remaining sticking points so that the dream we all have of a Europe characterised by close cooperation can become a reality .
Mr President , it has been gratifying in the course of this debate to note Parliament 's overwhelming endorsement of enlargement .
The circle from Copenhagen to Copenhagen is about to be closed .
If you come , as I do , from Copenhagen , the delight is naturally that much greater . Nor , then , shall I conceal my pleasure at coming from a country which , according to the opinion polls , is the country which puts enlargement highest on the agenda .
It is encouraging to hear from Mr de Miguel about the considerable progress that has been made during the Spanish Presidency .
We must express our thanks for the significant contribution that has been made , just as we must thank Commissioner Verheugen for his tireless efforts .
We have also heard about the hurdles which remain and which must be overcome : agricultural policy , Kaliningrad , the Cyprus issue and the Bene ? decrees .
The question is , whether the Netherlands , Sweden , Germany and Great Britain are to be added to the list .
Do not allow them to stand in the way . Let us not lose this historic opportunity to reunify Europe for the sake of freedom , peace and security .
Like others , the Danish Presidency too has a three-word motto or slogan .
It is ' enlargement , enlargement , enlargement ' .
After today 's debate , it could be Parliament 's agenda .
Mr President , I would like to start by congratulating Mr Bge and Mr Brok and the other Members who helped to produce these reports .
They are important reports with which I identify .
I have also listened with great interest to what Mr de Miguel and Commissioner Verheugen have said .
I would like to focus on the factors which might have been slightly overlooked .
One of these is the approval of the Irish referendum ; we must endeavour to work out what might happen in the future .
If it is not approved , which I am sure nobody wants , we cannot tell the candidate countries , after all their efforts , that it was just a joke .
This is undeniably an historic opportunity for Europe to be reconciled with its past .
It is clear that a response needs to be found in any case and it is right that we reflect on this .
The other factor is the cost of enlargement , which should be compared with the cost of not going through with enlargement .
Anyone who thinks that enlargement does not involve higher costs has quite frankly not done his sums properly .
Clearly , we also need to make the public understand the reasons behind some of our decisions .
The issue of upstream decisions , with which our citizens are quite unfamiliar and to which they are largely opposed , was mentioned just now , and rightly so .
Here , however , greater effort may be needed on the part of all the European institutions , not just Parliament and the Commission , for it is unthinkable that enlargement should be reduced to merely the opening or closure of a set of dossiers .
It is a decision that must have the backing of our fellow citizens but it is an opportunity which we cannot consider rejecting if we genuinely want positive developments for the future .
Mr President , first of all I must say that the goal of enlarging the European Union is as fundamental as the goal of deepening it .
In this respect I agree entirely with the report drawn up by Mr Brok , whom I congratulate .
In any case , I want to focus on one of the candidate countries : Bulgaria .
In my view , Bulgaria has been approaching the process of joining the European Union very seriously since political stability was achieved with the last elections .
I must therefore state that the Bulgarian authorities are making a great effort to continue in the right direction with the enlargement negotiations and the country 's specific adaptations so that it can become a European Union Member State within a timeframe that is both convenient for Bulgaria and possible for the Union .
We all want this timeframe to be as short as possible , although , as we say in Spanish , ' the sun is not hurried by early risers ' .
Nevertheless , I want to emphasise certain aspects that worry us .
First , the social aspect : of course the Bulgarian economy has to adapt , but it must be done by keeping the basic principles of social cohesion , such as the fight for equality and against unemployment , poverty and marginalisation , to promote jobs , benefits and social security .
On the matter of the environment , we highlight the need for all units at the Kozloduy nuclear plant to be closed down by the appropriate dates and also for the Bulgarian Government to make a firm commitment to environmental protection .
Lastly , we urge the government to remove all legal obstacles that still allow people to be marginalised , because of their sexual orientation , for instance .
It is unacceptable that articles like Article 157 should still be in force in the Bulgarian legal code .
Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , for me the year 2002 is one of the most decisive and historically significant years in the development of the European Union .
As the European Parliament , we want to make a full and complete contribution to peaceful enlargement .
Negotiations of individual chapters are making good progress in many fields and the Council presidency is really making every effort to get formal negotiations with the candidate countries concluded by the end of the year .
The agricultural chapter is one of the biggest topics for negotiation and along with regional policy and budget matters certainly one of the most difficult areas .
For me , one of the most important points is still the much criticised question of phasing-in the countries seeking accession .
But I fully support the Commission proposal concerning phasing-in .
Particular attention also needs to be paid to ensuring that the acquis communautaire is actually transposed into practice .
Only products that satisfy the same requirements as those of the EU Fifteen must be allowed on to the internal market .
The quota system must be maintained as an important instrument of control for that .
I would also like to stress how deplorable it is that such slow progress is being made with setting up Sapard payment agencies .
So far , they have been set up in only seven candidate countries and regrettably only a small amount of the funding has been disbursed since Sapard was implemented in the 2000 financial year .
We must do more to encourage the new Member States to create the administrative conditions necessary for adequate financial management for decentral administration without losing sight of the targeted nature of the aids .
On the other hand , I am glad that the Commission is aware of the difficult situation in the border regions and is investigating the socio-economic situation in those regions .
I personally welcome that very much and would like to say in conclusion that a common Europe can only come about through intensive cooperation and that the European model of agricultural policy must also be safeguarded for the future .
Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , I speak as someone who is involved with setting the Budget , and people in that position sometimes have the feeling that they have to start by saying very clearly that we , too , who are involved with the financial side of enlargement , are in complete support of that enlargement .
We know it is not only a question of money ; it goes far beyond that .
It is a question of peace on this continent , a question of standards , a question of security for the people who live all over this continent .
If we are to meet a challenge as great as the one before us , we must not only have the political will , but we must also ensure that the policies we make are backed by those for whom we make them , namely the people .
That means they must have confidence , and confidence exists when they have the feeling that things are also being handled in a proper and orderly way when it comes to funding these issues .
In that connection we must say that this enlargement will demand something of everyone .
Those who dream of advancing without any difficulties through landscapes in bloom fail to understand the matter .
We want to subject the financing of enlargement to very precise tests , which means that we are not issuing any blank cheques for the acceding countries , but we do not want to set up any hurdles either .
We very much welcome what the Commission has proposed .
In the matter of the structural funds , one of the areas where most expenditure is made , we are pleased that it has followed the approach taken by Parliament and intends to adopt a Regulation similar to what we are doing with the cohesion fund in order to make it easier for the candidate countries to absorb the funds .
But we also say very clearly at this point that this model is a model for transition .
We will not be creating a cohesion fund here that , in the future , will give rise to another model or to another fund that will then never run out but , insofar as it is possible to move over to the normal structural fund , that is what we shall have to do .
In the area of agricultural aids we support the Commission .
We agree that the rural areas should be seen as targeted units .
We also believe that direct aids are now part of agricultural incomes and that up until 2006 there is a simple model that can be funded , is clear and that we can also support .
For the time after that we shall have to give thought to how it is to look .
There are no blank cheques today , because we know the financial framework only up to 2006 .
At this point we can guarantee full support .
After that , it will be necessary to think again .
But that also demands something of those conducting the negotiations .
We will give them very critical but constructive support .
We take a similar position on foreign policy .
Anyone looking at future developments in external aid must count on things happening that cannot be foreseen today . As an example I will simply mention Kaliningrad .
Here we shall of course also be subjecting the European Union 's external aids to very critical scrutiny , but we are very much convinced that this is possible and that , here , too , we will be able to make progress accordingly .
Citizens can be assured that between now and 2006 there will be no discernible problems .
For the time after that there will have to be proper negotiations .
All who sit round the table carry a heavy responsibility .
As a Parliament we will have a part in deciding how things will move forward , and we will be looking at that very closely .
But we will also be following these questions very positively because we believe that European Union enlargement is the task of the future to which we must apply ourselves , where everyone must know where we are heading , where we must first talk about how much we are prepared to pay , but we will always take a constructive and positive attitude , as we have up until now .
Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , I am going to talk about the administration of the EU structural fund , something which is more than in need of improvement .
This is not only in the light of enlargement , as the 12th Annual Report on the Structural Funds 2000 , the Cohesion Fund and the Instrument for Structural Policy for Pre-Accession shows , as the rapporteur has rightly said , that there is substantial underutilisation of commitment and payment appropriations .
Despite the lowering of targets , concentration and simplification of planning , take up of the new forms of intervention for the structural fund planning period has been much slower than was intended and was desirable .
Even if EU Finance Ministers are currently pleased at every euro that is not spent at EU level , since it eases the burden of the EU Member States ' net payments in the short term , they are economising in the wrong place because EU money is urgently needed especially in times of rising unemployment .
The reasons for the difficulties must be sought both in the Member States and in the EU Commission .
In some cases there is a shortage of suitable projects .
Not infrequently the problem is the necessary cofinancing .
But appreciable administrative bottlenecks are also a reason why the Member States are unable to take up funding .
According to the Annual Report 2000 , not one intervention was approved in connection with the new Community initiatives , and as a result 0 % of the budget plan was implemented in this area .
That is atrocious !
In future , the Commission must ensure that the new planning period starts on time and it must insist that the Member States do their groundwork early .
On the other hand , the Commission must also intensify its scrutiny of the implementation of programmes and inform the European Parliament in good time of all irregularities found .
Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , it has been pointed out several times today already , and I can only emphasise it , that the advantages of EU eastward enlargement naturally outweigh the disadvantages and that many will gain from it .
But there are also problems and we cannot disregard those problems if , as Mr Walter has just said , we want to take the citizens with us .
That is particularly so at the interfaces of enlargement , that is the border regions .
Many border regions are already marginal areas with large structural deficits .
It is for that reason that we cannot leave those regions alone .
That is why , among other things , we have Community action for border regions , which I consider to be a very good instrument .
The main section relates to transport .
As we also made clear in the Sommer report , we must give regional transport a central place in that .
It is not enough only to invest in TENs , because it is not only about ways from Warsaw to Berlin or from Vienna to Prague , but it is also about ways from one small town over here to another small town over there .
This brings me to the second key area mentioned in this Community action , namely support for small and medium-sized enterprises .
Cross-border trade is a necessary step .
There is now a pilot scheme that has at last got going and I hope it will be a great success .
But we will only be successful if we simplify the application procedures and if we get better coordination between support instruments , for example between Interreg and PHARE-CBC .
I also want to stress here that we do not need any new instruments , but that we should optimise the existing ones .
Finally , we must also give some thought to whether we cannot increase the proportion of cofinancing in one corner or another .
Instruments like Community Action really have European added value .
In border regions , people come together .
They may work on one side and live on the other .
This is where they can get to know each other and learn from one another .
That is why we should do all we can to assist this process .
Mr President , I am speaking specifically about the Turco reports .
I agree that they represent a damning indictment of the management of the Structural , Cohesion and ISPA Funds .
It is simply not acceptable , for example , that there are many programmes dating from the 1980s and 1990s that have still not been closed .
Likewise , no disbursement of funds has been made under programmes such as Urban , Interreg or Leader in the year in question .
As the report implies , this has been nothing but a catalogue of errors .
Recent reports by the European Court of Auditors and OLAF have revealed substantial holes in the Commission 's accounts .
OLAF alone has investigated cases with a value of EUR 144 million this year .
Where has all this money gone ?
It is now essential that the Commission starts to act with more financial probity , in order to retain what remains of its credibility .
In view of the fact that 35 programmes from 1989 are still on the Commission 's books , nine years after payments were due to finish , it is imperative that suitable measures are introduced now to bring projects in on time and on budget .
Therefore , the n + 2 principle should be rigorously applied across these funds , so that the European taxpayer is not left to foot the bill for projects which run on over their funding deadlines .
Similarly , Member States are not blameless in this funding fiasco .
It is amazing that reportedly over EUR 100 billion remains unspent , due in large part to lack of action by national governments .
The UK is one of the worst offenders in this respect .
I am appalled that , for example , less than 5 % of available EU funding had been taken up in my own region at the beginning of the year .
These funds are not and should not be infinite .
If neither the Commission nor the Member State can get their act together , they should be returned to where they belong - the pockets of the European taxpayer .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am taking the liberty of speaking here in response to the problem of asylum seekers from the PECO countries .
I feel this problem clearly raises the question of the European Union 's ability to determine the rights and statutes of European citizens or future European citizens with regard to the right of asylum , on the eve of the great challenge of the decisions on enlargement .
The addition of the protocol on the right of asylum to the Treaty of Amsterdam prohibits Member States of the European Union from considering a request for asylum submitted by a national of another Member State .
In doing so , the Treaty introduces discrimination against European citizens based on their nationality .
This runs counter to Article 3 of the Geneva Convention , which defines a refugee as ' any person who [ has ] a well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of race , religion , nationality , membership in a particular social group , or political opinion ' .
The grounds for the incorporation of this protocol are , on the one hand , that the Member States have to respect the rule of law , democracy and human rights and possess the internal and external legal resources to put an end to violations of these legal principles , and , on the other , that nationals of the Member States already have rights in the other Member States which render useless the right of asylum , the right to free movement , free establishment , free choice of residence and other laws relating to citizenship .
What can be said , however , of the recent condemnation of various Member States by the European Court of Human Rights , or the Amnesty International reports which , every year , denounce violations of fundamental rights in most of the Member States ?
Moreover , how can we know what the future holds and state with absolute certainty that the Member States or future Member States of the European Union are above any form of abuse ?
The attitude to minorities is a good example of this .
Let us ensure that everyone can claim the right of asylum within the European Union .
Let us ensure that everyone can have their request for asylum considered .
Would that not be the best way of testing our democratic commitment ?
Mr President , as vice-chairman of the Lithuania delegation I would like to concentrate on that country and in this connection on the Ignalina nuclear power plant .
I expressly welcome the fact that we heard officially from that country at the beginning of the week , from Prime Minister Brazauskas , that Lithuania also intends to shut down the plant 's second reactor for good in 2009 .
That was made possible because the European Union has entered into obligations for the period from 2004 to 2006 totalling approximately EUR 245 million . But I say , too , that we shall also have to assist this country after 2006 with the entire decommissioning of the nuclear power plant .
Of course I have my doubts as to whether the Union will have to pay all of the EUR 2.4 billion that Lithuania wants for that , spread over 20 years , because every country that operates a nuclear power plant in the normal way has to make provision for the time after it is closed .
One thing I find interesting in this connection is that with respect to Ignalina we are for the first time rightly demanding something of a candidate country that cannot be found in the acquis communautaire because - lamentably - we have as yet no Community acquis concerning the safety of nuclear power plants .
I consider that really to be a political scandal and I hope we will arrive at a common standard for that for the future .
I hear that some members of the Council , the usual suspects , are already objecting to the closure of the plant and the reasons why they must close it being so expressly included in the accession treaty for Lithuania because they are afraid that could indirectly create an acquis .
I hope that Commissioner De Palacio will be successful in pushing through her announced package of measures laying down for the first time common standards for the safety of nuclear installations under Euratom auspices .
If we want to continue with nuclear energy , that can only be the highest standard technically possible , but I really want to use this as an opportunity to say one thing : we must not be unreasonable in asking from the candidate countries what we do not ask of ourselves .
In the present case we are right to ask that , but then we within the Union must take the appropriate steps ourselves when it comes to safety standards for nuclear installations .
Mr President , I wish to express my agreement with the report drawn up by Mr Turco .
Regional development programmes are intended to promote the competitiveness of employment and the creation of conditions that will ensure sustainable development in Europe 's least-favoured regions , in an enlarged Community .
In order to ensure that Community aid is effective , an assessment should not focus solely on cost-benefit analysis but should also include other quantitative and qualitative indicators .
The priority of the funds is to improve the quality of the programmes , to link these with reducing regional asymmetries within the Union and to use them to improve the quality of life of the citizens .
Programmes for the common agricultural policy , the common fisheries policy and for the research and information society must be incorporated into economic and cohesion policy so that the asymmetries are not increased in favour of the richer countries .
The Cohesion Fund and the Structural Funds must be used to develop the trans-European networks and , in particular , the high-speed European rail network , so that this can be extended to the outermost regions of the enlarged European Union .
Mr President , allow me , in common with many others , to thank Mr Bge for his extraordinary work on a report in which the focus lies so incredibly clearly upon enlargement and its necessary economic conditions .
As Members of the European Parliament , we have the opportunity - especially during the forthcoming Seville Summit - to put that pressure on the Council which is obviously needed in order to make it clear what the remaining enlargement negotiations are about .
Enlargement is the EU 's absolutely most important priority .
It is quite unacceptable again to postpone clarifying matters and taking a stance now that enlargement is effectively around the corner .
Continued delays and conflicting signals on the part of the Council concerning the ground rules in the common agricultural market for established and new Member States in an enlarged EU are in danger of causing us not to have the privilege of welcoming ten new Member States at the beginning of next year .
It is also important in this context to bear in mind that it is not in actual fact only the EU which is to decide on this matter .
Support for an enlarged EU is also required in terms of the referendums being held in the new Member States for the purpose of ratifying the treaties .
Enlargement to include the countries of Eastern Europe is an historic task , and the biggest and most important that any of us will ever get to experience .
Anyone who tries to prevent or halt this process is assuming a very large responsibility .
I hope that this is also appreciated by the Heads of State and Government meeting in a few weeks ' time at the Seville Summit .
Mr President , I would like to talk about the Sommer report and the way in which it promotes and affects the future of enlargement .
I would like to make it clear from the outset that we agree with what the Commission says in its communication with regard to the impact enlargement will have on regions directly bordering candidate countries , and we fully support Mr Sommer 's report , which has the merit of accurately identifying the specific problems facing these border regions , problems which they will have to address quickly because of their proximity to countries which are still very far off achieving European economic standards .
We also fully support the amendment we have tabled , which has been adopted by the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , calling upon the Commission to undertake to provide a clearer , more exhaustive definition of a ' border region ' , duly allowing for both land and sea borders , which takes into account changes in the Union 's political priorities as well .
Mr President , since enlargement of the European Union is an undeniable reality , we must also take the opportunity it provides to produce a balance-sheet of the Union 's own policies , given that many inequalities still remain within the Union and that enlargement cannot be allowed to take place at the expense of the poorest members of the current European Union .
I feel that the proposal put forward by the Commission for the negotiations on farming is , on the whole , a reasonable one .
The most controversial issue is that of the implementation of current direct aid , created by the 1992 and 1999 reforms of the CAP to compensate for the price reductions decided on at that time .
Looking at the matter objectively , these countries are not entitled to receive this type of aid .
This aid was created with the sole aim of compensating for price reductions .
In the new Member countries , however , not only have there been no price reductions , there are even likely to be price increases .
The mistake the Commission proposal makes is to suggest that the current model of direct aid should be maintained beyond 2006 .
The current system of direct aid under the CAP was justified in the medium-term to prevent falls in farmers ' incomes . This is unsustainable , however , in the long term because , since not all forms of farm production can continue to expand , it is highly discriminatory .
By 2006 , therefore , we need to create a new system of aid for agriculture based on farming 's multifunctional role in society .
Will this mean , however , that no aid must now be granted to the new countries of the East ?
It does not .
I feel that the Commission proposal to present 25 % of aid at this stage will be acceptable if this aid is paid out on an objective and horizontal basis - for example , on the basis of farms or of areas - without tying this to specific crops or forms of production .
If this is done , the proposal will already be more technically consistent and will be fairer , both in the present and in the future .
Mr President , the challenge of enlargement is an inalienable political objective , and it is unacceptable that negotiation of the agricultural chapter should put the aim or the timetable of enlargement at risk .
It is therefore absolutely essential that we should continue working to support the efforts that the candidate countries are making to restructure and modernise their agriculture , under the requirement that the candidate countries should comply with the Community acquis , but we must be quite clear that we too must comply with this Community acquis .
Direct payments form part of this Community acquis and the Commission 's proposal that they be phased in , which we support , should ensure that there will soon be a single agricultural policy for the expanded European Union .
The rural development measures must ensure that there are active rural areas with diversified production in the candidate countries and especially that they guarantee employment .
Lastly , it must be remembered that enlargement cannot be associated with the reform of the agricultural policy .
Reform of the CAP goes at its own speed and according to its own timetable , and to a great extent it depends on the results of our negotiations in the World Trade Organisation and their effects on world market trends .
Mr President , I would like to speak about the Turco report . It is a very critical report , rightly so , and what strikes me is that our criticism is still the same as it was years ago concerning the annual reports on Structural Funds .
Back in the first assessment year , the Commission noted serious delays which led to considerable underspending .
Not enough attention is given to additionality , which is a fundamental criterion , after all .
Member States should monitor European money as well as their own money , starting with my own government .
None of this has changed , and certainly not improved , since the eighties .
The amount of money that remains untouched is still enormous .
This applies to both Objectives 1 , 2 and 3 and to the new initiatives .
I consider this to be a missed opportunity for the Union and the regions .
It is perplexing that no greater attempts have been made at Member State level to spend the money available .
What kind of message is this sending to the accession countries ?
If our Member States cannot cope with our funds , how will the new Members be able to do so ?
We can no longer wait for administration to be simplified .
This should happen now .
It is impossible for the newcomers to comply with our administrative requirements .
ISPA is a case in point .
As a result , the money of the funds will not be spent , and we will miss a major opportunity for development in eastern Europe .
The late submission of projects within the framework of ISPA , if no technical support is offered by the Commission , should not be a reason for rejection .
I should very briefly like to broach another topic .
We insist on the Commission now finally completing old projects dating back to the eighties and nineties .
It will soon no longer be possible for the services of the Commission to tie up the loose ends of these projects once ten new Member States have joined .
I call for reorganisation now .
What does the Commission intend to do about this ?
Mr President , the citizens of the applicant countries now have the chance to participate in the Union 's most important multiannual programmes , and , in fact , many states have started participating in the Socrates , Leonardo and YOUTH programmes .
Some of them are also involved in the Culture 2000 and Media Plus programmes .
This development should be wholeheartedly encouraged .
It is leading to genuine cooperation and feelings of solidarity between the citizens of the applicant countries and those of the old Member States .
The programmes offer young people in the applicant countries the chance to boost their human capital with language skills and cultural know-how .
Relations and contact between the citizens of the old and future Member States are also necessary when providing information on membership .
Although the main responsibility for information rests with the governments of the applicant countries and the EU institutions , it would be good if civil society could be involved in letting others know about their experiences .
The discussions that preceded the referenda in Finland , Sweden and Austria are still fresh in the memories of people there .
Perhaps that would help in approaching the aims for 2004 .
Mr President , the enlargement of the European Union is going to be the greatest project that Europe takes part in during the next ten years and we have to be careful , not only how we enlarge for the sake of the present Member States , but also how we deal with the countries that are coming in .
I want to deal with the agricultural side because I want to see a proper reform of the common agricultural policy before enlargement takes place .
What worries me is that we are not going to do that properly .
We are going to get to a situation where the budget of the common agricultural policy does not fit the size of the new European Union .
Then we will have to make cuts in places , which is perhaps not the right way to do it .
I know the Commission is dealing a lot with this , but we also have to look at how we get the Sapard funds into enlargement states to help them build up their infrastructure , including their education systems .
On a recent visit to Poland I found there were lots of problems with education , especially in the rural areas where very often young children were not going on to secondary school because they stayed at home to work on the farms .
We must face up to the huge number of farmers in these enlargement states and we must find some way of helping them to restructure their agriculture as and when they come into Europe .
I am also very concerned to avoid food coming into the European Union that does not meet the high standards of our production .
We have to be very clear on this .
With those reservations , much as I support enlargement , we must be careful how we do it .
Mr President , I congratulate the Council and Commission on having endured a five-hour marathon of listening to everything the European Parliament wants for the accession process .
As you have heard , we have a lot of comments and requests concerning this historic project .
I myself am a member of the Romania delegation and an acting member of the Bulgaria delegation .
So I have just one point to make : these countries are naturally very anxious that they should not be forgotten .
If the door opens for ten countries in Copenhagen at the end of this year , then in Bulgaria and Romania they will want to know where they stand .
I would like to ask what signal we will be giving these countries at the end of 2002 .
Is there a timetable for the second round ?
Will there also be more aids for accession so that we can improve the process of adaptation ?
That need not always be money , Mrs Schreyer .
There are other forms of aid .
We must not forget these countries .
The first accession process is only the first stage .
Mr President , I too would like to congratulate Mr Brok and the many speakers who have helped to present the report before us today on their work .
I share the position of the many Members who have called for caution and rigour as well as boldness when we bring the accession process to a close for each individual country .
The entry of the candidate countries is a decision , a political objective and a necessity for the Union 's States .
The decision to allow individual countries to enter the Union is based on merit and strict compliance with the Helsinki Council and the Copenhagen criteria .
I welcome the participation of the candidate countries in the Convention 's work , for it will become quite clear to them from that debate that , as well as the need for good government and combating corruption and crime , as well as economic , judicial and social reform , as well as agricultural and fund distribution policies , there is another point on which the Union is not prepared to compromise : civil rights and equal opportunities , which must be non-negotiable preconditions for EU membership .
In actual fact , the present time is a phase in the enlargement of Europe .
It is true that previous enlargement has been gradual , with Europe growing from the six original countries to the 15 it comprises today .
What frightens us is the speed with which this new phase of enlargement is taking place , particularly considering that ten countries are joining the Union which have not long been democracies .
It is for precisely this reason that we both fully support the political decision and advocate caution and the need for rigorous respect for the acquis .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to sincerely thank all the rapporteurs who have been involved so closely with the subject of eastern enlargement not only this year but over the last few years .
I think as Parliament we have set something revolutionary in motion here .
Political support and the support of the people in the enlargement process is the decisive point and that can of course only be given by democratically legitimised forces such as Members of Parliament as representatives of the people of Europe .
In that respect we are performing an important task here .
I want in particular to thank Mr Bge , the rapporteur , also as a member of the Committee on Budgets , because I think the financing of enlargement is naturally the most serious question being put to us from all sides and one which is naturally of particular concern also to the people of the European Union - just as it is in the candidate countries .
I think the approach that Mr Bge has found , that we in the Committee on Budgets have found , deserves to be taken seriously .
Of course whatever is available through Agenda 2000 must be included in this enlargement process , but we cannot at the same time commit ourselves for the period after that in such a manner that we no longer have any freedom to take decisions after 2007 .
I think that is a very wise approach .
I am also very grateful to Mrs Sommer , because I think that in her report on the border regions she has managed to highlight the problems of the people directly affected by enlargement and who are already experiencing in their daily lives what it means to live in a region where there is a marked economic disparity and to ensure that we in Parliament send out a strong signal that appropriate support must be given , because we in Parliament can make those funds available in the budget procedure for 2002 .
It was a hard struggle , but at the end of the day we succeeded .
I assume that in the 2003 procedure we shall be able to find a euro or two to make additional resources available for these areas .
Mr President , enlargement of the EU is an important step , and the right one , on the road that leads to Europe 's future , but this is not a time for unmitigated jubilation .
On the contrary , the enlargement process needs to be carefully prepared and negotiated , both as a whole and even more so in all its many details , so that they too , being the proverbial lair of the devil , may be right .
It is important from that point of view that Parliament have an associated debate to thrash out enlargement as a whole - the progress of the accession negotiations , financial issues and , last but not least , Community action for the border regions .
It is this topic that numerous Austrian MEPs have , for five years and initially in the teeth of virtually universal opposition , repeatedly highlighted as an indispensable back-up measure , and they have done so for very good reasons .
Now that the date for accession is looming ever closer and more and more people are giving thought to what this event will actually amount to in detail , we can scarcely restrain ourselves from indicating our agreement .
To be sure , most are not only willing to agree with us , but they also , and above all , want a share in the financial resources and to share them with us .
As has already been said today with reference to support for border regions , the Commission was not particularly helpful at the outset .
Even now , we are not completely satisfied with the communication from the Commission .
What is being provided for should be welcomed as an initial measure , but there will be a need for further steps - for which read funds - to make a wholesale success of enlargement on our side of the border as well .
There will also be a need for a number of other back-up measures .
Above all , we need a better de minimis rule , to give additional support , in the form of European subsidies , to the efforts of our Member States and regions at restructuring using their own resources .
Only when that happens will people in the region immediately adjoining the border be able to say ' yes ' to enlargement with a clear conscience .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we meet this afternoon under the banner of ' enlargement of the European Union ' .
The speeches made by Members confirm my belief that we are all agreed on one thing , namely that we want enlargement of the European Union , and we are working at every level to realise this objective in a responsible manner .
The timetable is an ambitious one .
The end is in sight , although chapters on such things as agriculture and regional policy have yet to be sorted out .
Let me , in this context , refer back to yesterday , when farmers from the present Community demonstrated in front of the parliament building .
They presented the concerns that they have about their future and demonstrated about the mid-term review of Agenda 2000 .
What they were concerned about was a fair chance for their businesses , and thus for their families , in the future .
What made the greatest impression on me was the solidarity our farmers showed with their counterparts from the future Member States , despite the adverse situation they themselves have been put in by falling prices for milk and cereals .
This was for me an appeal for everything possible to be done for the people in the present EU and in the candidate countries not to be left alone with their concerns and needs .
So we too have to talk about their problems .
Let us take Sapard as our first practical example .
The flow of funds here is quite inadequate .
They should be kept for agriculture and rural areas .
Secondly , the funds that continue to be needed for the development of rural areas must be provided by all the structural policy measures and not just from the common agricultural policy .
Thirdly , full harmonisation is absolutely necessary in the internal market .
I will stop there and thank you for listening , as there are a few people who have been waiting a very long time already .
Mr President , in my speech I shall focus on the practical implementation of regional and structural policy , which is a key element in successful enlargement as well as preparations for it .
The Commission and the applicant countries must prepare for enlargement in a way that avoids needless delays in the start-up of programmes and so that the money set aside for these preparations can be used effectively .
The Structural Funds must also be used in a way that is as uncomplicated and efficient as possible .
There is much room for improvement here , which is evident , for example , from Mr Turco 's report .
Aid must be allocated and staggered so that the funds get to the local players as directly as possible and primarily to the poorest regions of all .
Structural work must adopt the principle of phasing in increased batches of aid .
It is reasonable to use the Cohesion Fund in the early stages , but in the future the programme-based financing share must be increased .
Skills , know-how , new technology and good levels of networking between SMEs and regional players are essential in implementing effective regional policy and promoting the positive impact of enlargement .
The particular challenge is not so much the adoption of Community legal provisions but their implementation and monitoring .
Mr President , you can imagine that after five hours of debate I have no desire to add anything new , because I think everything has already been heard .
Besides , I am not going to tire this House , because it would be the seats that get tired , anyway , since there is practically nobody left except the long-suffering European Commission , which , of course , has been sitting here , like the Presidency , for these five hours without a break .
I should just like to say that we have taken very good note , because naturally that is part of the exercise : the Presidency has taken good note of everything the honourable Members have said ; I cannot say I agree with everyone , but I have gathered some very important points .
Secondly , I must tell you that enlargement has been a priority for our Presidency , and it will continue to be one for the Seville European Council , and we therefore hope we can draw some conclusions to further this process .
Of the road map we had to follow , all that is left for us is to conclude a consensus , that we hope we can reach , in order to achieve a common position on agricultural matters .
If , for any reason that I can understand , this consensus that we are going to fight for in the Council cannot be reached , I imagine that the countries that do not subscribe to the common position will answer politically to this Chamber and to European public opinion . This is because I think the subject of direct payments , as can be deduced from the Commission proposal , forms part of the acquis and is not for discussion , and therefore it is not good for accession to be conditional upon a hypothetical or future reform of the common agricultural policy .
This is a subject that I do not want to prejudge ; there is always room for hope and for seeking a formula that pleases everyone , and that is precisely the Presidency 's objective : that everybody should be able to find their own position and solve their own political problems .
I am convinced we shall succeed .
Thank you , President-in-Office of the Council .
I am sure that a great many of the Members have listened to your speech from their office .
Mr President , I will be even more brief .
I just want to thank the House for what I feel has been an extraordinarily constructive and helpful debate , which the Commission also sees as an encouragement to pursue its present course , in which certainty of Parliament 's support is a great help to us .
This debate has thrown up a large number of questions , but we would need another hour if I were to try and answer them now .
So , with your permission , Mr President , I would ask you to let me answer in writing the questions raised in this debate .
Mr President , honourable Members , ladies and gentlemen , I would just like to start by associating myself with the thanks expressed by Commissioner Gnter Verheugen , who spoke before me .
I too would like to thank you for the broad support with which the Commission 's proposals have met in this debate .
I just want to address one or two points , and do so briefly .
The first concerns the Sapard programme , which was referred to by a very large number of speakers in the debate .
I would , firstly , like to point out that seven programmes are currently up and running ; the great question is , of course , in which candidate country .
I am able , though , to give you the good news that another country is to be added this month , namely Poland , which is to be given more funds than the other seven countries participating to date .
You can take that as an indication that it is a bit too simple to concentrate only on percentages and amounts .
This way of looking at things must , I believe , take account of the differences between the candidates , and also , of course , of the need to establish a system that will subsequently meet , for example , with the approval of this House 's Committee on Budgetary Control .
It is the case that the introduction of this system has been very demanding in terms of effort , and that it has also resulted in delays , but it is not true that these setbacks and delays can be laid only at the Commission 's door .
I would like to give you something of a warning against resuming the debate on an INRA programme or whatever the thing is called , by which I mean a warning that we would only be delaying matters still further if we were now to start a debate about amending the financial legislation or even the Financial Perspective , or if we were to invent new bureaucratic structures that first needed to be developed .
I do , though , understand that the concerns of civil society are having a greater influence on the administration .
We will have to do some thinking about that .
My last point is that a very large number of you have mentioned the agricultural reforms .
Let me make it quite clear that I am committed to them , and have always affirmed that we need them , and that agricultural reforms are a process with which we have to press on .
I only hope , when we in the Commission decide on our proposals for the mid-term review on 10 July , that they will meet with just as much approval in this House , especially from all those who have , today , called for further reforms .
I would , though , like to reiterate that conflating the enlargement process in any way with further agricultural reforms or even making the one dependent on the other will not just create difficulties for enlargement , but will delay both it and further reforms .
We are therefore firmly convinced that the two must be kept separate and progress made on both of them without delay .
Mr President , various comments have been made on the Structural Funds .
Having taken part in the debate with , so to speak , the aid of Mr Barnier 's ears , I would like briefly to respond to what has been said about the Structural Funds .
The outflow of resources is unsatisfactory at the moment , but it is not quite true to say that major delays are occurring ; it is simply that the Member States are , as it were , delaying implementation until the last moment at which the legislature has allowed them to put the programmes into operation .
Parliament played its part in enacting the regulations in question .
As regards the debate on the financial framework for enlargement , let me , as Budget Commissioner , reiterate that , in producing its proposals , the Commission has had to be guided by the principle that a proper balance has to be struck between the interests of the present Member States and those of the new ones .
It is my opinion that we have succeeded in achieving this balance .
When the proposals were put forward , the new Member States initially complained that they were not receiving equal treatment .
Although we provided for direct support to be phased in , the Commission proposal envisages that , as early as 2006 , the financial obligations in respect of the new Member States should , in per capita terms by reference to the population , be equal to those in the present Member States , so that there is equal treatment already .
Does the Commission proposal put the present Member States under excessive financial strain ?
Let me observe that we have kept strictly to the limits of Agenda 2000 , and that we in the Commission have , in addition , proposed that the new Member States should make contributions to the EU Budget from the very outset , something that the Council has accepted .
That means that the net cost to the present Member States is even less than the amount stipulated in Agenda 2000 as the maximum burden resulting from enlargement .
I think it is important not to lose sight of that .
Let me emphasise one more thing . The reports we are considering , and our debate today , sometimes give the impression that the costs of enlargement will be borne only by the present net contributors .
That is false .
All the present Member States will be paying the same amount in relative terms towards enlargement , leaving out the special arrangement for Great Britain .
The same effort , though , is called for as an expression of solidarity .
As Member States differ in size and gross domestic product , that of course means in absolute terms that 80 % of the enlargement costs will in fact be borne by the five largest Member States : Germany , Great Britain , Italy , France and Spain .
But this is a joint effort for the sake of solidarity , and the financial aspect is of course of great importance in public debate , and also in debates in Parliament , the Council and the Commission .
However , it must not be forgotten that this debate is not about whether or not to build a new stretch of motorway , but about the unification of Europe .
It is about the stabilisation in Europe of peace , democracy and the rule of law .
One cannot put a price on values such as these .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
I would also like to thank all the speakers .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was suspended at 8.15 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m. )

Your Majesty , it is a great honour and a pleasure for us to welcome you to the European Parliament today .
I should also like to welcome Her Majesty Queen Rania Al-Abdullah , who joins us in the official gallery .
You are most welcome , Your Majesty .
Your presence here today continues a tradition initiated by your respected father , King Hussein , who addressed this Assembly in 1983 and again in 1991 .
We believe your visit underlines the new phase which has commenced in Jordanian-EU relations since the Association Agreement approved by Parliament some years ago entered into force on 1 May this year .
Your visit also reinforces the role of Jordan in Europe 's Barcelona Process and Euro-Mediterranean dialogue .
Your Majesty , since you succeeded your most respected father , King Hussein , to the throne of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan in 1999 you have worked to build on his achievements to improve the life of your people by instituting a broad programme of economic , legislative and social reform through an ambitious five-year development plan .
This plan , which focuses on the upgrading of public and social services and the speeding up of economic reform , has the support of this House .
We welcome in particular your strong commitment to guaranteeing a full role for women in your society .
( Applause )
The European Union and the European Parliament will assist Jordan in these priority areas .
We put special emphasis on strengthening political pluralism , civil society , the rule of law and human rights , priorities which we know you so earnestly share .
In 1994 , your father had the courage to sign a peace agreement with Israel .
Now you play an important role in trying to extend this peace to the entire region , a role respected and highly valued in this House .
On many occasions , the European Parliament has called for the creation of a Palestinian state alongside the State of Israel .
Both peoples must be able to live in peace and security .
Families must be able to raise their children in societies free from hatred , violence , bloodshed and fear .
The European Parliament strongly believes that the path to peace will not be found in terrorism , assassinations or violence and cannot be founded on force .
We recognise the contribution which Your Majesty and Jordan are making to the search for peace and reconciliation .
We thank you for honouring our House with your visit .
It gives me great pleasure to invite you to address the European Parliament .
( Applause )
Mr President , distinguished Members , it is indeed an honour to address the European Parliament .
Your forum is home to an historic experiment that attests that even after the most terrible of conflicts people of different nations of unique cultures can together create a future peace .
I need not tell you that your work has lessons for the world .
Jean Monnet said it very simply 50 years ago .
Your Majesty , it is always a wonderful privilege , in a Parliamentary context , to be addressed by a leader who has conviction , reason and vision .
You have all of these qualities .
You have touched our emotional intelligence as well as our rationality .
In doing that you have touched so much .
Thank you , Your Majesty .
Jallatu Lmalik , chukran jazlan lakum .
( The formal sitting was closed at 12.28 p.m. )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are now examining a Commission proposal for a Council decision on the indirect tax in force in the Canary Islands .
The purpose of introducing a tax known as ' the AIEM tax on the import and delivery of goods in the Canary Islands ' is to allow Spain to apply lower rates of tax to certain products manufactured in this outermost region .
It must be stated , of course , that the purpose of the Community authorisation is not to create the AIEM , because the Spanish authorities are free to do this , as long as Community directives on VAT and on special consumer taxes do not apply in the Canaries .
The Council decision is , consequently , necessary , but to validate tax exemptions and their extension to Canarian regional products , an aspect that is not properly clarified in the Commission proposal .
The aim of most of the amendments that I tabled , and which were approved by the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , was to ensure that this clarification was made .
The central tenet of the Commission proposal is , therefore , the establishment of tax exemptions under Articles 23 , 25 and 90 of the Treaty , on the grounds that discrimination is practised in favour of certain industrial goods manufactured in the Canaries over imported industrial goods , since the former can be taxed at rates 5 , 15 or 25 percentage points lower , depending on the type of product concerned .
Article 299 ( 2 ) of the Treaty provides the justification and the legal base for these tax exemptions .
This article acknowledges the unique situation of what are known as ' outermost ' regions and the corresponding need for the European Union to take special steps to help those regions .
The proposal now under consideration deserves my total support . It seeks to enable regions such as the Canaries , which suffer serious competitive disadvantages in the industrial sector as a consequence of their remoteness , better to integrate and exploit the highly competitive dynamic of the single European market , of Economic and Monetary Union and of globalisation itself .
This type of specific measure is crucial to ensuring the survival and modernisation of industrial activity in the Canaries , which now produces little more than 5 % of regional GDP , when historically it has always generated very high levels .
The integration of the Canaries , however , into the customs territory of the European Union in 1991 , and the gradual dismantling , by 1999 , of the tax then in force , which was also intended to protect regional production , have accentuated the fragility and the vulnerability of the Canaries ' industrial sector to external competition .
As the situation in the tobacco industry shows quite clearly , the decline has been steady .
Between 1985 and 2000 , the tobacco industry shed more than 3 300 jobs , or around 67 % of its workforce .
It is , therefore , imperative that we ask ourselves the following question : should the full integration of the Canaries mean that their industries are all but wiped out ?
Should the Canaries depend almost exclusively on tourism-related activities for job and wealth creation ?
Is this not too heavy a price for the Canaries to pay for their full integration into the European Union ?
The Commission proposal that we are now looking at is , therefore , a legitimate and appropriate instrument for guaranteeing a minimum degree of economic diversification in a region with the specific characteristics of the Canaries .
This proposal is also justified , however , in light of other considerations , not least the competitive inequality suffered by industrial firms in the outermost regions .
It is well known that remoteness imposes additional costs on industrial activity in these regions and that , in the specific case of the Canaries , these costs are estimated to stand at around 8 percentage points for large undertakings , 9 % for the SMEs , and even reaching 29 % for tobacco production .
This situation forces us to draw a conclusion of paramount importance , which is the following : instead of being harmful to free competition , the tax measures proposed by the Commission are designed to level out conditions for competition .
This is the only way we will be able to guarantee genuine equality of opportunity for Canarian industrial operators or , rather , for some of them , provided that the tax measures proposed are not universal and systematic .
I therefore believe that we are discussing the appropriate instrument with which to respond to the specific needs of the Canaries as an outermost region and the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism expressed the same view when it approved my report by overwhelming majority .
If the European Parliament is to be consistent with its previous positions demonstrating clear solidarity and support for the outermost regions , it must deliver a favourable opinion on the Commission proposal we are now discussing .
Mr President , as the rapporteur has already said what this is about , I do not need to enlarge on that , but I have to make it unmistakably clear that giving local products 15 % or 25 % advantage is excessive .
We do not agree with the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , and , in the opinion I drafted , we proposed that these tax differentials be scaled down from 25 % to 15 % and 15 % to 10 % respectively .
I regret the fact that the lead Committee on Regional Policy has not followed us in this .
As regards the products listed in the various categories , various inconsistencies are apparent , which have been pointed out in the many comments I have had from Spanish producers and also from Members of this House , and I would like to point them out to Mr Bolkestein , who is , after all , such a great defender of the principle that there should be no market distortions in the common market .
This is what I have to say to you . Category B includes rum , which , as we all know , is made from sugar cane .
There are no sugar cane plantations in the Canary Islands , and the product , already distilled , is imported from abroad .
The two dominant local manufacturers control 73 % of the market and add aromatic substances and colourings to what they import from South Africa , selling the concoction as ' rum from the Canary Islands ' .
So one cannot speak in terms of rum production in the Canary Islands supposedly maintaining jobs ; there may well be a hundred jobs , but two families with an oligopoly of the Canary Islands market reap an immense profit from them .
That is something of which you should take account .
I also have to point out that there are a few other inconsistencies , for example , the levying of the new tax on gin , vodka and liqueurs , but not on whisky or other spirits .
Make of that what you will .
I suggest to you , Mr Bolkestein , that you take a good look at what you or your department have wrought there , and then you will see why we feel like giving you a clip round the ear when you keep coming back to us and telling us about inconsistencies !
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , I naturally want to thank Mr Marques and congratulate him on his report and also on the way he has presented it .
Perhaps I should begin by reassuring Mrs Lulling - reassuring her and clarifying things a little for her , because last week I was in Luxembourg , Mrs Lulling 's own country , right in the middle of the European Union .
In fact , the problem they have in Luxembourg today , as I could see last week , is that the country has too much economic activity , which is attracting hundreds of thousands of workers to work there .
The situation in the outermost regions of the Community is completely different .
We are , one might say , the other side of the coin to Luxembourg .
Any economic activity we perform has to overcome the enormous obstacle of distance .
At the moment , therefore , it is quite impossible for any industrial company to set itself up in the Canary Islands to compete within the Community .
We had developed a small industrial sector on the basis of some rules which are certainly quite ancient , going back to the time when the Canary Islands were brought under the Crown of Castile , before Spain existed .
There is a fifteenth-century Royal Charter by the Catholic Monarchs exempting traders in the Canary Islands from paying a number of taxes , and this has continued over the centuries .
The Spanish constitution recognises it .
When Spain joined the European Community , the Spanish Government took care to include some special provisions in the Act of Accession of Spain and Portugal to the European Community to guarantee this special regime , and there is a protocol on this , which was amended by a Council decision in 1991 to adapt it to the internal market .
I would say that the special regime for the Canary Islands compared with the rest of the Community territory is less special now than at any time in the whole history of our country and the European Community .
What we have done is to replace old forms of taxation , which were much more restrictive , like the APIM ( Tax on Production and Imports ) or the special tariff , with some new forms of taxation which conflict much less with the operation of the internal market .
In other words , what the Commission is proposing and I hope the Council will approve is to try to reduce the impact on trade . In this way , the measures we are adopting now are measures that will facilitate trade within the European Union .
Mrs Lulling may be right in some respect ; I do not deny it .
That is , I would say we have now had a first go , a first attempt at outlining what this neutral tax system will be , allowing trade to function but with a slight preference so as to be able to maintain traditional activities .
If Mrs Lulling looks , for instance , at the amendments approved by the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism - Amendment No 10 to Article 2 and Amendment No 11 to Article 3 - she will see that there are some adaptation mechanisms , so that the Council , acting on a proposal from the Commission , can review the conditions and adjust the rates and other situations .
Besides , I am aware that the same concerns voiced by Mrs Lulling have also been voiced specifically at a local level by economic and political actors .
This means that , once the Council approves the system , we shall have the opportunity to go on reviewing and adapting it in order to achieve the objective of the functioning of the internal market .
It is not a matter of putting up insurmountable barriers but of letting some small , traditional activities continue , and that explains why there is , if you like , a certain discrimination .
That is , products are included according to whether there are economic activities that have to be kept going .
It is not a question of developing new economic activities but in practice of keeping existing ones going .
Of course , I agree with Mrs Lulling that there may be differences , but we shall have to look at these differences a little later .
At the moment , I believe the objective for the Spanish Government in making the proposals and for the Commission is to liberalise the internal market and to facilitate the integration of this region - so distant and facing so many difficulties - into the rest of the internal market .
It must also be remembered that there is not even such a thing as a Canary Islands market , because there are seven islands and each island has a market , with its own obstacles . In other words , it may be much easier to export from Luxembourg to Gran Canaria than from Tenerife to Gran Canaria , unless these small differences are established .
I hope that tomorrow this House will approve the proposal as formulated by the Committee on Regional Policy , and the Socialist Group is , of course , against the amendments tabled by Mr Helmer , which attempt to demolish or weaken a system which I believe has now been precisely calculated to prevent these businesses or occupations from disappearing .
I am grateful to the Commission and its staff for their efforts and , of course , I am grateful to Mr Marques for the work he has done in presenting this report to us .
Mr President , the Committee on Fisheries has voted in favour of the Commission proposal that we are now discussing , as we have done for previous resolutions adopted by this House .
With regard to fisheries , the proposal affects fresh and chilled fish belonging to certain species such as sea bream , hake and sea bass , as well as smoked fish and salmon .
The exemptions authorised - as those who have spoken before me have pointed out - must form part of a strategy for the economic and social development of the Canary Islands and thus contribute to the promotion and diversification of local activities .
These tax measures are exceptional , specific and designed to compensate for the disadvantages suffered by the islands as an outermost region and are therefore fully covered by Article 299 ( 2 ) of the Treaty .
This is a legal basis which is aimed at allowing the local economic activities of the outermost regions to compete , despite the considerable disadvantages of their insularity and isolation and the small size of their local market .
It is a legal framework that is not limited to this type of tax measures .
In the area of fisheries , now that the common fisheries policy is to be reformed , for instance , the specific conditions deriving from their nature as outermost regions must be taken into consideration in the framework of Article 299 ( 2 ) , as indicated by the proposal which the committee itself has already adopted .
Mr President , I must first of all offer my congratulations and thanks to the rapporteur , Mr Marques .
I congratulate him because he has produced an excellent report responding to a demand from the Canary Islands - one of the outermost regions of the Union that has some specific tax features , supported on a sound legal basis ( Article 299 ( 2 ) of the Treaty ) .
I thank him because , through his excellent work and his flexibility , he has managed to gather a solid parliamentary majority around him which makes it seem likely that the report will be approved within the next few hours , which will put an end to a long parliamentary journey that began almost two years ago .
The economic and fiscal regime of the islands is the backbone of the statute of autonomy and self-government of the Canary Islands , the current version of which derives from the Treaty on European Union and Spain 's Treaty of Accession to the European Communities , although over the centuries - ever since we were brought under the Crown of Castile , even before Castile was Spain - it has often been modified to suit the circumstances of the moment .
The question is therefore about certain historical rights , which are no lower in status than the fiscal peculiarities of Luxembourg or some of the British Isles , to mention only the case of countries where these measures have come up against some stiff opposition , paradoxical though it may seem .
Those Members who have tried - and are still trying - to change the rapporteur 's text with their amendments are upholding legitimate interests - there is no doubt of that - but interests linked especially to the tobacco , alcoholic beverage and spirits lobbies , which do not now coincide with the interests of the Canary Islanders , the vast majority of whom have , through their legitimate representatives , declared their position along the lines of the Marques report .
Just as the Spanish Government has done , by virtue of its Constitution , just as the European Commission is doing - it has seen that this project is valid and does not run counter to Community law - and as is reflected by the broad agreement within the Council , which may well approve it in a few days ' time , once Parliament has pronounced on it .
The Canary Islands will thus have a good economic policy instrument , which will allow them to diversify their resources and enhance their economic and social development , stop the decline of their already weak industrial sector and , if possible , stimulate its growth , especially in the food processing sector . If this happens , it will help retain jobs and create new ones in a region of high unemployment , while offering alternatives to the islands ' risky dependence on the tourist industry .
The Canary Islands cannot continue to grow just on the basis of receiving a few hundred thousand more tourists every year .
This year we will have had twelve million visitors ; this brings benefits , of course , but it also has sometimes devastating effects on our sustainable development : on some islands the annual number of tourists far outweighs the total number of permanent residents , generating a number of problems .
These will only increase in future if we do not step in to correct this trend , which is what this regulation aims to do .
For all these reasons and others mentioned by the rapporteur and some of the speakers , this report must be approved and , as a member of the European People 's Party , that is what I hope will happen .
Mr President , I too wish to congratulate Mr Marques on the excellent work he has carried out here , not least with regard to the clear distinction he has made between the existence of the Canary Islands ' having their own tax arrangements as a right and the possibility of discrimination in favour of certain local products to boost their economic development .
I also wish to welcome our fellow Members from the Canaries who are present and say that , speaking on behalf of the Azores , we stand shoulder to shoulder with you and that we fully support your objectives of achieving the most balanced possible form of development for the Canaries .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there is one thing we must understand : what we have here are not proposals for tax exemptions for some rich countries at the centre of Europe , such as Luxembourg , for example , which would seriously undermine the balance of the internal market , which would create economic imbalances , and even a concentration of economic activity that in fact benefits no one .
What we have here are one-off measures intended to support industries and small-scale activities which would otherwise not survive .
We cannot compare the survival of small rum producers in the Canaries with the situation of sugar in the European Union , which is a cartel providing massive profits for a industry that is highly protected and which the Commission is not able - or willing - to end .
In fact , it is doing the opposite .
We saw proof of this here only yesterday .
I therefore call on all my fellow Members resolutely to support the proposal submitted by Srgio Marques .
Mr President , the AIEM is a tax that is being talked about a lot this year , both in the Canary Islands and in this House , to the extent that this is the second time we have debated and voted on it .
Furthermore , it replaces another no less categorical tax , the APIM . As an outermost region of the European Union , the Canary Islands have seen a review of their model of integration into our European Community , which led to the APIM falling apart when certain basic products or goods were imported , resulting in job losses in the Canary Islands ' industrial sector and a fall in the export of local products .
The European Commission , in collaboration with the competent authorities , has therefore put forward a proposal for a decision on special fiscal measures designed to correct the costs of being an outermost region .
However , the most important fact from a political viewpoint is , I believe , that the Commission has , to this end , taken Article 299 ( 2 ) of the Treaty as the legal basis for implementing a temporary and proportional derogation from Articles 23 , 25 and 90 when applying the Community provisions that allow the Spanish authorities to discriminate in fiscal terms regarding certain Canary Island products .
Hence our congratulations to the Commission , the rapporteur , Mr Marques , and also Mr Casaca for his support .
We hope the Council - and Parliament - will be receptive towards this proposal , because amongst other things this tax is recognition of the Canary Islands ' fiscal regime , and it is also coherent with the economic diversification strategy drawn up by the European Union for the outermost regions and prevents job losses .
Mr President , firstly I should like to say that this proposal was introduced earlier this year by the Commission under the procedure without debate .
Had it not been for the initiative of one of my colleagues , Mr Helmer , in overturning that procedure , this House would not have had the opportunity to discuss it .
Let me make it very clear to the House at the outset that , recognising their ultra-peripheral status , I have no problem with special treatment for the Canary Islands , - my goodness , I would quite like it for my own region , but that is not very likely .
This was accepted at the time of Spain 's accession to the European Union and special tax arrangements were put in place to assist local industries .
But those derogations from the rules of the single market were intended to be temporary and to be phased out .
Far from phasing out these measures , the Commission 's proposal effectively doubles the level of protection for a wide range of goods , impacting especially heavily on spirits and tobacco .
The large tourist industry of the Canary Islands is an important outlet for these products .
The proposed measures will impact negatively on liquor and cigarette manufacturers in many Member States .
By raising consumer prices in the Canaries they may even damage the island 's tourist trade .
In particular they will damage Gallaghers in my own constituency and Imperial Tobacco in Nottingham , to name but two .
Bizarrely , as I understand it , the proposals will protect an American cigarette manufacturer in the Canaries .
The rapporteur says that jobs have been lost in cigarette factories in the Canaries , but they have also been lost in cigarette factories across the European Union .
With changes in consumption and improvements in productivity , we all have industries in our own regions that suffer from overseas competition , but in the single market we do not raise protectionist taxes .
The original intention was to phase out these measures .
The Commission 's proposal is to double them .
I put it to the House that a reasonable compromise is to leave the levels as they were in 2001 , and I call on colleagues to support the amendments to this effect and reject the Commission 's proposed increases .
Mr President , thank you for giving me the floor on this important matter .
I shall begin by saying that this Commission proposal represents the implementation , in the tax field , of Article 299 ( 2 ) of the Treaty .
That article recognises the specific nature of the outermost regions , which include the Canary Islands , and it provides for specific measures to be adopted , particularly in taxation , to take into account the special characteristics and constraints of those regions .
On the basis of a memorandum and notifications from Spain , the Commission proposed a Community framework for a tax known as " Arbitrio sobre las Importaciones y Entregas de Mercancas en las islas Canarias " , or the AIEM tax , which would apply to the Canary Islands from 1 January 2002 .
As has been remarked by many Members of this Parliament , a number of handicaps affecting local manufacturing firms were identified , and this justifies the introduction of a specific measure to encourage industrial production and increase its share in the Canary Islands ' gross domestic product through exemption or rates reductions granted to local products .
For that reason a Community framework has been proposed which selectively authorises maximum tax rates of 5 % and 15 % for various sensitive products to which Spain may apply exemptions in the light of the need to promote local production activities .
The rates applicable to tobacco products is fixed at 25 % because local production of tobacco products has significantly diminished in the Canary Islands in recent years .
Mr Nicholson referred to the exemption , or , rather , the maximum rate applicable to tobacco products ; it was 15 % in the past ; 25 % is now proposed .
Local production is still being lost , so there does not appear to be a link between the lower tariff that has been applied in the past and the level of local production .
The rates and exemptions contained in the Community framework must be seen as options subject to ceilings which the national and regional authorities may use in combination with the support needed for local production .
This decision is to be applied for a period of ten years .
It will nevertheless be necessary to evaluate the proposed system after five years .
An evaluation is therefore to be made of the arrangements and , if necessary , the decision can be adapted on the basis of this evaluation .
The Commission is very pleased that this proposal has been welcomed by the European Parliament .
I would in particular like to welcome the positive contribution of the rapporteur for the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , Mr Marques , as well as the opinions of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market and the Committee on Fisheries .
Examination of this proposal is ongoing in the Council , and the Commission very much wants to address this issue in a timely manner .
The most appropriate course of action at this time is for the Commission not to formally accept the amendments put forward by Parliament , but to endeavour to take them on board as far as possible with a view to adoption of the proposal by the Council .
This applies to Amendment No 1 , which proposes to introduce a reference to the Commission report of March 2000 on the measures to implement Article 299 ( 2 ) of the Treaty .
This also applies to Amendments Nos 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 and 9 , which propose basing the European framework of this AIEM tax on the limitation of maximum exemptions instead of the tax itself , Amendment No 8 , proposing introduction of a recital to justify the date of application of the proposals , and Amendments Nos 10 , 12 , 13 and 14 , which are purely formal .
On the other hand , the Commission does not agree with Amendments 7 and 11 , which allow the extension of the list of products concerned by the fiscal exemptions under a comitology procedure .
Since those exemptions constitute fiscal discrimination , the content of such provisions must be decided by the Council itself .
Amendments Nos 15 , 16 , 17 and 18 , which were introduced at a late stage , propose rates of 5 % and 10 % for products and 15 % for tobacco and are not acceptable to the Commission .
The 5 % , 15 % and 25 % rates proposed by the Commission correspond globally to the rates allowed under the previous regime , the purpose being to focus on the products for which the measures are most needed .
I would now like to reply to some of the comments made this evening .
First of all , I agree with Mr Medina Ortega , who said that the AIEM equals the APIM plus the special tariff .
These two latter taxes were amalgamated in the 1991 regulation , so once again I agree with the analysis , which was shared by Mr Snchez Garca .
Both Members of Parliament have the Commission on their side as regards that analysis .
Mr Fernndez Martn then said that maintaining local industry maintains local employment and activities other than tourism .
Of course , he is right and the Commission would like to express its agreement with that statement .
I have already replied to Mr Nicholson on tobacco products , stating that local production is decreasing in spite of the fiscal advantages .
That apparently ensued from Amendments Nos 16 to 19 put forward by Mr Helmer .
The reduction of the exemptions is not acceptable to the Commission since it would defeat the whole purpose of the exercise .
Lastly , I was struck by the vivacious nature of the comments , questions and remarks by Mrs Lulling .
I can assure her in the case of rum that there is indeed traditional local production .
I can testify to that myself , having been at various times to the Canary Islands .
I have even seen the plants .
If Mrs Lulling does not believe me , I suggest that the two of us visit the Canary Islands and look at the plants and on our trip we can also discuss the possibility of excise taxes on wine .
I have to reject the last proposal of the Commissioner on moral grounds .
Mr President , since I have been personally implicated by certain speakers , I must ask to take the floor for personal reasons .
First of all , I have been attacked as a Luxemburgish MEP .
Mr Medina Ortega complained that we have too many economic activities ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
No , no , Mrs Lulling .
Excuse me , but that is not permitted .
You may speak on a point of order , but that is what you already have done .
No , pour un fait personnel - on a personal matter .
I do not know what that is in German , but you , as Vice-President , should .
A personal attack has been made on me .
Mr President , I have been in Parliaments for thirty-seven years , so I know what a personal attack is , and that one is permitted to respond to it .
I ask you to let me have the floor , so that I may answer this personal attack .
If you had listened to me , this matter would have been sorted out long ago !
Just to clarify matters , Mrs Lulling , I will read out to you Rule 122 on personal statements : ' A Member who wishes to make a personal statement shall be heard at the end of the discussion of the item of the agenda being dealt with or when the Minutes of the sitting to which the request for leave to speak refers are considered for approval .
The Member concerned may not speak on substantive matters ' - which you did - ' but shall confine his observations to rebutting any remarks that have been made about his person ' - not about mine - ' or opinions that have been attributed to him , or to correcting observations that he himself has made . '
I say this only for the sake of good order .
I allowed you to speak , but you were not actually entitled to your contribution .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by giving the apologies of our rapporteur , Mr Garca-Margallo y Marfil , who has , at short notice , an important appointment in his home region and has therefore had to leave Strasbourg for a few hours .
He has asked me to present the report on his behalf and on behalf of the committee .
The Fiscalis programme has demonstrated its effectiveness as an instrument for the promotion of mutual understanding between the European Union 's tax officials and it is therefore the committee 's view , and that expressed in the Commission proposal , that it should be continued .
We have , however , tabled seven supplementary amendments .
The committee gives its unreserved support to the Commission 's proposal that the programme be proceeded with for a further five years .
We consider this a matter of urgency in view of the difficulties confronting the European Union in its attempts at preventing tax discrimination and tax fraud in the internal market , as mutual understanding and greater cooperation between the various tax authorities is of vital importance not least because of the difference in competences between internal market legislation and tax law .
What are this programme 's objectives ?
Firstly , the efficient operation of the internal market , which is substantially impaired by tax evasion , which damages legitimate business , has a detrimental effect on employment and undermines trust in the Community 's tax systems .
That requires effective monitoring and measures to combat fraud .
We need a network of tax administrations working together as if there were only one European tax administration , and this programme also contributes towards achieving the Lisbon objectives .
We also welcome the innovations in comparison with the old programme , which was a successful one , in the shape of the Commission proposals , chiefly for the increase in operational expenditure from EUR 40 million to EUR 56 million .
Secondly , the programme 's scope , which formerly covered the treatment of indirect taxes , has been extended to officials dealing with direct taxation .
We also welcome its clearer alignment and extension through the programme 's objectives being directly linked with those of other Community policies in the field of taxation .
Let me also say that we think it right for the programme to be open to candidate countries , as that already facilitates participation in seminars and exchanges and as administrative cooperation is very much of the essence in preparing the accession process and to make adjustments to regulations as and when necessary .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs ' amendments relate mainly to the following areas .
Firstly , we hold fast to the view that finance after 2006 will have to be agreed to by the Budgetary authority ; secondly , that the EU is in urgent need of a VAT system based on the principle of taxation in the country of origin , and that the direct taxation field needs increased awareness of Community policy in this area as well as of other Community policies and general principles of Community law affecting the taxation of individuals and of enterprises .
You will find , in addition to the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs ' seven amendments , an amendment by the Liberals and another by the Greens accompanying the reports from the Commission and the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and serving as bases for discussion .
What is crucial is that we include the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs ' amendments in the Commission 's programme , for that is the way we have taken , and it is the right one .
Mrs Lulling , I would seriously ask you to carry on your private conversations at a lower volume or outside the Chamber , as you really are disturbing the debate .
When you speak , you do not need a microphone !
Mr President , I am speaking not on behalf of my group or my committee , but on behalf of the British Conservative delegation in the European Democrat pillar within the PPE-DE Group .
We do not support the extension of the FISCALIS programme to cover direct taxes , in particular income tax and capital tax .
These are areas which should remain a matter for the exclusive competence of Member States .
The right to tax citizens is one of the hallmarks of a government .
Increasing EU involvement in taxation could spell the death of the nation state .
I know the response will be that this is just a technical scheme to exchange information and run seminars for tax officials , but I say it is one more step that takes the European Commission and the European Union closer into the tax affairs of Member States .
As Commissioner Prodi himself recently stated , very high political ambitions have often been achieved in the EU as a series of small , almost technical , steps .
I suggest that this is happening with tax , in the numerous different tax initiatives and ways in which the European Commission and the European Union are seeking to enlarge their competence over areas of tax .
I reject the technical steps that take the European Union closer into the tax affairs of Member States , just as I reject the ultimate objective of allowing the European Union to levy taxes on individuals in the European Union .
Democratic national governments should levy taxes . Undemocratic supranational organisations should not .
Mr President , as Mr Karas said in the first speech , the Fiscalis programme currently in operation has had real benefits .
It has allowed knowledge to be disseminated and it has added to the experience of those who participated in the programme .
It has definitely helped the fight against fraud and in doing so has improved the workings of the internal market .
It has allowed officials to adopt new administrative practices and cooperate more with each other .
All of these things have been very beneficial since 1998 .
It has also improved mutual understanding of Community tax law on indirect taxes such as VAT and excise taxes .
There have been exchanges of officials from the EU Member States , seminars on indirect tax issues of common interest , multilateral control of excise duties , development of common professional training across the European Union , including improving audit skills for the officials concerned , and , significantly , development of language training .
There has also been funding for the maintenance and development of communication and information systems and schemes .
Overall , we are enthusiastic about the Fiscalis programme and believe that it has been very successful and that it should be continued , but only in its present form .
It should also be extended , but only in its present form , to the candidate countries , which could benefit very much from this programme for the objectives and the kind of things that the Fiscalis programme has been carrying out .
They could certainly benefit from implementing the necessary legislative , organisational , administrative and technical measures in the programme as it exists at the moment .
I have stressed the notion of the programme as it exists at the moment because I agree with Mrs Villiers that the Fiscalis programme should not be extended to direct taxation .
Unlike value added tax , there is little by way of a shared body of knowledge of direct taxation across the EU Member States and different Member States impose indirect taxation in very different ways .
The fact needs to be borne in mind that the Fiscalis programme as it stands has not really been properly evaluated yet and it would not , therefore , be a good idea to carry it forward on this basis . The programme as it stands at the moment has been a success .
It should be continued in its present form and we should not extend it beyond its current boundaries .
Mr President , Commissioner , few issues contain so much political dynamite and evoke so many feelings as tax issues .
In a poem , the Swedish Nobel Prize winner , Erik Axel Karlfeldt , writing at the turn of the nineteenth century , highlighted five dangers in life : sheriffs and their constables , alcohol , women and the Devil .
' First comes the sheriff with his hard and overbearing ways ; he 'll rob you of inheritance , prosperity and farm . '
The fact that taxes have a special role to play in my own country , in which we have the world 's highest taxes , doubtless does not surprise anyone .
It is not , however , only in Sweden that the issue of taxes , particularly at EU level , is difficult to deal with .
There is also anxiety that , as Mrs Villiers and Mrs Honeyball pointed out , the next step after the common exchange of information might be the harmonisation of taxes , including direct taxes .
We in the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party are not prepared to allow the EU to decide about direct taxes .
What , of course , we can appreciate , however , are the advantages of , and need for , greater cooperation within that area too .
It is a question of increasing tax officials ' understanding of the Member States ' tax systems and the fact that , for example , one country might wish to reduce its high taxes ; it is a matter of raising the level of training and , in that way , improving the way in which the tax system operates in the internal market ; and it is about combating fraud , promoting developments in the computer field and ensuring that the candidate countries are fully involved .
We therefore support the Commission 's proposal and the report by Mr Garca-Margallo y Marfil , we endorse the rapporteur 's observation concerning the VAT system and country of origin principle and we also support the amendments by the Committee on Budgetary Control .
Allow me to emphasise how important it is for issues concerning personal privacy and the use of personal data to be dealt with in accordance with existing EU and national regulations .
That is important , especially in the area of tax .
Mr President , in spite of their good points , both the Commission 's Fiscalis 2007 programme and the report by my esteemed fellow Member , Mr Garca-Margallo y Marfil , seem to be lacking something .
I think that the report , and the programme , have forgotten the fiscal competences of certain regions that the Lamassoure report , as you will recall , terms ' regions with legislative competences ' and ' constitutional regions ' .
In fact , these are often nations that are already highly restricted by their own legal framework .
This is the case of my country , Catalonia .
With regard to taxes , situations can obviously differ .
Thus , the Basque Autonomous Communities possess real power .
The Catalan Autonomous Communities , meanwhile , do not have as much .
In any case , all these political bodies would like to be able to establish direct links with the Commission .
They would also like to be able to participate in Council meetings when their competences are at stake .
The amendment we have tabled is along these lines .
Mr President , tax evasion and fraud are , unfortunately , common features of the tax systems of all European countries .
Tax fraud and evasion take on a specific national dimension for each country , in line with its culture and varying according to the degree of citizenship felt in that country . They also have a supranational dimension , however , based on the use of sophisticated techniques and schemes for getting around the law .
It clearly falls to each country to adopt appropriate measures for eliminating tax evasion , although some of the stimulus for this must also come from Community policies .
In Portugal , for example , we know , as a result of studies of unquestionable scientific merit , that more than 25 % of potential tax revenue is lost every year .
Consequently , recovering around one-third or EUR 4 billion of this tax revenue would be enough to ensure that we easily meet the objectives set in the Stability and Growth Pact and , not least , balance public finances in 2004 .
This is leaving aside , obviously , the social damage caused by the injustices and inequalities - in other words , the iniquity - that such a permissive tax system allows and encourages .
In this context , all the Community measures favouring this effort , and specifically the continuation of the Fiscalis programme , which has been updated and strengthened under the proposals put forward by the European Parliament , which also apply to the candidate countries , are correct , welcome and are measures that we can support .
Tax evasion and fraud also have a supranational dimension , however , and in order to combat these practices , harmonising technical approaches or standardising administrative procedures , although important , are not sufficient .
We must move resolutely towards achieving legislative harmonisation itself .
Economic and Monetary Union means all countries sooner or later having a similar and harmonised tax model .
Although steps forward and progress in this field ( sufficiently supported by common policies , which would entail various concessions being made ) must be cautious and gradual and this policy must be formalised in accordance with the objectives set for Europe at the Lisbon Summit .
In accepting the renewal of the Fiscalis programme as a crucial instrument for the efficient functioning of the internal market , the European Parliament must also give a clear indication that this will simply be the other side of the coin of the requirements for economic competitiveness and financial consolidation that we so often demand - and rightly so .
Mr President , the programme that we have been discussing tonight , known as the Fiscalis 2007 programme , will continue and extend the existing Fiscalis programme which has been in place since 1998 .
Before the Commission decided to propose the Fiscalis 2007 programme , it evaluated the activities and the results of the existing Fiscalis programme .
That evaluation was based on Member States ' reports on their experience with that programme .
The evaluation indicated that Member States viewed the programme as being an essential tool in fostering administrative cooperation between administrations responsible for indirect taxation .
Accordingly , the Commission decided that the existing programme activities should continue to be funded by a Community programme .
The Commission also felt that it was necessary , particularly taking into account the conclusion of the Council 's ad hoc working party on tax fraud , to propose the extension of the programme to direct taxation .
That will mean in future that direct tax administrations will have a tool to help them to work closer together in a manner which has become second nature to indirect tax administrations by means of the Fiscalis programme .
The Commission also believes that it is important to give as much support as possible to the countries preparing for the enlargement of the European Union .
For that reason , candidate countries are put on an equal footing with Member States in this programme , which has special objectives to meet the needs of those administrations .
I should like to add it is very important that this programme is adopted before the expiry of the current Fiscalis programme .
I and the Commission are therefore extremely pleased that this proposal is supported by the European Parliament .
I particularly welcome the positive contribution of Mr Garca-Margallo y Marfil , the rapporteur for the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
Given the fact that examination of this proposal is ongoing in Council and given the Commission 's strong desire to have the programme adopted as quickly as possible , I believe that the most appropriate course of action at this time is for the Commission not so much to accept the amendments put forward by the Parliament .
In particular , as regards the budgetary issues raised in the reports , Amendments Nos 1 and 2 appear to be counter to the agreements between our respective institutions on budgetary discipline and in substance do no more than repeat what is already found in the proposal as regards the programme 's financial framework .
Amendments Nos 3 and 4 go beyond the scope of the Fiscalis 2007 programme which is a purely administrative measure .
Amendment No 5 is superfluous , because Parliament is already entitled to obtain the relevant documents .
Amendment No 6 would interfere with the proper implementation of the programme .
Amendment No 7 is superfluous because the decision already contains provisions on a regular follow-up of how objectives are achieved .
Amendment No 8 is also superfluous because the present programme does not have any direct impact on local fiscal authorities and I say this in particular in answer to remarks made by Mr Mayol i Raynal .
May I say that I am personally confident of the fact that an agreement between the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission will be achieved on these issues .
The Council has already started to discuss the proposal in detail . It will do its best to reach an agreement as soon as possible .
Your support for the proposal is very important in achieving that result .
I should like to thank Parliament for that support .
To reply in further detail to Mrs Villiers ' remarks , the Commission believes that there are convincing reasons for the programme to be extended to direct taxation , not least because the Council itself , in its ad hoc working party 's report , explicitly recommended improved cooperation in direct tax matters .
I am very much aware , as perhaps Mrs Villiers knows , of the fact that direct taxation , except where it distorts the internal market , for example in the case of contributions to pension funds across borders , is very much a matter of national political preferences .
That is a position I have often defended , both in the Commission and in outside discussions .
On that point I agree with Mrs Villiers .
But here we are talking about administrative cooperation and the basic issue is combating fraud .
I am sure Mrs Villiers dislikes fraud as much as the Commission .
Disliking something is one thing , doing something about it is another .
If we want to do something about fraud in the area of direct taxation , we must facilitate cooperation between fiscal authorities .
With all due respect to Mrs Villiers , I cannot escape the impression that perhaps she is looking at water burning if she objects to cooperation between the fiscal authorities in the field of direct taxation .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Mr President , we have now reached the home straight in a Commission initiative - I would call it a good Commission initiative - designed to achieve harmonisation of legislation on insurance mediation .
This is a field which so far had not been harmonised .
This gap will now be filled and fortunately , I believe , for the better , because the internal market in insurance is crippled if there are no common rules for the commercial networks .
If the insurance companies can act within Union territory without any borders , it is clearly also necessary that those who offer their products should be able to act under common rules , with freedom of establishment and freedom to provide services , once and for all in the internal market .
That , however , is not all that is needed : we must also harmonise our laws to achieve high standards of consumer protection in an area such as this , where there is a highly significant imbalance between the information held by the vendors of the products and that held by the purchasers .
This is one of the objectives in this proposal for a directive .
At first reading , Parliament adopted a total of 40 amendments , some admittedly by a tiny majority .
In the common position , just over half were accepted either as they stood or at least in spirit .
Now , at second reading , Parliament has repeated some of the amendments that were not adopted , although it has done so in terms which I think make their approval by the other institutions likely .
While on this subject , I should like to reflect a little on the codecision procedure , and this makes me think that , if this procedure is generalised , it cannot and must not lead to proceedings becoming unnecessarily lengthy or , if the co-legislating institutions start from different positions , to each one sticking to its own position without coming to any reasonable agreement .
If this agreement can be reached without going into the conciliation phase , so much the better and , if so , that is an objective I believe can be achieved in the processing of this directive , because Parliament has shown how it can play a full part in the legislative process by collaborating with other institutions , without the legislative procedure becoming unnecessarily lengthy because of it .
The procedure , however , also has its problems , and perhaps the most important of them is the debating system in this Parliament .
In contrast to what occurs in other parliaments , here we do not debate proposals in a contradictory fashion . Therefore it seems that any effort one may make to try to convince you that certain amendments are good or bad is a wasted effort .
Even so , I cannot help at least trying to put across my reasons for opposing or proposing a vote against certain of the amendments that have been adopted by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
I hope it will not be a wasted effort , because a thinker from my country used to say that wasted effort leads to melancholy , and at this time of night I do not want to get melancholic .
I oppose adoption of Amendments 2 and 14 approved in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , and I am opposed more strongly than I can tell you to the content of Amendment 2 , for various reasons .
First , on technical grounds : the amendment tries to exclude from harmonisation certain possibilities that , if approved , would contradict other points in the directive .
Other points , ladies and gentlemen , that were approved in the text and accepted by the Council and Commission as a consequence of this Parliament 's amendments at first reading .
How are we going to adopt this amendment if it conflicts with our own texts ?
Secondly , but no less importantly : if , as Amendment 2 would have it , certain types of intermediary are to be excluded from harmonisation , this means , no less , that a large part of the sale of insurance contracts would fall outside the consumer protection mechanisms contained in the directive , and this should not be accepted .
Mr President , first of all , as PPE-DE shadow rapporteur , let me congratulate my Socialist colleague , Mr Berenguer Fuster , on an excellent piece of work which has achieved a remarkable degree of cross-party consensus within Parliament and the committee .
I am very pleased with this Council common position document , which reads far better and more intelligibly than the initial Commission proposals .
It is internally consistent and incorporates some 20 first reading amendments from Parliament , including several that I submitted , such as the need to cater for the electronic age and Internet age by allowing for computer and disk storage of data , exemptions for telephone selling , exemptions for the travel industry for small contracts and action to ensure that the scope of the directive does not extend to the mere provision of information on products .
I fully accept compromise Amendment No 15 relating to transitional provisions to exempt existing brokers and also compromise Amendment No 7 for a regular review of registration as opposed to my original proposal for a three-yearly review .
This was originally carried by the committee in order to ensure the maintenance of high standards of probity and professional standards of the intermediaries , or brokers , as we call them in the UK .
I particularly support the Council proposal for information exchange between competent registration authorities and the fact that the role of the insurance undertaking is prescribed in the intermediaries ' registration process , particularly for the tied intermediaries category .
After much deliberation I too will oppose Amendment No 2 as I realise this would pose problems to the Council by considerably reducing the application of the directive .
If passed , it would necessarily have to go to conciliation .
I shall support compromise Amendment No 16 to get rid of the best-advice principle , which would impose unacceptable burdens on the industry .
I continue to support Amendment No 18 , which is designed to reduce the burden on the industry by ensuring that the obligation to provide information applies only when a customer requests it .
In summary , this has the making of a good piece of pioneer legislation which will be an integral part of the financial services action plan and the first designed specifically for insurance brokers .
It will serve as a model for other types of brokers in financial products and , not doubt , in other areas as well .
This definitive measure will provide a useful service to Europe 's consumers in facilitating a safe and competitive pan-European insurance market with mutually recognised and acceptable standards of professional competence by using the financial passport , with only minimal standards being set , rather than prescriptive harmonisation proceedings , as some would have claimed necessary for such an undertaking .
I congratulate the rapporteur .
I look forward to this speedily becoming European law .
Madam President , Commissioner , I am replacing Mrs Riis-Jrgensen , who has other important commitments this evening .
To begin with , I wish to thank Commissioner Bolkestein who has once again presented a well-balanced proposal for completing the internal market , this time within the field of financial services .
I also want to thank the rapporteur , Mr Berenguer Fuster , for a sound piece of work , from the first reading to today 's second and very rapid reading .
It is gratifying that the Council is , for the most part , adopting Parliament 's position from the first reading .
This proposal will make it possible to make cross-border offers of insurance while providing a high degree of consumer protection .
There is a good balance between a freer market , benefiting consumers by offering them more choice , better competition and lower prices , and the requirements governing the protection of policyholders .
The fact that this balance between the market and consumer protection has , in the end , been established at the right level and feels reasonable is incredibly important for an increasingly cross-border market .
It is basically a question of confidence , which is something we are seeing right now in the financial markets .
The regulations must be designed in a way that creates confidence in those who constitute the market , that is to say the consumers .
As Dr Tannock stated , it is not a question of harmonising all the regulations but , rather , of finding methods of achieving a mutual acceptance of current rules in the various Member States .
I believe that is a wise approach .
In general , those of us in the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party assent to most of the amendments , even though we question the wisdom of adopting a number of them .
Allow me to mention the most important amendment which , in important respects , alters the whole proposal .
In common with Mr Berenguer Fuster , I am talking about the second amendment , which we cannot accept .
It would be unfair to consumers and their demand for security .
It would also be in danger of distorting competition .
We shall therefore vote against this amendment .
Mr President , the current draft proposal on cross-European insurance mediation ensures a high level of professionalism and competence among insurance intermediaries .
Our common aim is to guarantee that all persons , natural and legal , pursing the activity of insurance brokerage are registered by a competent authority on the basis of a minimum set of professional requirements .
A single registration system for intermediaries facilitates cross-border activities by way of freedom of establishment and freedom to provide services .
The proposal also guarantees a high level of protection for customers ' interests .
Unfortunately the original Commission proposal did not take sufficient account of the diversity of European insurance markets .
It would have imposed an unnecessarily heavy bureaucratic burden on many intermediaries , without increasing customer protection .
Our amendments from the first reading referred explicitly to those whose main activity is not to sell insurance but rather to offer the standardised insurance contracts that have been in use in many countries for decades , for instance tourist assistance packages or car insurance offered by travel agencies and car dealers .
Customer protection is a primary value in the insurance business of my home country and , yes , travel agents and car dealers are entitled to sell standardised products .
Trouble-free years of experience have shown that the current practice is in the interests of both intermediaries and customers .
Costs of insurance mediation must not be increased , especially when there is no benefit to customers .
Nor is it useful for certain Member States to adopt more stringent provisions regarding information requirements , which bring no added value to the customer but merely distort competition between European providers .
I am happy that my colleagues supported my amendments in the committee vote and I hope they will also support them tomorrow .
The directive as it now stands in the second reading is a good draft , providing a reasonable compromise between the legitimate interests of Member States , insurance providers and customers .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to enlarge on my speech of 13 November 2001 by discussing the following areas . I would like , first , to thank the rapporteur and the PPE-DE Group 's shadow rapporteur for the excellent work they have done .
I believe that both the Commission proposal and Parliament 's report make a further contribution to a stronger financial internal market , to facilitation of cross-border activity and to greater harmonisation in this area , which is dependent on public trust and of importance to transparency .
A number of amendments have already been discussed .
For my part , I would like to deal with Amendment No 6 , which concerns itself with greater transparency , because we want to see to it that the register , in addition to the proposed methods , shall indicate the country or countries in which the intermediary conducts business under the rules on establishment or on the freedom to provide services .
On the other hand , we want to ensure that there are greater possibilities for monitoring , by using Amendment No 10 to allow consumer associations to register complaints .
Then Amendment No 12 has to do with sorting out the frequently-discussed question of whether information should be supplied without being requested , by stipulating that information on the customer 's rights must be supplied , whilst detailed information may be requested .
I would like to say that Amendment No 2 should not be misunderstood .
It is not opposed to harmonisation .
Many countries , though , have stricter rules of various kinds , so that , for example , credit institutions are already subject to many requirements contained in this directive .
Amendment No 2 is therefore intended to take account of these different rules , which already impose higher standards , by making different approaches to it possible , without , though , undermining the directive 's basic tendency .

Mr President , I would like to begin by thanking the European Parliament and in particular the rapporteur , Mr Berenguer Fuster , for their judicious and efficient handling of this matter .
After the second reading in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , only 18 amendments were submitted to plenary .
This is evidence of the balanced quality of the common position text which Mr Berenguer Fuster mentioned to the committee last week .
It was not just a compliment .
Indeed , the common position to a large extent follows the line taken by Parliament at first reading .
It took account of the most important amendments adopted , which improved our initial proposal .
The action plan for financial services identified insurance intermediaries as a priority objective .
Insurance intermediaries are indeed confronted with obstacles which prevent them from taking full advantage of the freedoms of the Treaty . This hinders the proper functioning of the internal market .
The directive following the text of the common position will ensure that , once registered in his home Member State , which is responsible for checking professional and financial requirements , an insurance intermediary will be able to conduct his activities throughout the internal market .
That will improve the functioning of that internal market in insurance , particularly as regards retail markets .
At the same time , the directive will guarantee the protection of customers by setting appropriate information requirements .
The Council common position now submitted to this Parliament is fully consistent with the essential objectives pursued in the Commission 's proposal .
The Commission supports this text .
But it is vital to ensure that the difficult balance reached in the common position is not put in jeopardy by amendments which would not be compatible with its fundamental objectives .
Let me now turn to the amendments which were submitted to plenary .
The Commission can accept the following amendments : Amendments Nos 1 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 15 and 16 .
With regard to Amendment No 17 , which aims to clarify the scope of the directive , the Commission can accept it , even though it considers that minor redrafting is needed in order to avoid any misunderstanding .
The Commission is not , however , in a position to accept the following amendments : Amendments Nos 2 , 9 , 13 , 14 and 18 , for the following reasons : firstly , Amendment No 2 , on which Mr Berenguer Fuster , Mr Tannock and Mr Schmidt have spoken just now .
That amendment aims to exclude from the scope of the proposal a large number of insurance intermediaries , such as car dealers selling motor insurance , travel agencies , veterinary surgeons , captive intermediaries of industrial firms and some bank insurance activities .
Such exclusions would affect the sale of a large number of insurance products involving important risks .
They would deprive the directive of a major part of its content .
Furthermore these excluded intermediaries would not be able to make use of the advantages provided for in the directive .
Should these intermediaries be excluded from the benefits of the internal market , I very much share Mr Berenguer Fuster 's concern about that amendment .
The Commission cannot accept it .
Amendment No 9 introduces a transitional provision aiming to facilitate the application of the directive to those intermediaries already carrying out activities before the date of adoption of the proposal by the Commission , namely September 2000 .
The Commission already welcomed this idea at first reading , but , as Amendment No 15 better meets the concerns of the directive , the Commission would prefer it to be adopted rather than Amendment No 9 .
While a fundamental element of the proposal and the common position is to ensure a high level of consumer protection by providing customers with appropriate information and advice , Amendment No 13 would devalue that requirement .
It provides that the advice given by an intermediary has to be based on the best possible advice principle .
The Commission cannot accept that amendment .
It would imply enormous difficulties for the work of any insurance intermediary .
It would also lead to great legal uncertainty and may be a source of legal conflict .
Last , but not least , it would increase the costs of insurance mediation .
The text of the common position already contains a balanced provision which makes it mandatory to provide appropriate advice on the basis of a fair analysis of the insurance contracts available on the market .
That provision fully ensures a high level of consumer protection .
Amendment No 16 , which refers to an objective analysis , is along the same lines as the common position and may improve the text .
The last amendment that I wish to discuss is Amendment No 14 , which provides , in the case of immediate cover , for a derogation to the principle that the information requested by the directive must be given in writing .
That would jeopardise the objective of a high level of consumer protection .
The common position already takes account of the spirit of Amendment No 44 proposed at first reading .
Accepting this new amendment would deprive the consumer of written confirmation of the information required by the directive .
The same reasoning also applies to Amendment No 18 , which reduces the obligation on insurance intermediaries to specify the demands of the customer .
Thank you , Commissioner Bolkestein .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 p.m.
The next item is a report ( A5-0177 / 2002 ) by Mrs Stihler , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on measures for the recovery of cod and hake stocks [ COM ( 2002 ) 724 - C5-0095 / 2001 - 0299 ( CNS ) ] .
Madam President , the background to this report is well known , but worth repeating as it is crucial .
In November 2000 , the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea ( ICES ) warned that cod stocks in the North Sea and west of Scotland waters and the northern hake stocks are at serious risk of collapse .
ICES estimates that cod stocks in the North Sea are at their lowest level since 1963 and that technical measures and TAC reductions alone will not be enough to restore them to within safe limits .
Cod stocks in the Kattegat , Irish Sea and west of Scotland waters are in similar condition .
For hake the decline in stocks has been less dramatic , but stocks are thought to be around only half of their 1980 levels .
At the December 2000 Fisheries Council meeting , it was agreed that more long-term conservation measures were necessary in addition to TAC reductions for 2001 .
The Commission was invited to submit proposals for a multi-annual recovery plan .
During 2001 , the Commission adopted various emergency regulations to restrict the fishing of these species and in June 2001 , it issued a communication outlining its strategy for rebuilding cod and hake stocks in Community and adjacent waters .
The current proposed multi-annual recovery programme for cod and hake follows on from that communication .
I welcome the overall approach , which includes targets for recovery of each of the stocks , total allowable catches allowing for an annual percentage increase of 30 % for cod and 15 % for hake , with an upper and lower limit to the permitted change in the TAC of 50 % from one year to the next , a system of fishing effort limitation , enhanced controls in relation to satellite tracking for vessels over 50 metres in length , position reporting , landing conditions , retentions on board and conditions for weighing and transport . The potential use of temporary closed areas for up to 60 days .
I believe that successful recovery of stocks must be a priority .
We must at all costs avoid a Canadian-style disappearance of cod and hake from these northern waters .
In Canada , a cod moratorium was introduced in 1992 .
Some 30,000 people lost their jobs , the biggest lay-off in Canadian history .
The cod disappeared due to a complex mix of factors , including over-fishing , and a decade later the stocks have not recovered .
We cannot ignore the ecological warning signs .
At the committee vote , references to hake were removed from this report . I hope colleagues will support me as rapporteur in trying to reinstate hake in this report .
Although there is disagreement over whether cod and hake should be treated together , the Commission 's approach seems to me acceptable , provided that sufficient account is taken of the specific situation of the two species .
The figures and the levels of hake stocks have been questioned and we should be guided by evidence .
On the measure proposed for hake , new scientific evidence may allow a relaxation in the targets and the percentage stock increase expected .
We need a package of measures which first of all work and secondly minimise the pain to the sector .
Finally , while the success of the recovery plans must be the priority , an annual review of their progress and socio-economic impact should be undertaken .
However , if recovery is not achieved the outcome will be increased socio-economic hardship .
In any event , without fish there cannot be fisheries .
I ask colleagues to vote for Amendments Nos 2 , 4 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 15 and 16 and against Amendments Nos 1 , 3 , 5 , 9 and 14 .
Madam President , I must start by regretting the absence of Commissioner Fischler .
I believe this debate is important enough to deserve his presence here today .
Rigorous , transparent , verified scientific reports , carried out together with the industry , should be the first pillar of the CFP reform in order to have credibility in the conservation of our fishery species .
We need to diagnose the true state of the stocks precisely and accurately , because otherwise we could be using a sledgehammer to crack a nut .
The European Union should be a global example of marine research , but it is not , not even - and I say this to Commissioner Fischler - with his proposed reform , which pushes science into the background .
Last week at a meeting of marine scientists , Mr Robin Cook , of the Aberdeen marine research laboratory and an advisory member of the ICES , stated that the fisheries reform proposed was based on scientific reports that were very poor and which lacked transparency .
John Molloy of the Dublin Marine Institute - as you can see I do not mention any Spanish scientists here - said that ' fishermen are scientists ' and that we need to use the raft of first-hand information they have , which is currently being ignored .
The Canadian scientist McGuire has also rejected the hake catastrophe reports .
The industry rejects them outright .
We are aware that the ICES and the Scientific and Technical Committee on Fisheries do not agree , and they again brought up the review of current hake reports at Lisbon and Copenhagen .
Mr Fischler , without an economic , social and regional impact assessment , proposes equating cod and hake , which are very different species and very different situations ; and he adopts drastic , irreversible measures to cut down the fleet as if there were no other alternative measures that would maintain the stock while we wait for conclusive reports .
I call on the Commissioner to think it over for once .
The Committee on Fisheries approved Amendment 1 - I see the rapporteur is against separating the two species - and I hope the House will adopt it .
If not , I hope the Council can bring it back in .
We want to protect stocks but not at just any price , not through just any measure .
We want the ecological reports to include economic and social reports , and we must take into account the industry which has been fishing in the same waters for several generations , and they do not understand the Commission 's proposal , in view of the results they are getting , and they want other biological reference points to be selected that are broad in scope and more rigorous .
I therefore call on the Commission to go deeper into CFP reform and marine research , and to devote more human and material resources to it .
I call on it to review the proposal for hake , since the industry that depends on it demands more transparency , more participation , more dialogue , more objectivity and more reliability before it will accept the proposals that the Commission puts before us .
Madam President , I offer my sincerest congratulations to my colleague , Catherine Stihler , for her excellent work , which gives the Council the opportunity to approve a much more balanced plan for these two species .
I cannot , however , agree with her desire , as rapporteur , to reinstate hake in this report .
As she well knows , I had tabled 13 amendments in committee aimed at softening the measures for hake , and more than half lapsed when the committee adopted the amendment tabled by Mr Varela , which separates the two species .
Therefore , if we now approved the report for both species together , it would be highly unbalanced .
The Community fisheries policy has to find a balance among the measures on stock conservation , the reasonable adjustment of the fleet to each Member State and the maintenance of economic activity in fishing-dependent regions .
It is a complex approach .
First of all , because overfishing is not the only cause of stock depletion : the indiscriminate catching of species for fishmeal production interrupts the food chain for cod and hake and to a great extent causes the situation both species are going through .
There are certainly highly significant differences between these two fisheries as regards their mortality and growth rates and the conservation measures needed .
The situation of cod in the North Sea and off Scotland is different , just as the situation of northern hake off south-western Ireland differs from that off the French coast .
Not all species - and this is something we have to say out loud - and not all fishing grounds are in the same state .
In this respect , the Committee on Fisheries considered that the hake and cod situations are different , and that hake should have different measures from cod , which should be adopted based on confirmed scientific reports .
There is no single , unified and indisputable scientific basis to indicate that the northern hake stock has fallen below the biological safety limit , and there does not seem to be a need for drastic management measures to save this stock .
We cannot forget the great economic and social impact that these measures will have on the fishing communities .
The Commission has not undertaken any study of these consequences or of those that must be taken into account when the plan is implemented , nor has it shown us an evaluation of the emergency measures it adopted in 2001 .
It must be remembered too that the TAC for hake was cut by 51 % between 1999 and 2001 .
The European fishing fleet quite reasonably needs to know what prospects there are for this activity .
My group is therefore opposed to drastic cuts , which can be brought in over longer periods .
We therefore support the rapporteur 's Amendment 8 , and once again I sincerely congratulate her on the excellent work she has done .
Mr President , this is a very important report because the European Community is discussing recovery plans for fish stocks for the first time .
Since this is the first time , it is very important that we get it right .
We must make sure that the actions we take will reverse the declines in several cod stocks and northern hake and allow them to recover .
The Commission proposals were tough and will definitely have an impact upon the fishing communities involved , but they had to be tough because the state of the stocks is so poor .
As the rapporteur has said , if we do not do something about fish stocks , there will be no fishing industry in the future as there will be no fish .
ICES says that cod in the North Sea is at its lowest level since 1963 .
While hake may not yet be in such dire straits , it is still far below the level which is appropriate , and the warning bells have been ringing now for quite some time .
The Commission , the Committee on Fisheries and the Council all claim to agree with the precautionary approach , which states that the absence of definite proof should not be used to refuse action to prevent a decline in fish stocks .
In other words , as soon as there are reasonable grounds to believe that cod and hake stocks need a degree of protection , we should act .
That is exactly what the Commission has done .
However , what did the Committee on Fisheries do ?
It argued that there is no crisis involving hake and completely removed it from the proposal .
We must vote against this amendment . I agree with the rapporteur on this point .
It is completely unacceptable .
This is not a precautionary approach to fisheries management . The committee is simply paying lip service to the idea and continuing with business as usual .
We are not going to solve the problems if this is the way we go on .
We cannot keep refusing to face up to reality .
We must realise that these stocks are endangered and we must protect the fishing industry .
It is doing the fishing industry no favours in the long term if this is the kind of simplistic , nationalistic short-term approach that has been taken .
If the report goes through plenary as it is , the Verts / ALE Group will have to vote against it .
Madam President , during the course of 20 years , cod stocks in the North Sea have shrunk by three-quarters .
At the same time , the number of cod fishermen has fallen considerably in my country .
In 1980 , there were still 310 cutters that fished for cod under the Dutch flag , while these days most fishermen have switched to flatfish , and there are only a handful of cutters left that fish for cod .
Nonetheless , this reduction in the number of fishermen does not seem enough .
The Commission is right to table proposals for multi-annual recovery programmes for cod and hake .
However , in the Commission 's proposals on reform of the European fisheries policy which Commissioner Fischler presented recently , those very fish-stock related reductions are missing .
The link in the case of cod and , to a lesser degree , of hake , is evident .
I share Mrs Stihler 's view completely when she states in the explanatory statement to the report that successful recovery of the stocks must be the priority .
The package of measures must be effective , but must also take account of the socio-economic damage to the fisheries sector .
There is no point putting the sector under pressure if the measures implemented do not have the desired effect on the stocks .
This is why it is important to monitor the effectiveness of the measures .
Measures must be reversed as soon as it is evident that they do not have any positive effects .
As a bad example of such a futile measure , I would remind the Commission of the cod contingency plan which it launched for the North Sea in the winter of 2000 .
This contingency plan , by means of which part of the North Sea was closed for fishing , had the opposite effect .
In the open areas , fishing pressure rose enormously , while in the closed areas , the fish stocks were quickly caught following their re-opening .
According to fisheries biologists , the closed areas did not correspond very well with the mating areas of cod .
Due to the fleet concentration in the open areas , vulnerable areas are being over-fished .
In my view , fishermen and biologists were right to conclude that the Commission was not so much concerned about effectiveness as it was about political viability .
A repeat of this debacle and the lack of proportion must be avoided .
It is unacceptable for Dutch fishermen who are allowed to catch 10 % of the Total Allowed Catch , the TAC , for cod , to be far more restricted in their fishing activities than British fishermen who account for 40 % of the TAC .
I will make a few observations to the measures included in the Commission proposal .
First of all , the aforementioned area closures are a good example of how things should not be done .
Real-time closures , closures in an area where a high concentration of young fish is found , on the other hand , can be an effective measure .
Technical measures can be of particular importance for the fishermen who fish for cod as a secondary activity .
Secondly , the reduction in TAC for cod entails the risk that the fishing pressure on unquoted species will increase enormously .
Pro-active policy should ensure that unquoted species are quoted as quickly as possible .
This is all the more important when in 2003 , Spanish and Portuguese ships will also be heading for the North Sea .
If the Commission abandons TACs and quotas for these species , we can expect recovery plans for these species in ten years ' time .
Thirdly , a reduction in effort is achieved most quickly by applying the sea-days ' scheme .
It is delightful to see that a system used in the Netherlands , that was always met with criticism by the Commission , is now finally being adopted by the self-same Commission .
I hope that the Commission will apply this method more widely .
A weekend ban , well-known in the transport world , is being recommended by Dutch fishermen .
Fourthly , the Commission should not simply leave the details of the sea-days ' scheme and the financial compensation to the Member States .
This would lead to unfair competition .
The Commission must prescribe reduction figures for each Member State .
These figures can be based on the quota and the observed over-fishing in recent years .
Finally , we must ensure that fleets that have found a balanced relationship between effort and quotas do not undergo further re-organisation .
By that , I mean that if a fleet , in the event of sound quota management , is capable of working profitably and effectively , then this should not be disturbed .
It is therefore positive that subsidies for the building of new vessels will be abolished .
But even when FIFG funds are used , the fishing capacity should not be maintained artificially .
It is important for the impact of the plans to be assessed in good time .
It is also important that we then take account of the socio-economic damage to the sector .
If the recovery plan fails , the damage to cod , hake and to fishermen will be incalculable .
Mr President , I shall start by also congratulating Mrs Stihler on her excellent report and on the excellent speech she made this evening in this House .
Everyone in this House is aware that fish stocks are in sharp decline across the EU .
That is why the Commission has come to us with a radical new package of proposals for reform of the common fisheries policy .
That is why we are facing an 18 % cut in overall gross tonnage in the EU fleet , with the attendant massive impact that this will have on jobs in many economically challenged and remote peripheral areas of the Community .
However , we also understand that the two species at most serious risk of collapse are cod and northern hake .
There is at least no doubt about the state of cod stocks .
I would admit that there are , however , some doubts about the state of hake stocks .
The International Council for the Exploration of the Sea ( ICES ) claims that hake stocks are on the verge of collapse .
Other independent scientists claim the stocks are still at sustainable levels and they challenge the ICES findings .
As Mrs McKenna has pointed out in her speech this evening , we are pledged in this House to apply the precautionary principle whenever such doubts exist .
In these circumstances , I would appeal to this House to reinstate hake in the Commission 's recovery plan until such time as the scientific evidence can be analysed and verified in exactly the way Mr Varela Suanzes-Carpegna has called for this evening .
Yesterday , as we all know , a substantial number of Member States voiced their opposition to certain aspects of the Commission 's proposals for reforming the CFP during the Fisheries Council .
They want public aid to be used for building new vessels , they want open access to Community waters , they support short-term profits over long-term sustainability , they oppose change , they support the status quo .
Theirs is surely a policy of despair .
We cannot continue as we have done in the past .
If we do so , it will not be only cod and hake that disappear , our fishing industry will disappear as well .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , fishing exploits natural resources which are , admittedly , renewable , but they are also fragile and easily destroyed .
Because for centuries catching methods were of limited effectiveness , the idea arose that stocks were inexhaustible .
This feeling still exists in some reactions against conservation policies . Nevertheless , in the face of a public opinion that cares about protecting nature and of the economic risks created by the collapse of some fish species , fishermen are realising that they must be marine life 's allies and not its enemies .
It is in this context that any reform of fisheries policy must be seen , whether it is a wide-ranging reform or one designed to address specific situations , such as this one .
The aim of the legislation currently under consideration , which is the subject of the excellent Stihler report , is to prevent the disaster that the extinction of fish as popular as cod and hake would represent .
We can discuss the relative values of the recommended measures and the effectiveness of the method of implementing them ; we can discuss the accuracy of the scientific data on which this method is based , but what cannot be underestimated is the danger threatening cod population units and , on a smaller scale , those for hake as well as the need to turn the situation around and to recover these population units .
In our debates on fisheries , we have frequently come up against the uncertainty and the unreliability of scientific data .
This is the justification for the Committee on Fisheries ' decision to make its proposals for hake more flexible .
I wonder whether this is a step in the right direction .
I have my doubts .
For these reasons , I call on the Commission to set up a system of scientific and technically credible research on which to base our decisions .
It is crucial that the Commission does this .
Cod , as everyone knows , is one of the cornerstones of Portuguese cuisine , but man does not live by haute cuisine alone .
Cod fishing in Newfoundland is deeply ingrained in the minds of our fishermen and has left indelible traces in Portuguese literature .
We must , therefore , fight to save the cod !
Mr President , this proposal highlights the desperate state of some of our fish stocks and underlines why it is so important that the Commission and the Council get the reform of the CFP right .
There must be no bowing to political pressures .
They must ensure that the objective of sustainable fisheries is at the core of fisheries management .
While I accept that recovery plans for hake must be specific to that fishery , I do not believe that hake should be excluded from the proposal .
As to the details of the proposal , I have some concerns to highlight .
Firstly , the Commission must take greater account of mixed fisheries which are impacted by recovery plans .
Crucially I am not convinced that the Commission has learned the lessons from the dangers of displacing effort , as we saw in the north of Scotland last year .
The Commission must ensure that scientific advice is reliable and verifiable , not just in determining what areas should be closed but determining the effect of such closures .
The removal of ceilings on financial contributions under the FIFG is to be welcomed .
But the Commission has failed to propose a system which ensures that there is equal treatment of fishermen subject to recovery measures and that it is not promoting unfair competition between fishermen from different Member States .
I hope the Commission will heed the committee 's amendment calling for Community funding which is not dependent on cofinancing to compensate fishermen under these plans .
Safety is of paramount importance .
While public aid for modernisation and renewal should not be a bottomless pit , it should be available for improvements to safety .
A combination of ageing vessels and days-at-sea restrictions could be a lethal combination .
It is vital that safety be taken into account when measuring the impact of recovery plans and , for that matter , fisheries management in general .
Madam President , I hope we have all been able to fortify ourselves with the delicious Dutch herrings that have been provided for us .
I would like to thank Mr Albert Jan Maat from the bottom of my heart .
That was a great occasion , and I can only confirm - as I think you will too - that fish are a good thing .
I do not want to talk up the vote on stock rebuilding as the fateful question in the run-up to the fisheries reform , but I do hope that those who reject the Commission 's proposal for a regulation as submitted , will after all agree to a compromise tomorrow morning , a compromise that would again permit hake alongside cod , just as the Commission had rightly proposed .
I , too , have had second thoughts in the meantime .
Like others , I still have hope , as I have in the meantime re-examined the matter ; I have not done this completely off my own bat , but have taken scientific bases , ICES for example , as my starting point .
Who would seriously call their data into question ?
Has the Commission submitted a proposal including measures to recover the stocks of cod and hake ?
That stocks of both species are severely threatened has been disputed by nobody here this evening , and so , if we want to be consistent , hake must not be left out , and the sceptics should bear in mind that prevention is better than cure .

We have to get to grips with the biological realities and the problems nature creates for an exact analysis of the stock .
Fish swim .
That is why nobody can count their precise number , and also why casting doubt on ICES ' recommendations is a popular sport .
We have for a considerable time been able to see where that leads , not only with cod and hake , and not only in European waters .
I would like fisheries to be economically sustainable , environmentally responsible and socially acceptable .
If this is to happen , our prime need is for healthy stocks .
Action is needed to break the vicious circle of more and better boats chasing fewer and fewer fish .
Now !
Excess capacity is being cut back in other sectors of the economy as well , and that is something that fisheries will , unfortunately , have to get used to , as European fisheries have to be maintained , but standing on their own feet , not kept alive by Europe , and not without fish in our own waters .
Madam President , I have conflicting feelings about this proposal for a regulation and this report .
On the one hand , I feel I must make my rejection of this regulation clear , particularly with regard to hake , which suffers irrational and unjustifiable damage as a result of being treated together with cod .
On the other hand , however , I believe that this will provide a valuable tool for calling into question the reform of the CFP , which was proposed by Commissioner Franz Fischler and presented by the Commission to the Council .
The weakness of the Commission 's arguments becomes apparent simply from reading the Stihler report 's explanatory statement , particularly when the Commission attempts to base the regulation on supposedly reliable scientific studies .
As the rapporteur points out , the proposal for measures was approved in 2001 , on the basis of the information supplied by the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea , even before the drastic reductions of the TACs agreed for 2001 had been implemented .
As the rapporteur points out , the scientific considerations are full of ambiguities and uncertainties .
To quote from the text : ' For hake , the decline in stocks has been less dramatic and therefore the scientific evidence is less clear cut and indeed the subject of some dispute ' .
I continue : ' Disagreement occurs over whether the two species [ hake and cod ] should be treated together , the speed at which recovery should be attempted and hence the severity of the measures necessary and what precisely those measures should be . ' etc .
The report highlights , furthermore and above all , the impact and the economic effects that have not been addressed in the draft regulation .
These , Madam President , are the many consequences that will occur or which are already occurring , in a sector which will become much more crucial and dangerous as a result of the unfair and irrational Fischler reform of the common fisheries policy .
Madam President , firstly I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on a very courageous report .
This is going to be very painful for all fishermen , because it will mean that there will be many reductions in the catch and many job losses .
She refers to that in her report . There are some measures there to help fishermen .
One thing we can be sure of is that fish do not recognise any border or boundary .
We must also recognise that this is a cod and hake report .
I want to make sure that we urge all colleagues to vote for hake to be reintroduced to this report .
Otherwise we will be sitting here in the not very distant future saying that the hake stocks have been reduced so dramatically that we need even more draconian measures in order to reinstate them .
The rapporteur said that hake stocks have been reduced by 50 % since 1980 , so we must take measures to make sure that they improve .
We also have to accept that when fish are swimming in the sea they do not separate themselves out neatly , so when you go out to fish one particular species you cannot always be sure that is the only species you catch .
We have to take a wider look at all the conservation measures .
We must in particular find a solution to discards of fish , tradable quotas when you come ashore or whatever it may be .
There must be a way to stop discarding healthy fish , because the stocks are not there and we must make sure that they are built up again .
We have only to look at what has happened in Canada to see that if you carry on fishing then there is going to be no fish for anybody .
It is also wrong for one particular Member State to exert enormous political pressure to try and have hake removed from this report and then try to get more fish for itself .
At the end of the day it does not matter what nationality we are .
If there are no fish , there are no stocks and nobody will be able to fish .
We have to be sure that these measures are put in place .
I again congratulate the rapporteur and ask that we all vote for what was originally a cod and hake report - and make sure that we do have a cod and hake report .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I take the floor in this House to support the proposal by the Committee on Fisheries , principally to uphold the need to exclude northern hake stocks from the scope of the proposal for a Council regulation establishing measures for the recovery of cod and hake stocks .
I do so because the situations of the cod and hake stocks are very different .
If they are not excluded , we will be putting at risk thousands of jobs and an industry on which many coastal communities in the European Union depend for their living , on no verified , irrefutable technical-scientific grounds .
This socio-economic consequence should be a good enough reason to make us think , but there are other reasons too : the proposal is based on an alleged scientific study , but by November 2001 the Scientific , Technical and Economic Committee for Fisheries was pointing out that the precautionary points of reference used by the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea were not currently valid and , besides , recommended that they should be reviewed immediately .
As nobody , no administration , has a monopoly on common sense and doing the right thing , there is an obvious need for a scientific advisory appeal mechanism , a need for peer review and , of course , a need to listen to and analyse in depth what the affected sector seriously has to say with their verified and verifiable arguments and studies .
When decisions of great social significance are to be adopted , they need to be very well grounded ; the studies on which they are based have to be irrefutable .
All that has been said so far , ladies and gentlemen , does not mean opposing other serious and responsible alternative measures for conserving and improving hake stocks until such time as the studies have been completed and confirmed , but we must not support measures that may have irreversible consequences .
It must , of course , be possible to apply the precautionary principle without causing economic disasters or social upheavals .
A balance is possible , and the Commission must seek it .
A first step will be verified , confirmed studies , which will show we are quite right and provide us with arguments .
Things have to be done properly , especially when our fishermen are clearly at risk of being seriously harmed .
Madam President , may I begin by saying that I shall not speak about the proposal itself , other than to emphasise that the Commission regards this as one of the most important steps to be undertaken under the common fisheries policy .
As many here are aware , this proposal foreshadows many aspects to be discussed in future on the overall reform of the common fisheries policy .
If we cannot collaborate to secure recovery of our fish stocks , the future of fish and fishermen cannot be ensured .
Let me now comment on the amendments .
On Amendment No 1 , the Commission cannot accept this amendment , which would remove reference to hake from the proposal .
ICES has advised that the stock of hake is in danger of collapse .
If this is the case , the Commission must act to rectify this situation .
The only alternative assessment of the state of the stock is that prepared at the request of the Instituto Espaol de Oceanografa by Canadian fishery scientist , Mr Maguire .
During the discussions in Council working parties , Spain has not challenged the validity of the ICES assessment of the historical development of the hake stock or of the current state of that stock .
Spain has challenged one of the so-called precautionary reference points against which the state of the stock is judged .
In detail , the Spanish officials have proposed that the value of 165 000 tonnes in the Commission proposal should be changed to 145 000 tonnes .
This position does not contradict the perception that the stock is in danger of collapse .
It perhaps means that it is in less danger , but the dangers still exist .
Regarding Amendment No 2 , the Commission feels that this amendment is unnecessary since account is already consistently taken of scientific reports on environmental effects , to the extent that these effects are scientifically documented and quantified .
An example is the effect of low salinity in recent years on reproductive success of cod in the Baltic .
The other factors mentioned in the amendment lie beyond the scope of the common fisheries policy and therefore it would be inappropriate to refer to them in this proposal .
Furthermore it remains a fact that for cod , hake and many other fish stocks , fishing is the main cause of mortality and the reduction of fishing is the most likely way to achieve recovery of the stocks .
Regarding Amendment No 3 , the Commission is already working on improvement of all aspects of scientific advice .
Any communication on this topic will be included in the second package of reform proposals , which will be presented to this Parliament in the near future .
Furthermore , it is not correct to say that the necessary analysis of the correlation between fishing effort and mortality rates or the appropriate level of tax has not been made for the year 2002 .
For those reasons the Commission cannot accept that amendment .
Regarding Amendment No 4 , the Commission can agree in principle with this analysis , since TACs are not instruments which will necessarily solve the problem of discards .
The problem will only be solved if selectivity of fishing gears is increased or if fishing is reduced or prohibited in geographical areas in which small fish congregate .
That aspect has been dealt with in a series of Commission and Council regulations emanating from the emergency situation with cod and hake .
Also the Commission is currently working on an action plan on discards in the framework of the CFP reform .
This amendment is therefore not necessary .
Regarding Amendment No 5 , the Commission cannot accept this amendment , since it takes the view that public aid for vessel modernisation should be used only for the safety of fishing vessels , whereas the amendment implies that other objectives might also be eligible for aid .
Aid which is likely to enhance the fishing power of fleets is no longer acceptable .
Regarding Amendment No 6 , the Commission cannot accept this amendment since real time closures need to be enacted very rapidly .
The inclusion of the Council in this mechanism would take much more time .
Once the Council has taken a decision , real time closure would no longer be efficient .
Amendment No 7 is accepted : there has been a typographical error .
Regarding Amendment No 8 , the Commission is in the process of considering the impact of a lower annual variation in TAC level on stock recovery .
That is a point on which the Council has also expressed some reservations .
Regarding Amendment No 9 , the Commission cannot accept that amendment .
Technical measures are dealt with in a different legislative proposal .
Technical measures which are acceptable to Member States will bring about some improvement to the present situation , but do not go far enough .
The Commission indicated earlier that only about 20 % of the desired reduction in fishing mortality will be achieved by the application .
A limitation of fishing effort is therefore also required .
Compulsory scrapping of vessels is not mentioned in the proposal and it is not intended for the future CFP .
TACs will be proposed at levels concordant with scientific advice .
Regarding Amendment No 10 , the Commission cannot accept that amendment .
Hake are not caught only by industrial fishing vessels and cod are caught in very small quantities .
A proposal for 5 % reflects the probable catches of cod and is therefore proportionate to the objective pursued .
The Commission cannot accept Amendment No 11 .
While it is difficult to calculate the amount of a supplementing premium needed to generate more interest in scrapping , 20 % is already a significant increase and corresponds to previous practice in similar situations , for example structural measures for the ex-Morocco fleet in Spain and Portugal .
The Commission cannot accept Amendment No 12 .
We see no reason to restrict safety-related aid to smaller vessels , that is , those of less than 12 metres .
The recent proposals for CFP reform propose that all vessels should be eligible for such aid , provided that it does not affect the fishing capacity of the vessel .
The Commission cannot accept Amendment No 13 .
This is a very expensive form of aid , which does not reduce the underlying problem of over-capacity .
Only short-term measures of this kind can be justified .
To accept Community co-financing for a longer period would significantly reduce the availability of Community funds for co-financing of scrapping , which is clearly the priority objective in this case .
Amendment No 14 is not acceptable to the Commission , since the Community cannot accept full responsibility for aid of this kind .
Co-financing is a fundamental principle for structural aid .
The Commission cannot accept Amendment No 15 .
A specification of the duration of the plan is not acceptable .
The stocks will be deemed to have recovered whenever , for two consecutive years , science indicates that quantities of mature fish have been in excess of defined levels .
Reference is made in the last Paragraph of the explanatory memorandum to the Commission 's intention to conduct an impact study within 18 months of adoption of the proposal .
This might be supported by the addition of texts in an article of the proposal , but the reference in the explanatory memorandum should be sufficient .
Regarding Amendment No 16 , a review process can be envisaged , but not on an annual basis .
It will take some time for the proposed measures to take effect .
The earliest point in time would be after two full years of operation .
Reference is made in the last paragraph of the explanatory memorandum to the Commission 's intention to conduct an impact study within 18 months of adoption of the proposal .
This might be supported by the addition of texts in an article of the proposal , but the reference in the explanatory memorandum should be sufficient .
I should like to refer to some additional remarks made by Members of Parliament .
To begin with , Mr Varela Suanzes-Carpegna referred to the scientific advice on which we base our proposal .
That advice is the advice of ICES .
Despite its shortcomings , which nobody denies , the ICES advice is by far the best available .
The reform of the common fisheries policy prioritises the improvement of scientific advice .
In the meantime we have to work with the best advice we have , which is the ICES advice .
This is also in reply to Mrs Migulez Ramos .
Thank you , Commissioner Bolkestein .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 p.m.
The next item is a report ( A5-0198 / 2002 ) by Mrs Ayuso Gonzlez , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the Common Organisation of the Market in ethyl alcohol of agricultural origin [ COM ( 2001 ) 101 - C5-0095 / 2001 - 2001 / 0055 ( CNS ) ] .
Madam President , two months ago we were debating this same report , because the agricultural alcohol problem is actually one that has arisen owing to the large amount of agricultural alcohol produced in the candidate countries for accession , because the future negotiation with the WTO may give rise to further reductions in border production , and also owing to the foreseeable growth in demand for bioethanol as fuel in the European Union .
Because of this , the Council of Ministers of 17 July 2000 called on the Commission to introduce a regulatory framework for alcohol of agricultural origin , but the Commission went much further and proposed a COM , which did not include any financial measures but did allow for the possibility of establishing tariff quotas and safeguard clauses , prohibiting or restricting the use of inward processing arrangements , and a specific provision on aid .
This proposal , however , made by the Commission did not include synthetic alcohol , although 70 % of ethyl alcohol users can use it industrially ; only the 30 % involved in the production of spirit drinks can only use alcohol of agricultural origin .
Because synthetic alcohol was not included , and because at the time no legal basis could be found for bringing it into a COM , Parliament referred the report back to committee two months ago .
Afterwards the Council continued its deliberations and has reached an advance agreement to include synthetic alcohol and has asked us for a second report .
The Council and Parliament are now in agreement , and I think the Commission should take this into account .
This report proposes in one of its amendments - the most important one - to change the title : instead of a COM , what is proposed is a Council regulation laying down specific measures concerning the market in ethyl alcohol of agricultural origin within the European Union .
It is proposed that synthetic alcohol should also be included in these measures , especially with regard to statistics .
It is also proposed that the Management Committee for Wine should have competence in these matters , but that a specific working party should be set up within the Management Committee for Wine to deal with alcohol of agricultural origin .
It is also proposed that Article 10 should be deleted because , as this is not a COM , an article referring to aids does not make sense .
Besides , as these are national aids , I think they come under the heading of all state aids , regardless of whether they are for agricultural alcohol or for some other matter .
Commissioner , please pass on all these amendments , which I ask should be voted on in the House tomorrow , to the competent Commissioner , together with the understanding that the Council and Parliament are in agreement on this aspect .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this evening 's debate is about something that was the Council 's sole request , namely the question of how to introduce transparency and the statistical dimension into the agricultural alcohol sector .
I am extraordinarily grateful to our rapporteur , Mrs Ayuso Gonzlez , who has made exemplary use of the limited room for manoeuvre available to Parliament .
We would , Commissioner , have liked to reject the Commission proposal as a whole , as it took no account whatever of the Council 's request .
Close cooperation with all concerned parties has enabled the rapporteur to lay before us a genuine compromise on which all of them were able to agree .
Thirty years of discussions have now got us to the point where we can give this sector a regulation that provides for the required statistical surveys , and does so primarily within the framework of a simple Council regulation .
Secondly , this regulation does not , in essence , call for any statements on aid legislation .
Thirdly , it includes industrially produced alcohol , agricultural alcohol 's direct competitor .
As a matter of urgency , I appeal to the Commission to stop resisting this compromise approach .
In the event of a qualified majority in Council , it has previously been the practice for the Commission not to insist on a unanimous vote unless there are legal difficulties , but , in this instance , there is no sound reason to insist on unanimity .
The Commission 's instruments are perfectly adequate for the purpose of monitoring this sector , in which no distortions of competition occur .
Not one of the candidate countries wants to adopt or copy the German model which is the subject of this dispute .
If the Commission holds fast to its legal position , then I appeal in equally urgent terms to the Spanish President of the Council .
When it comes to the interests of German distillers and the interests of our cultural landscape , I appeal to Mrs Knast , the German Federal Minister for Consumer Protection , Food and Agriculture , to vote on 27 June in such a way as to achieve unanimity in this matter .
Throughout long negotiations , Parliament has done everything in its power , and now we are counting on your support .
Mr President , because of the various discussions that have taken place the rapporteur has had an unusually long time to work on this report and she is to be warmly thanked for the efforts that she has made .
I was interested to discover that the United Kingdom appears to be the second largest producer of ethyl alcohol and , along with other producers , is of course concerned at increasing imports but rather static Community demand .
We know that imports into the Community have tariff concessions which have been agreed by the Council of Ministers .
The industry tells me that there are subsidy regimes in the exporting countries which naturally they do not view very favourably .
Our producers are also concerned about the prospect of duty-free entry from the 48 least-developed countries .
We understand these concerns , but I do not believe that removing the prohibition on state aid provisions , which are provided for in Amendments Nos 7 and 19 , is a solution to the problem .
I would certainly hope that these will be opposed and I will be voting against them .
On the positive side , the specific measures proposed by the Commission are welcome .
They are certainly preferable to an interventionist organisation and I welcome the change in nomenclature that the rapporteur has introduced .
I hope that the provisions are non-discriminatory , that they will provide for the continuance of the trade without any great hindrance , and that our competitiveness will not be too much affected by imports .
The proposals do involve a minimum degree of administration and documentation .
I hope that Parliament will reject Amendments Nos 7 and 19 , in which case I will be able to support the report .
I cannot say that this is the view of all the Members of the PSE Group , but it is certainly the view of some of us .
Mr President , may I begin by thanking the Members of this Parliament for the work they have put into considering the proposal for a common market organisation for alcohol .
In particular my thanks go to the rapporteur , Mrs Ayuso Gonzlez , for her analysis of the proposal and the report .
Before I comment in more detail on the amendments proposed , I would remind you that this is another proposal to establish a set of common rules for the alcohol sector after several attempts in the past , all of which failed for various reasons .
The Commission is of the opinion that the actual market situation in this sector makes it necessary to propose at least a minimal set of rules and that , accordingly , the chances of success this time are fairly good .
Most of the amendments proposed can be accepted by the Commission .
All amendments relating to the change of title are acceptable .
Indeed if the title proposed by the Commission creates problems because it refers more to an intervention system not provided for here , a more appropriate title reflecting the content of the regulation as suggested by Parliament can be considered .
The amendments on including synthetic alcohol in the article on market information can also be accepted .
Parliament initially proposed to extend the proposal to synthetic alcohol , which is not an Annex I product and therefore is not part of the common agricultural policy .
For most outlets except alcoholic beverages , both agricultural and synthetic alcohol can be used and therefore compete on the same market .
The suggestion in the Agriculture Committee 's report that synthetic alcohol should be included in the article on data collection to establish a yearly market balance of the sector , and to have better market information and increased market transparency , is one which the Commission is willing to consider .
Amendments 7 and 19 concerning deletion of the state aids article are not acceptable .
The Commission is of the opinion that all provisions proposed are necessary to establish a set of common rules for the alcohol sector , including the provisions on application of the rules on state aids .
Without fair application of those rules , there would not be a real common set of rules for agricultural alcohol , and I would point out that those rules already apply to synthetic alcohol .
The Commission is well aware of the concern that the application of state aid rules may create a problem for the functioning of the German alcohol monopoly .
I would repeat that the purpose of this proposal on agricultural alcohol is not to put an end to that monopoly .
If alcohol production by German farmers under monopoly rules , including federal payments , is necessary to maintain valuable eco-systems or to cover the extra costs of environment-friendly production methods , current state aid rules offer substantial scope to grant aids for those purposes or rural development aid schemes could be used .
On the other hand , small distillers producing not only alcohol but also spirits could benefit from the de minimis rule on state aid for non-agricultural products .
The Commission is willing to try and find a solution , but cannot accept the proposal to simply delete the related article on state aid from the draft text .
A solution should be found within the context of that article .
Amendment No 8 , which refers to the declaration on rum under the ACP-EU Partnership Agreement and asks for special treatment to rum producers affected by the application of EU policies is also difficult to accept .
By definition , the proposed regulation should comply with all bilateral and international agreements , as stated in Article 14 .
It is neither necessary nor appropriate to grant special treatment to one category of partners within a specific agreement .
Amendment No 13 can be accepted except for the reference to CN code 3814 0090 in the definition of non-agricultural alcohol because that code covers mixtures of alcohol with solvents and is not limited to non-agricultural alcohol .
Adoption of Regulation No 142 / 2002 has solved the problem of imports of those mixtures .
Amendments Nos 14 , 16 , 17 and 18 are purely technical improvements to the text that have also been discussed in the Council , and there is no problem in accepting them .
Amendment No 20 , however , is more difficult to accept .
The Commission does not want to create a specific working group on alcohol as part of the wine management committee .
The Commission 's aim is the same as that in the amendment , that is , to bring together the real experts on alcohol .
For that reason , the Commission has already made a statement on organising the work of the wine management committee in such a way that all alcohol-related items are grouped together in order to permit Member States to send the real experts to the meeting .
Although Amendment No 21 is acceptable , I must point out that it limits the Commission 's scope to take transitional measures more than the original proposal does .
This text appears in other regulations and is therefore acceptable .
As far as Amendments Nos 22 and 24 are concerned , the Commission of course agrees that the rules on state aid should be applied in this sector , too , and therefore should not be deleted .
I also recognise the value of existing aid systems in certain Member States , especially for small agricultural distilleries , and the need to find a solution for them .
The notion of a transitional measure is certainly one I must give thought to , but I am not yet in a position to indicate the specific nature of the solution .
The Commission cannot accept Amendment No 23 , as indicated a short time ago .
The Commission can accept Amendments Nos 3 , 5 , 13 and 15 on including synthetic alcohol in the proposal as far as the system of data collection is concerned .
According to the Court of Justice case law , it can be included without changing the legal basis of the proposal and therefore the Commission is of the opinion that the global alcohol market is satisfactorily addressed by this proposal .
I hope that my comments today have clarified the Commission 's position on this proposal .
Moreover , I should like to thank Members of Parliament for their constructive suggestions , which we shall of course consider , and for the time they have devoted to this process , and in particular I would thank the rapporteur , Mrs Ayuso Gonzlez , for her contribution .
Thank you , Commissioner Bolkestein .
The debate is closed .
. ( PT ) As we all know , the proposal for a regulation for the creation of the European Maritime Safety Agency is part of the second package of measures proposed by the Commission following the sinking of the oil tanker Erika .
The planned creation of the Agency is accompanied by other measures with which the Commission intends to ensure a more effective protection of European shipping against the risk of accidents and the protection of the seas against pollution .
We consider the new agency to be enormously important , because it will supply the Member States and the Commission with the necessary technical and scientific support for them effectively to implement Community legislation in the maritime safety sector and in preventing pollution from ships . The agency will monitor the implementation of all legislation ; and will assess the effectiveness of the measures in force .
Incidentally , we hope - and believe we are justified in hoping - that due to Portugal 's unique geographical position and to the extent of our maritime territory , that country will be selected as the seat of this future European Agency .
.
( PT ) I wish to congratulate Mr Gil-Robles on his report on the election of representatives in the European Parliament by direct universal suffrage .
The participation of the Union 's citizens in European elections is far from satisfactory .
The turnout rate has fallen from 63 % in 1979 to 49.7 % in 1999 , whilst the powers of the European Parliament have increased substantially .
The European Parliament is gaining power but losing its legitimacy .
The steady decline in the turnout rate in European elections is a matter of concern to us .
In the next European elections in 2004 , the Community institutions and Member States must adopt the necessary measures to make voters more aware of the importance of these elections .
The Member States must reach agreement on a date for the next European elections which does not coincide with national traditional events or public holidays , in order to optimise the conditions for the turnout in the elections .
The Member States must adopt all possible measures to ensure that there is greater participation in the European elections , including procedures for ensuring people are registered on the electoral rolls and for the use of direct voting .
I agree with the provisions laying down the incompatibility of the offices of Members of the European Parliament and members of a national parliament .
Portuguese law already contained such provisions , but this will now become a Community measure .
I must note that the Council has not accepted Parliament 's proposal to reserve 10 % of seats for the single European constituency .
It was right to reject this proposal .
This would do nothing to bring the citizens closer to their representatives and would only serve to take seats away from national representations and give them to a more distant set of ' European ' personalities ?
In order to increase the turnout in elections , we must close the information gap and work on developing an EU information and communication policy aimed at the European people .
- ( PT ) We regret the openly federalist tone of the report and , furthermore , the inconsistency that it stubbornly demonstrates by not adopting the creation of a new single constituency at European level .
It makes no sense at all to try to take this opportunity , in a roundabout way , to attempt to introduce amendments to the system that has been defined and to its balance , in areas or aspects which should only be dealt with in a revision of the Treaties .
Instead , we directly support the draft Council decision , which must , in its simplicity , confine itself to new practices which are consistent with the revisions of the Treaties that have taken place in the meantime and , furthermore , to other practical improvements arising from past experience .
An example of the latter would be to broaden the time-frame in which the elections to the European Parliament can be fixed , which would allow some Member States to pencil them in for May . This would resolve , in particular , the chronic Portuguese problem resulting from the enormous inconvenience of these elections having to be scheduled for the June holidays , which , according to analysts , is a factor that increases abstention rates .
.
( PT ) Our broadly favourable vote does not overlook the concern still felt by many of us , where the Sixth Framework Programme is concerned , to see that crucial ethical guarantee clauses are ensured in good time . We also feel that these should be definitively established and clarified when the Specific Programmes are finally approved .
Hence the way we have voted on certain amendments .
It is worth pointing out that we share the concerns that have been expressed on this matter , particularly by the governments of Germany , Austria , Ireland , Italy and Portugal . Furthermore , we still feel it is unacceptable that monies from a certain country ( and its taxpayers ) in which various actions are illegal could , as a result of the European mechanism , ultimately be used to finance these same actions when undertaken in another Member State .
Let us remember the way in which we defended the principle of legislative unanimity in the Fiori and Caudron reports and we hope that the essence of this defence of basic ethical principles and of respect for the various national legal systems will prevail on the final decisions of the Council .
. ( PT ) I wish to make a brief comment to explain how our vote on this report clearly confirms that we are in no way opposed to the European Research Area , to extending and developing it or to the Sixth Framework Programme in general .
The fact is that since neither issues of a sensitive ethical nature nor the duty - which we should all fully understand - to fully respect the various national legal systems are being called into question , our support for this report , as for others in the same field , has been constant , cooperative and unreserved .
It is rather those people , including Mr Busquin , who persist in seeking to extend European research policies to areas which are deemed illegal in some Member States , who must be held responsible for the delays that have occurred and furthermore , for the fact that the definition and the entry into force of the Sixth Framework Programme are surrounded by quite unnecessary controversy .
. ( PT ) Now that we have completed the revision of the Rules of Procedure , which entailed extensive and protracted work , there is paradoxically now a feeling of great frustration that amendments to the most negative aspects of the functioning of this institution , which do serious damage to the genuine and full role of the democratic mandate of its Members have not been tabled .
We are left feeling that an opportunity has been missed and we will almost certainly end up with an excessively weighty institution which holds too many votes .
I am afraid that we will still have a European Parliament that is difficult for most of the European public to understand and which will still suffer from the unacceptable lack of transparency which is the indirect consequence of working at a break-neck pace , however widespread and common this practice is here .
Instead of attacking these genuinely serious aspects in a House that claims to be the seat of European democracy , the majority has preferred instead to join forces and fight to restrict the rights of the smaller political groups , which in terms of democracy and of basic respect for the principle of equality , is quite intolerable .
. ( PT ) We supported the text proposed in plenary and the various amendments tabled to it in order to thereby respond to the need , acknowledged by all the political groups , to improve the hybrid and discriminatory position of the Non-attached Members , whilst at the same time bearing in mind that , by insisting on the principle that political affinity remains the cornerstone of a parliamentary group 's constitution , the competent committee will in fact block the way to the future reconstitution of a so-called technical group .
Pedestrian protection : Commitment by the European automobile industry
The next item is the report ( A5-0154 / 2002 ) by Mrs Hedkvist Petersen , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the Commission communication ' Pedestrian protection : Commitment by the European automobile industry ' [ COM ( 2001 ) 389 - C5-0537 / 2001 - 2001 / 2216 ( COS ) ] .
Mr President , every year , 42 000 people die on the EU 's roads .
This is a very big political issue for people within the EU .
In the White Paper on Transport , the Commission writes that we must halve the number of people killed by 2010 .
In that case , we must be active , not passive .
We must take all kinds of measures at all levels .
Everyone must help , especially industry , because we know that this is what consumers are demanding .
The case for safety is self-evident .
How , then , must cars be designed so that they cause as little harm as possible to unprotected road users ?
The proposal for a voluntary agreement which we have obtained from the Commission and which the automobile industry has negotiated is inadequate .
It is amazing that the Commission has seen fit to accept it in its current form .
It is not always clear how it is to be implemented , and the EEVC tests are not taken seriously , in spite of the fact that they have been developed over a period of more than 22 years .
We are concerned here with survival on the roads and life in our society , and we must therefore be careful .
The subject has been difficult to deal with , and I wish to thank all the shadow rapporteurs in the committee for a very successful piece of work which has demanded a great deal from us all .
There have been many different opinions on the subject , many lobbyists and many points of view from the committees .
It is now important to proceed on the basis of road safety and consumer demands .
We had three alternative responses to the Commission .
The first was to accept the voluntary agreement .
The second was to recommend a detailed directive , stating exactly how cars are to be designed .
The third was to recommend a framework directive .
The committee does not believe that the voluntary agreement is sufficient .
It is not provide enough certainty and does not offer scope for any grassroots parliamentary supervision of how the automobile industry assumes its responsibility .
It is insufficiently binding , and its processes insufficiently transparent .
The committee therefore proposes a framework directive , as mentioned by the Commission too in its communication .
It means that we in the political assemblies establish the objectives , whereupon experts oversee the implementation under the supervision , and with the participation , of the Commission .
The framework directive we are now proposing and calling for has a number of components .
The objective is that , by 2010 , all models of car should meet the requirements of the four EEVC documents .
This process must be initiated now .
The EEVC is the institution that has made the most progress in researching road safety throughout the world , especially in the area of pedestrian protection .
We are , however , able to envisage other methods of testing which provide at least the same level of protection for pedestrians .
There must of course be effective tests that influence car design .
We also want the process to be assessed regularly , with annual reports sent to the European Parliament .
In that way , we shall be part of the process and be able to check that the goals we have set are really being met .
We want the Member States , through their type approval authorities , to help assess how the framework directive is being implemented .
We also believe that the EEVC has made the most progress when it comes to methods of testing and that it can make further progress in this area .
These are the demands made by the committee .
We await confirmation from the Commission and Commissioner Liikanen that the latter will be tabling a proposal for a framework directive .
Within the Group of the Party of European Socialists , we should like to have gone still further in certain sections by , for example , placing significantly sharper emphasis upon the exclusive merits of the tests developed by the EEVC and by setting a clear subsidiary objective with a view to obtaining a straight line of development in pedestrian protection between now and 2010 .
The Group of the Party of European Socialists also wants the Commission to table its framework directive immediately , and preferably before the end of the year .
That is important if the Commission wants to show that it is serious about the issue .
As I say , this is a very controversial matter .
We have now reached a compromise and shall therefore support this in order to obtain as much backing as possible for the demand for a framework directive as the best solution where the issue of road safety is concerned .
My group will therefore only support the committee 's proposal in the report , and I would urge other MEPs to do the same .
We approve the compromise which , for the sake of road users , I am pleased that we were able to negotiate .
Mr President , I want to thank Mrs Hedkvist Petersen for putting together what is a balanced compromise that reflects interests across Parliament .
Speaking as the rapporteur for my own committee - the Legal Affairs Committee - I can say that we were in favour of the Commission 's proposal for a voluntary agreement and felt that the overall package achieved what Mrs Hedkvist Petersen wanted .
It will save lives earlier than any other proposal .
It also takes very seriously the need to improve design standards for cars .
But - and this is a crucial issue she did not mention - it allows the industry , and everyone else involved , to tackle the issue on a broad front because we know that simply making the front end of cars more resilient in the event of a crash is a second option .
We want to avoid collisions with vulnerable road users altogether through accident avoidance measures within the vehicle itself .
Remember that anti-lock braking systems fitted as standard will be part of this package .
We also have to look at road design , user education and many other things .
This has to be a concerted effort .
I want to talk about design standards because this is important .
I am an automotive engineer by background ; I have seen the test laboratories ; I have talked to the engineers about the problems of achieving more pedestrian-friendly cars .
This is not a simple issue .
Some groups have been guilty of gross over-simplification about the problems involved .
Mrs Hedkvist Petersen implied that the industry was not taking it very seriously , but I know from my visits that it is .
Moving forward , she is right to say that we must look at a broad range of test measures .
I call upon the industry this morning to join with the Commission to put together a team of all the best talents in engineering and design , together with all other interested persons , to come up with the best tests possible , given today 's technology and not the 1998 technology on which the current EEVC tests are based .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by very warmly thanking Commissioner Liikanen for the very important and forward-looking step the Commission has taken .
We are all aware that , when problems crop up , the simplest way to deal with them is by means of incentives and assistance .
The Sixth Framework Programme for Research , which we have adopted , contains many incentives to achieve improvements by the use of scientific methods .
My second point is that we have standards , whether national or European , which give pride of place to the principle of mutual recognition and thereby make competition in the market possible .
The next stage , which is new and in fact sensational , is a voluntary commitment , whereby very strong pressure is brought to bear by both parties .
An amicable settlement has to be reached , and additional criteria can be introduced in order to actually enforce such settlements .
On the one hand , we have a simple contract , as originally planned , which of course involves risks and obligations for all parties to the contract and creates a number of problems , and on the other , we have the very slimline directive we are working on now , which we will use to do nothing more than draw up a timetable and lay down methods of supervision and assessment so that Parliament and the Commission can keep an eye on the progress made .
What I would like , and I believe that the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy would like it as well , is for this directive to amount to no more than one page .
That would serve as an example of how we are constantly up to date in laying down principles and demonstrating how our work in lawmaking can also be slimline and forward-looking .
Thank you , Commissioner ; you have done an excellent piece of work .
Mr President , first of all , I should like to thank the rapporteur and also the European Commission .
The European Commission has had the courage to present self-regulatory measures in order to get industry and governments to commit to greater pedestrian safety , which is also necessary , in fact .
I come from a culture where self-regulation is very common .
I am very much in favour of it , because self-regulation invariably entails the latest state of the art technology on which industry too can agree .
Moreover , it can be a very quick process .
The legislative process is always much more protracted .
There is always one condition , namely that these self-regulatory agreements are monitored effectively .
If you ask me for my personal opinion - and this is also what Mrs Petersen said -I would have been satisfied with sound self-regulatory measures , and legislation would not have been by definition necessary .
However , this is what Parliament has decided and I will have to reconcile myself to this decision .
A skeletal directive is what we will end up with , one that leaves open plenty of opportunities to repeatedly lay down further regulations according to the latest state of the art technology .
I am such a staunch supporter of self-regulation because in my view , a number of processes in the European Commission are too slow .
As a final point , I have stated in the recommendation by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy that something needs to be done about whiplash , although this is not at all related to this issue , but rather to a safety issue which also robs a huge number of people of their health .
Moreover , it incurs a high level of costs in our society .
Not for nothing have I included this as my final point .
I know , after all , that far too little is happening in this area .
I have also asked questions in writing , upon which I receive the response that something will indeed be done .
We have already discussed it in the context of the Fourth Framework Programme .
Why does the handling of all these issues that are related to preventing accidents and preventing extra expenses in this area take up so much time ?
This has been going on since the Fourth Action Programme ; we are meanwhile looking at the Sixth Research and Development Action Programme .
Surely , something else should replace it .
I would ask the Commissioner not only to enter into consultation with industry very promptly in order to do something about this pedestrian protection , possibly by means of self-regulation , I would also ask him to tackle these other problems too .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , for years , and in vain , Parliament has been calling on the Commission to produce proposals for binding legal instruments that would compel the automobile industry to reduce the risk of injury to pedestrians in the event of a crash by means of passive safety measures on the front of motor vehicles .
Instead of doing so , the Commission presented a communication on an agreement negotiated with the automobile industry , which , however , incorporates not only passive safety measures , but active ones as well .
As substantial parts of it can become effective at once , it is very much to be considered as a useful means of realising the policy objective of reducing by 50 % the annual total of those killed or gravely injured in accidents by 2010 .
However , I expect all the parties concerned to regard the agreement thus negotiated as a contract by which they must abide .
No doubt the Commission is able to confirm to us that it is not the case that - as we have been informed - motor manufacturers are already questioning their obligations on one point .
The motion for a resolution before us now will motivate the automobile industry to step up its research into passive and active safety for pedestrians , rather than - as individual lobbyists fear - contributing to the crippling of development .
The protection of pedestrians is at last becoming a matter of public interest .
The two-phase improvement of pedestrian safety envisaged is acceptably close to the aim of the White Paper on European Transport Policy .
Phase A , which commences at once and will end in 2005 , will already contain essential measures , including , among others , the equipping of all new vehicles with ABS anti-skid equipment with effect from 2003 , the immediate installation of daytime running lights on new vehicles , the requirement that new vehicles should cease to be supplied with bullbars , and the carrying out of modified tests by the European Enhanced Vehicle-Safety Committee ( EEVC ) to examine impacts on pedestrians .
Whilst reference is made to the importance of the EEVC 's research and development programme , we call for the quality of the four systematic tests in phase B to be further developed .
In order to truly guarantee phase B 's legal certainty , we call on the Commission to draft a framework directive , primarily to stipulate a clear timeframe for further measures and details of the monitoring process .
We furthermore expect such a directive to prescribe coherent and practicable test methods , dealing with more aspects than do the EEVC 's testing areas and take the interplay of the tested objects into account .
The result of this is a challenge across the board to the automobile industry 's capacity for innovation and research .
Consumers are coming of age and will increasingly value the cars of the future in terms of their safety for their occupants and for pedestrians , and will choose which to buy on that basis .
Safety is being used more and more in marketing and sales , which brings advantages for consumers and advances in road safety .
I recommend the adoption of the text as voted on by the Committee .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe the Commission 's draft and Mrs Petersen 's report to have an important and twofold significance .
This has to do , on the one hand , with their subject matter - traffic safety , which is an important issue to the European public . It also , of course , has to do with this report 's role in the overall discussion - of which there has been a great deal - of the documents on European democratic governments and better regulation .

I am most grateful to the rapporteur for taking an actual example to show how things could go and what roles are played by Parliament , the Commission and the interest groups - which some would call ' lobbies ' - by industry and consumer protection groups , and so on .
Surely it is right for MEPs to be suspicious of agreements such as these , as we are never quite certain how far the industry will go , and to what extent it will keep to what it has supposedly committed itself to ?
It is also understandable that industry is sometimes suspicious of MEPs , whose wisdom and expertise in these different fields is called into question .
So I believe it to be right that we should try to go down the road of compromise - the way pointed , thankfully , by the rapporteur - not an empty compromise but one that really shows the way things can go .
Being members of this House , we are naturally torn between the obligations and tasks imposed on us by a parliamentary democracy and the knowledge that there are many details we really cannot get to grips with unless we are experts in a specific area .
We are torn between trust and mistrust of industry 's knowledge and also its willingness to be decisive in making things happen that may only be burdens to it and do not do anything for industry 's profits .
We are also torn between our responsibility in matters of principle and , at the end of the day , the responsibility many people see us as having for many of the details .
I therefore think it right to call for a framework directive in this case in particular .
I am all in favour of it being slimline , and we will certainly not argue about whether it should take up one page or one-and-a-half .
Mr Rbig was so fulsome in his praise of the Commissioner that I do not know how to add to it , but I find it perfectly understandable that the Commissioner should use a commitment to perhaps get us MEPs to take the middle way that he , as a democrat , believes to be the right one , and to get this House to pass a framework directive .
I will conclude by emphasising that this is all the more the case as we are dealing here with the area of traffic safety , and , whilst there may well be a technical issue at the bottom of it , it is a technical issue that has an effect on human lives .
Any technical issue capable of making people 's lives better or saving them is , after all , one on which we MEPs should at least lay down some principles .
I support the rapporteur 's motion .
Thank you , Mr President . I found it interesting to take part as a shadow rapporteur on behalf of the Liberals .
We succeeded in establishing fruitful cooperation with the other groups , and particularly the rapporteur , and reached a balanced report with sufficient support from Parliament and in which , therefore , a very clear signal is being given to the Commission .
Under normal circumstances , my line of approach would have been to try to persuade the various parties in the field to reach a covenant , a workable cooperation , with agreements and obligations , but in this case , it is right and proper , in my view , that Parliament should take the responsibility to fight the corner of the consumer .
We must not forget the past when we draft the report .
I therefore think it important to apply past efforts as a basis for a framework directive .
It would be excellent if we asked the Commissioner if he thought he would be able to draft a proposal for a framework directive in the shorter term after all .
Indeed , the framework directive has 22 years of research behind it .
Also , there have been so many dialogues between the partners in society , between the automobile industry and the consumer organisations in the past .
It would , in itself , be a nice gesture to us to indicate that you on your part are also committed to a straightforward implementation .
Needless to say , every person who becomes a victim of a road accident is one too many .
This effort is therefore a welcome one .
The report has managed to strike the right balance in the descriptions of test methods and such like , and I am therefore pleased that the point of departure for the ETSC method is sound , but there should be scope for possible developments in the future .
It is , after all , a dynamic process .
Particularly in the technical and hi-tech industry , there are a whole host of options with which we may not be all that familiar yet .
This is why it is to be welcomed that the report offers scope for possible , even better , methods than we have at the moment .
It is also important to note that it is not only the European Parliament that prevents road victims .
The behaviour of road users is particularly important .
This also means , therefore , that it is an integral process in which others in society will also need to play a role , and this is why I am pleased with this contribution to establishing a safer and integral traffic policy to which consumers too can make a contribution .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would first like to thank the rapporteur for the work that she has done , despite all the pressure that we have all been under .
There is a common denominator : we all agree that the number of accidents , injuries and deaths on European roads is absolutely unacceptable ; and we also agree that we need to find viable methods of considerably reducing this number of victims .
This report talks mainly about the most vulnerable road users ; I would therefore have liked motorcyclists to have been explicitly mentioned as well as pedestrians and cyclists , since they are just as vulnerable .
Vehicles need to be designed and built to be safer both for their occupants and for those around them , such as pedestrians .
The problem is finding a legal , quick , effective and transparent way of doing it .
Front designs that are capable of absorbing the impact of a pedestrian who is hit are vital in quantifying how much harm accidents would cause if they happened .
We should not , however , forget that we need to take care of other aspects , such as promoting safer driving , maximum dissemination of road safety information and , essentially , as has rightly been said , designing and building road infrastructures that are safer for all users .
The black spots on European roads are also black spots for this group of most vulnerable users .
Metal barriers , inappropriate vertical signs and kerbs are among the causes behind an enormous number of victims .
From the start of the debate our Group has rejected the so-called ' voluntary agreements ? with the automobile industry proposed by the Commission in order to improve the protection of the most vulnerable groups , as it is a system that could leave the way open for other extra-legislative agreements associated with transport and the environment , which concerns us given the lack of an interinstitutional agreement in that respect .
This would not happen with a legislative process , because , although it would take longer , it would maintain stricter parliamentary control .
It is true , ladies and gentlemen , that a voluntary agreement with industry would enable us to start sooner .
But it is also true that , according to all the data , it would save fewer lives .
We have tabled a series of amendments rejecting this voluntary agreement .
Amendment No 4 refers to the need for consumer and user organisations to continue to express their opinions , whatever the form of regulation ; Amendment No 6 expresses our concern regarding the requirement to use Daytime Running Lights across the Union , as their current use by the most vulnerable users , motorcyclists and cyclists , would lose its value .
In any case , we ask that this should not be obligatory until the matter has been studied in detail , or that Member States who ban Daytime Running Lights should be allowed to have positive discrimination for cyclists and motorcyclists .
Mr President , we have tabled a series of amendments in this respect and we ask for them to be looked at or at least to be voted on .
By accepting the Commission 's proposal , Parliament is explicitly accepting a loss of power over this important aspect , which concerns the safety and the lives of hundreds of European citizens , and we will be losing independence , judgment , transparency and control .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Petersen , Commissioner , to put it briefly and to bring matters down to a common denominator , I consider one single commitment by the automobile industry to the protection of pedestrians to be utterly inadequate . This is all the more the case in view of the dramatic incidence of serious traffic accidents which make it impossible to regard as appropriate the deadlines envisaged for implementing the recommendations regarding impacts involving the lower leg and head with the front or windscreen of the vehicle : 1 July 2005 for all new vehicle types , 1 July 2010 for 80 % of new vehicles and 2012 for all new vehicles .
I do not want to be misunderstood . I am not , as a matter of principle , opposed to commitments in general , but in this specific case I see it as necessary to produce a binding framework directive .
That would be a preferable way of going about it .
Mrs Hedkvist Petersen 's report reflects this problem .
Attempts have been made at negotiating a compromise , but , unfortunately and apart from any compromise , a whole array of shortcomings remain .
You , Mr Koch , looked only at the positive side of that ; I am now considering it from another angle .
Excessive delays prior to the commitment 's implementation , the reduction of tests from four to two , the commitment to equip vehicles with daytime running lights , the provision that the implementation of phase 2 should be subject to technical feasibility , which gives no guarantee that the objectives will actually be achieved , the failure to adopt a ban on fitting front and rear bullbars after a vehicle is purchased .
We of course support the equipping of all vehicles with ABS , as we do the introduction of a range of electronic active safety devices .
Making the first move is always better than doing nothing .
This one can help cut down on accidents .
So , despite all my reservations , I will vote for this report .
Mr President , the current number of fatalities which public roads claim annually calls for measures to be adopted .
Measures that relate to both vehicles and to road user behaviour .
Everyone has his or her own responsibility to take .
In my opinion , the Community should not be able to shirk its responsibility too easily .
It has the task of protecting its people from the risks of public life , including the roads .
At the moment , the Community is prescribing requirements for the design of cars , which is good , in my view .
This power must not be relinquished .
This is why voluntary agreements with industry have to be treated with great care .
Industry is only secondary , and never able to adopt the role of legislator , simply because it always wants a compromise of criteria without any of the sharp edges .
The agreement with the automobile industry which we are discussing here is partly illustrating why that is .
Let me start by saying that the agreement offers more certainties than are currently laid down formally .
That is to say , provided that all parties provide their cooperation to the letter and spirit of the agreement .
This does depend on the basic premise that is opted for : either an existing situation or a desirable one .
I would opt for the latter , namely the need for considerable improvement .
In this light , there are a few observations to be made about the agreement .
One point that deserves attention is the existence of two different test methods .
One is related to industry and one is independent .
It goes without saying that the first one will not be as far-reaching as the second one , or at least not be as critical .
There is also a clear difference in the set-up of the test .
The EEVC goes considerably further and can ultimately guarantee a higher level of protection than the NCAP .
The timeframe plays an important role too .
Industry suggests that technical adjustments to models require more time .
This is also reflected in the voluntary agreement on the basis of which requirements for all new cars only start to apply after a very long time .
Practice has shown , however , that adjustments can be implemented remarkably faster , not in years but even in weeks , as long as the right incentives are in place .
As far as the specific content of this resolution is concerned , there is only one conclusion possible , in my view .
We believe that Community legislation is the only way in which the criteria for the safety tests can be established .
Accordingly , we warmly welcome the proposed legislative instrument , namely a framework directive .
As for its content , the four EEVC tests will need to occupy centre stage , because they prescribe higher requirements and , in so doing , offer a higher level of protection for weaker participants .
On the basis of information available to us , it is very feasible for the automobile industry to meet these standards .
There does not seem to be a problem there either .
The inclusion of alternative test methods is , in our view , superfluous .
It is claimed that this would be necessary in order to be able to incorporate progress in the test methods .
However , the EEVC tests too are updated regularly .
Finally , the plea for the ban on bullbars both during and after production receives our support .
In short , with the exception of a few minor changes , we can endorse this resolution .
Mr President , the subject of today 's debate is far more important than anyone who is not familiar with the figures might imagine .
By way of illustration , according to the statistics , there were 23 000 road traffic accidents in Greece alone in 2000 , 3 900 of which involved pedestrians .
So you can see that we are talking numbers which are not easily disregarded .
As we all know , the Commission communication we are examining today is about a commitment by the European automobile industry designed to increase the chances of survival of pedestrians and cyclists involved in collisions with motor vehicles .
This particular commitment comes in two stages , one by 2005 and one with even more stringent measures by 2010 .
The important thing is that , first , the industry itself is anxious to make a voluntary commitment , meaning that no direct legislative intervention is required in the first stage and , secondly , this commitment covers all the important manufacturers , European , Japanese and Korean alike .
The debate on this report in the European Parliament 's Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism had what I consider to be a very satisfactory outcome , thanks to the efforts of the rapporteur , Mrs Petersen .
Of course , with it being a compromise , we are not overly excited about the result but , when all is said and done , it takes account of our group 's concerns , which is why we voted for it in committee and shall do so in Plenary .
The fundamental elements in this agreement are paragraphs 6 and 14 , so I shall just reiterate them if I may .
First , we consider that the voluntary commitment being negotiated with the automobile industry represents a first step towards improving road safety and , secondly , we are asking the Commission to come forward with a framework directive in which a clear , realistic time schedule is established for the intermediate and final goals to be reached , as well as methods for monitoring assessment .
Mr President , I will not focus on the content or technical aspects of the communication . They have already been amply discussed and , although there is still much that could be said about them , the rapporteur has dealt with everything in her excellent overview .
Instead , I will focus on the chief reservation expressed by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy in its opinion .
It is clearly so important to reduce the number of road accident victims that the question of which instrument would be best to achieve it - a voluntary agreement or a legislative measure - is secondary .
In any case , we are not opposed to voluntary agreements in principle .
However , they can only be usefully allowed within an agreed legal framework that gives Parliament the right to participate , particularly where the objectives to be set , the results to be achieved and monitoring are concerned .
We only hope that this condition , which remains binding in environmental matters , will , at last , be fulfilled by the ' Better regulation ' initiatives launched by the Commission in recent days .
Mr President , I too wish to thank my colleague , Mrs Hedkvist Petersen , for drawing up her report with such a sense of purpose and also for her active involvement in the matter of road safety generally . Thanks also go to Commissioner Liikanen for his unbiased and fruitful endeavours .
The compromise that has been achieved represents the new decision-making culture and is a step forward for dealing with matters faster and more flexibly .
The voluntary agreement will allow us to adopt simple solutions to increase pedestrian safety more quickly .
However , Parliament must ensure that the car industry keeps its promises . For this reason a loose framework directive is appropriate .
At the same time it has to be remembered that this commitment is just a start .
As has been said here in several speeches , the targets for action might have been a lot more ambitious .
New technology makes it possible to improve road safety in general and hence also pedestrian safety .
Solutions already exist and more are on the way .
They must be speedily adopted .
It is now essential to monitor closely the implementation of the commitment and its results .
The experience gained will allow us to evaluate the benefits of a wider application of an equivalent procedure .
Thank you , Mr President . First of all , I should like to express my thanks to the rapporteur for the sound work she has done .
In the final analysis , the background to what we are discussing here is the fact that public roads claim forty thousand victims annually , including a number of vulnerable road users - as they are referred to - cyclists , pedestrians and also , of course , moped riders and motorbike riders to a certain extent .
These are the people around which everything ultimately revolves .
The agreement that is being discussed here is in the first instance voluntary .
To a certain degree , I can go along with Mrs Oomen-Ruijten and others who would ideally like to see voluntary agreements concluded with industry .
However , this has already taken some time .
These tests have taken 22 to 24 years , although some adjustments are taking place .
I do , in fact , share the view of Mr Van Dam who claims that these adjustments can be made a great deal faster .
These days , consumer adjustments can be made very quickly thanks to technological connections between both the requesting parties and , ultimately , the implementing operative activities in industry itself .
Phase one is , in itself , a step forward in this procedure where , for example , the application of ABS is concerned .
We have some misgivings about daytime running lights , because it is , after all , the weak vulnerable users who end up being portrayed in a bad light .
We have tabled a few amendments on this score .
Ultimately , it is also about the front of the cars and what goes on around these .
I very much welcome phase one 's implementation on a voluntary basis .
As for phase two , I go along with these four tests where it is clear which ones are the best , but this is , at the end of the day , about a framework directive .
This is what we should focus our attention on now .
I fully agree with the rapporteur on the scope and intention of this framework directive .
I also agree with her - this is also why we have tabled an amendment on this - to implement this framework directive , which should not be formulated in a technically complex manner , as soon as possible .
This is why we state in our amendment that we would ideally like to see this before the end of this year .
In the light of 24 years of history , this is certainly not asking too much .
Once again , I should like to ask a number of groups - for a number of those are agreed - to consider Amendment No 9 , particularly part one , which is about submitting this relatively simple framework directive to us before the end of the year , and this according to the criteria that have been laid down in the low-key consultation between all of us .
Mr President , are the non-elected executives of industry the legislators , or is this the task of the elected representatives of the people ?
Industry would like measures on a voluntary basis that only partly meet the public 's expectations and that can easily be avoided by companies that stand to benefit from doing so .
It is sad that the European Commission wanted to meet this wish and that some of the Right-wingers in this Parliament were prepared to endorse this .
The argument in favour , namely faster results and more flexible adjustments , is largely cancelled out by the fact that the interested parties themselves have a huge bearing on the outcome .
They want to leave room for effects which may be harmful to others but beneficial to themselves .
Insofar as additional agreements with industry are meaningful , these can at most relate to the speeding up of the introduction of new rules and ways with a view to a prompt and goal-specific application .
I should like to finish off with a remark about the content of the covenant itself .
Compulsory daytime use of headlights is only safe in sparsely populated countries with a low sun position , few cyclists and without the need to make motorbike riders more visible , and there is a problem in this respect .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are trying by means of this instrument - which we must recognise deals with a technical field which we have to acknowledge overstretches our capacities as MEPs - to apply the law to technical matters . Commissioner , this new instrument presumes twofold legitimate expectations .
For a start , we are trusting the Commission , as , before the directive reaches us and is adopted by us , we have to expect that you will check to see that the Commission really will fulfil its obligation for the next two or three years from the word go , as it were .
It is , secondly , presupposed that you must , in theory at least , join us in trusting the industry to actually do what it has declared itself willing to do .
In so far , I call on the industry and the Commission to prove to us and to the citizens whom we represent , that legal undertakings are a good way of achieving rapid improvements , particularly in technical fields .
As has been said , though , we Members of this House are , as I see it , obliged to check up on the Commission and on the industry to see whether they actually merit our trust and whether they really are promptly and effectively putting their promises into practice .
I would like , Commissioner , to make another point . I take the view that , should this directive and this system come to pass , we in this House must also be free not to insist on all the old technical standards .

That , Mr Bouwman , is why I cannot vote for your Amendment No 9 , as item 14 of our motion for a resolution states that we expect the directive to take as standards either the four EEVC tests or other methods offering at least equal or possibly better safeguards .
This Parliament should not behave in 2002 as if it already knew what testing methods will be right in 2005 and 2010 .
So , Mr President , as regards the question of which are the right tests for the framework directive , I ask the Commissioner to submit proposals founded on objective criteria and modern knowledge .
Mr President , I celebrate the fact that this report brings nearer the prospect of safer car fronts and therefore fewer pedestrian , cyclist and motorcyclist deaths .
Cars remain excessively and unnecessarily dangerous .
Safer car fronts could save 2 000 lives a year at a cost of only EUR 30 or GBP 20 a car .
I agree it should be possible to turn off daytime running lights .
Indeed , I would want them banned in the United Kingdom because I think they reduce the visibility of motorbikes and make motorists feel superior and invulnerable .
I am delighted at the ban on bullbars , not only when cars are sold , but also an as after-sales purchase .
May I congratulate not only the rapporteur , but also my own colleague , Hermann Vermeer , for his excellent work in leading the search for a compromise and breaking the early deadlock between the two sides of the House , one insisting that voluntary agreements should never have a role , and the other saying that legislation should never have a role .
I regret the attempt by the car industry lobby to discredit the EEVC tests .
The report properly reminds us that EEVC is the institution which is at the forefront of research in road safety , with wide experience in the field of pedestrian protection in particular .
While the EEVC and other test methods should continue to develop with new technologies , currently there are no equivalent tests , so those tests are for the moment standard .
Just as I do not think that it is useful to be theological about voluntary agreements or legislation , nor do I think that it is useful to be theological about a particular kind of test , but there are no different standards at the moment .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission 's communication , which seeks to bring about a voluntary agreement between car manufacturers operating on the internal market in order to increase the protection afforded to pedestrians and other road users , is certainly a major step forwards in the area of road safety .
I believe it is also a good example of a non-legislative approach which can benefit the citizens quickly and strengthen the framework of the internal market .
The measures proposed by the European Automobile Manufacturers Association - introducing more pedestrian-friendly car fronts , fitting all new vehicles with ABS , installing daytime running lights in countries where this is permitted , and vehicle crash tests - should indeed make it possible to reduce the unacceptable number of people and pedestrians who , each year , lose their lives or are seriously or irreparably injured .
A negotiated agreement would therefore be an initial positive step towards improving road safety , and the commitment could still be improved in time and monitored .
In this context , it would appear fundamentally important for the European Parliament to call upon the Commission to guarantee the independence in both form and substance of the technical services certifying the conformity with the tests laid down of all new vehicle models that manufacturers intend to place on the market .
In this regard , the motion for a resolution to be put to the vote today quite rightly calls for the conformity inspection procedures to be set on the basis of guidelines established jointly with the Joint Research Centre and under its supervision .
Mr President , the non-binding motion for a resolution accepts for now the voluntary agreement by the European car industry .
But we are calling for EU legislation to take its place .
We welcome manufacturers ' development of pedestrian-friendly car fronts , automatic braking systems and the use of daylight running lights , although obviously there is controversy on that particular topic .
We welcome this because we are assured that these measures can be implemented relatively quickly .
However , the motion for a resolution recognises that this agreement is not the best way to protect pedestrians in the long run .
What if one of the partners fails to act ?
It is not as binding or as transparent as legislation , and there is a real lack of confidence expressed by the pedestrian protection bodies .
The car industry itself admits - and none of us can be happy about this - that it has not been proactive in the past 22 years .
Phase I will take five years to implement , with phase II in 2010 and a review in 2004 .
We are taking only a first step .
The car industry states that the framework allows it to move forward more quickly , that a directive will slow down implementation .
But we ask the Commission to come forward with a framework directive that will lay down a clear timeframe and detailed monitoring methods because at the end of the day we must protect the most vulnerable and pedestrian safety in our communities is of the utmost importance .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I found out about this speech only a couple of minutes ago , but this is a very serious matter . We are talking about human life .
For that reason I was happy to come and speak here at such very short notice .
It was a pity that the Committee headed off in the wrong direction right at the start .
We politicians wanted to leave our mark only because we were elected to this Parliament .
The issue is a lot more serious than that .
This is about saving human lives and finding the means of doing so as quickly as possible .
We must therefore forget the political approach ; we have to support the Commission 's very rational proposal and , likewise , the excellent work undertaken by the rapporteur , Mrs Petersen .
What is the way to implement those very technical changes - which are in fact huge in scale - as quickly as possible ?
We must remember that we are elected just once every five years , but the car industry holds an election every day .
Consumers vote with their wallet every day , and people 's awareness of safety matters should not be underrated .
Today they are insisting on safe cars and also that cars should be safe for pedestrians .
We especially must not get ourselves caught up in an EEVC test , good though it may be in itself , because developments are happening very fast .
What will we have to offer in terms of technology in two , three or four years ' time ?
We should not let ourselves get bogged down in the framework defined today and I give my utmost support to the Commission 's proposal , as well as Mrs Petersen 's work to reach a compromise , and I would just briefly like to say this : even Olof Palme would have been satisfied with the work that we have done here .
Mr President , as mentioned here by many speakers , with 9 000 pedestrians and cyclists killed and a further 200 000 injured in accidents involving a car , pedestrian protection has become a pressing concern for civil society , which the Commission fully shares .
When considering which approach to take to this issue , the choice has been between a voluntary commitment from industry on the basis of agreed objectives and the traditional route of legislation .
After talks with the European Commission , European motor vehicle manufacturers , represented by ACEA , committed themselves in June last year to introducing a range of measures starting this year , actually in January 2002 , leading to a high level of pedestrian protection .
Identical commitments have been entered into since then by the Japanese and Korean automobile manufacturers .
In a communication adopted in July last year , the Commission presented to the European Parliament and the Council the main elements of the industry 's commitment and invited both institutions to express their views on it .
The Commission would decide thereafter whether to accept the industry commitment or to propose legislation .
The commitment constitutes an innovative package that combines passive and active safety .
On the passive safety side , manufacturers have agreed to design cars according to a series of tests introduced in two phases , starting in 2005 , aimed at verifying that the car design will minimise injuries to pedestrians involved in an accident .
Another important passive safety element of the commitment is the ban of rigid bullbars from new cars as from this year .

Regarding active safety , industry has taken three additional initiatives : firstly , to equip new vehicles with ABS from 2003 onwards , secondly , to introduce daytime running lights on all vehicles from 2002 ( it should be noted that this refers only to the technical prescription of DRL , but it does not supersede national laws on the use of DRL ) , and , last but not least , industry is committed to progress and report systematically on the introduction of additional active safety devices to improve pedestrian protection , such as adaptive speed limiting devices .
The Commission would monitor the implementation of the commitment , on the basis of tests conducted by independent laboratories and possibly with the involvement of national type-approval authorities .
Since then , an intensive debate has taken place in the European Parliament and the Council in the past few months on the options presented by the Commission in its communication .
Last November the Council of Ministers approved the idea of an industry commitment in this area and its fundamental elements , subject to certain conditions on particular points .
Now it is the turn of the European Parliament to express its views .
I am grateful to the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism and in particular to the rapporteur , Mrs Hedkvist Petersen , for her impressive work , and also to Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , Mr Harbour and Mr Rbig for their opinions .
I appreciate the efforts invested in this matter , which have shown exceptional commitment , professionalism and openmindedness .
The aim has been to seek a balance between a high level of protection , flexibility and efficiency in law-making on the one hand , and the preservation of legal certainty and transparency on the other .
Firstly , the Commission welcomes the support expressed by the Transport Committee for the objectives and timeframe proposed in the Commission communication for the introduction of pedestrian protection measures .
Secondly , the Commission welcomes the views expressed in the report regarding the legislative approach , suggesting the use of framework legislation in this area to ensure legal certainty on the fundamental goals .
It has been asked what the Commission will do if the report is accepted .
If a majority of the European Parliament agrees to this approach , the Commission is willing to put forward a proposal for framework legislation , based on the relevant measures of the commitment .
I believe that we can do this by the end of the year , this coming autumn .
Thank you Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
The next item is the report ( A5-0192 / 20002 ) by Mrs Vlasto , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Technology , on the Commission communication - sustaining the commitments , increasing the pace [ COM ( 2001 ) 641 - C5-0075 / 2002 - 2002 / 2033 ( COS ) ] .
Mr President , this report was originally limited to the Commission communication outlining the progress achieved by the Member States in the wake of the Lisbon European Council .
I thought that it would also be helpful for the report to cover the implementation of the European Charter for small enterprises .
I wanted to present a simple and specific report to you based on the work done by the Commission and the Member States over the last two years .
I share the Commission 's concern about the slow pace of progress and about the downturn in the economic situation , which is not necessarily favourable to long-term reforms .
However , it is these structural reforms which we are being slow to implement , particularly as regards opening markets and reducing the tax burden .
One of the reasons for the slow pace of reform is the failure to comply with the method decided in Lisbon , which presupposes cooperation between the Member States and coordination by the Commission , with exchanges of information and an assessment of the measures adopted .
This is still lacking , and that is detracting from the coherence of enterprise policy .
That is why I am suggesting that the Commission should publish an enterprise policy scoreboard , just as it has done for employment policy , which should both prioritise actions to be taken and set out a timetable .
I am also calling on the Commission to provide us with better information on progress with structural reforms in the Member States .
Furthermore , I am asking the Commission to assess the effectiveness of initiatives taken by the Member States and effectively to disseminate best practice .
Small enterprises are a pillar of Europe 's economy and a breeding ground for jobs that we should support and develop .
The regulatory and administrative environment in which our companies have to operate also has an impact on their competitiveness .
We need to bear in mind that small enterprises employing fewer than 50 people provide jobs for 65 million people in the European Union .
They account for 99 % of all businesses and provide 53 % of jobs .
In other words , it is better to legislate , taking account of small enterprises , which means serving 65 million people more effectively .
That is why I am calling on the Commission to step up consultation with bodies representing small enterprises and to help them to set themselves up as a network .
It is also the reason why I am stressing the need to differentiate more clearly between different types of company in legislative proposals .
And it is also why we should not make life difficult for our entrepreneurs by overburdening them with legislation .
The aim of the measures I am proposing is to support initiatives taken by the Commission and the Member States in favour of companies .
I wanted to emphasise the methodological problems that are impeding the Lisbon strategy while advancing some specific proposals likely to meet the expectations of entrepreneurs and applicable in the context of small enterprise .
I hope that this House will support this approach .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate my colleague , Mrs Vlasto , on her report .
The Lisbon agenda is an important one for the economy and future of Europe and the European Union .
A great deal of promise was held out at that time and there is a lot of very positive rhetoric about the process and the things that we want to do .
But there is a lot of talk and spin , rather than substance .
Many of the projects of substance in the process are a continuation of those schemes , such as liberalising the energy markets , which were in hand before .
I note with keen interest comments such as in paragraph 14 , which calls on the Member States to reduce the tax burden on employment .
I wish that my own Member State had followed that advice instead of putting up the tax on employment in the last budget .
I support warmly the comments about stressing the importance for small businesses of a genuine opening of the markets in telecommunications , energy , postal services and transport .
This is a worthy aspiration .
We are working hard to do it but we are not making fast enough or satisfactory enough progress .
I also welcome the call from the Commission for a study on the impact on various kinds of enterprises for each legislative proposal .
The Commissioner knows well of my concern about business impact costs and the proposals .
That is why I am also concerned about Parliament and our propensity to put down amendments which add costs .
That is why my amendment is about examining the costs of our amendments .
Mr President , I add my congratulations to Mrs Vlasto for her report , which was adopted unanimously in the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy .
It deals with the issue of the Lisbon European Council which had the objective of making the European Union the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world and link that to the Feira Council which endorsed a European charter for small enterprises .
Clearly , as Mrs Vlasto said , small enterprises are one of the keys to success in the European economies .
I should like to make three points .
Firstly , the report details the very low levels of investment in research and development - 1.19 % of GDP inside the European Union .
This is particularly acute in industrial sectors dominated by SMEs .
I would like us to look at the idea , at a European level , of research institutes paid for by a levy on the relevant industries , which the Japanese have used so successfully in getting innovation in research and development in such industrial sectors .
Secondly , we need to look at the issue of better regulation to simplify and streamline our regulations .
I have no problem with imposing burdens on business to improve , for example , the environment , but we need value for money .
One of the recent studies in the United Kingdom suggested that the end of vehicle life directive , for example , cost GBP 400 million a year and benefits the environment only to the tune of GBP 100 million a year .
If that is correct , that is something that should not have been adopted into law in the European Union .
So we need to be aware of the impact of our legislation on business and jobs .
Therefore we support the Chichester amendment in principle and will be voting in favour of it .
Thirdly , we must look more widely at whether SMEs that serve local markets only should have the same burdens imposed on them as large companies exporting around the European Union and outside .
In many cases local knowledge can suffice to protect consumers .
Regulations are needed when the goods and services from anonymous companies are remote from the consumer both geographically and in terms of local knowledge .
Mr President , Commissioner , at the European Council in Lisbon the desire was expressed to harmonise and standardise the capitalist format for all Member States of the EU .
The Lisbon method was the opening up of markets and only one way to act was proposed .
It is the coordination of economic and social policy by placing special emphasis on the role of the private sector .
We might agree with the rapporteur that only an inadequate analysis of whether the same method suits all has been carried out .
Different countries have different public services and operate on different principles regarding social welfare .
In the Nordic welfare states public services are understood broadly to include pensions , healthcare , schools and childcare .
The Catholic countries , with their traditions of care within the family , should not come and tell us in the Nordic countries that our taxes are too high .
The privatisation method expounded at Lisbon is not going to provide better services in our part of the world .
EU declarations do not create socially secure life .
For that reason in the eyes of the rightist hegemony the free Member States might lack the desire - and , in fact , it is only right that they do - to act on declarations that would pulverise people 's basic social security .
Mr President , Commissioner , rapporteur , whenever I hear the Lisbon objective of making the European Union the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world within ten years mentioned , I always wonder whether we actually think that , before the Lisbon Summit , the Heads of government were trying to advocate less competitive economies .
I believe that , instead of imposing and proposing grand objectives , it would be better to try to do some of the necessary , useful things that need doing , and this report rightly specifies some of the issues that need to be tackled such as market liberalisation , achieving a more integrated securities market and opening up the export markets for European businesses .
I feel that more could have been said , rapporteur , Mr President , Commissioner , about the tax and administrative burdens imposed as a result of employment regulation , which particularly affect small and medium-sized businesses in Europe and which are one of the reasons why a substantial part of European enterprise and microenterprise - and this is especially true of Italy although not confined to that country alone - is effectively a submerged economy , an economy which evades regulation , which evades legal constraints because of the excessive burdens imposed on it .
I would like to end by saying that it is right that we should concern ourselves with small and medium-sized businesses in Europe : in Italy , small and medium-sized businesses are the backbone of the economy .
However , alongside this , we must bear two things in mind : firstly , Europe needs large competitive internationalised businesses ; secondly , it needs small and medium-sized businesses to grow , to grow and expand continuously , first and foremost in Europe but then , if possible , to internationalise their operations .
Therefore , the phrase ' small is beautiful ' is all very well , but we must not create the conditions for small-scale enterprise which we do not need .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to congratulate Mrs Vlasto on her report .
It is certainly clear that we all need to be aware that SMEs and SMIs play an important role not only in the economy , but also in society , by promoting economic and social cohesion .
However , the scope for modernising an economy and stabilising a society is very much dependent on institutional conditions and on having a clear , accessible and above all appropriate legal framework .
The single market and the total achievement of economic and monetary union , the enlargement of the European Union and the forthcoming establishment of a Euro-Mediterranean area will increase the size of this market and thus change the rules .
This globalisation of markets has a marked impact on the competitiveness of Europe 's companies , which need to adapt their strategy by incorporating into their analytical data the strategic advances made by their competitors in third countries and competition from markets in third countries which they want access .
We have found that Europe 's companies are not sufficiently internationalised , neither within the single market nor outside the European Union .
That is why companies need more favourable and above all more appropriate regulatory conditions to be put in place as soon as possible . In particular , these conditions need to improve market access and provide for additional measures for enterprise partnerships at international level .
SMEs also need to come up with new forms of work organisation , but these changes should in no case be at the expense of workers ' needs in terms of security .
It is essential to encourage workers to adapt their skills to the needs of the company and to consider training as an investment for companies and an added value for employees .
Furthermore , SMEs make a contribution to Europe 's cultural values and to increasing skill levels .
They are the section of our economy that we need to promote , as stated at the Lisbon Summit , but we need to act quickly , because our slowness is suffocating them .
When confronted with economic reality , our companies need deeds more than words .
We need to be as efficient as they are .
This is already clear in the Sixth Framework Programme on Research .
We now need to pursue that coherence .
Mr President , I would just like to address this question of better regulation .
I congratulate the Commission on its proposals , particularly its recommendations on economic impact assessments .
The Commission 's proposals will only be effective if the other two institutions - the Council and Parliament - follow suit .
Mr Chichester 's amendment seeks to alter paragraph 25 , which was my original amendment in committee , calling upon Parliament in essence to carry out its own economic impact assessments .
I believe that we should do this at second reading , once we have received the common position from the Council and we know what Parliament 's amendments were at first reading .
We should have an independent unit seeking to assess exactly what the impact of the legislation is , with a rigorous cost-benefit analysis , as Mr Ford has said , albeit not to substitute for decision-making , but to ensure that all decisions taken by Parliament are informed .
It may well be that even if we recognise there are costs involved , we feel the legislation is very important .
But Parliament has to follow the example of the Commission on that , otherwise it will not work .
Indeed , so should the Council .
The Council is very good at adding amendments to legislation without actually working out how much they are going to cost .
That is a vital challenge to Parliament .
Finally , the Lisbon agenda will only work if we focus on the skills issue .
Lifelong learning has to be meaningful , not just a slogan .
We have to make sure our workforce has the proper skills to be able to develop our economy , because our competitive advantage is largely skills-based and that is where the future of the European economy lies .
Mr President , the European Council that convened in Lisbon in March 2000 made entrepreneurship the key issue in the achievement of the EU 's strategic objectives .
Entrepreneurship can help to exploit economic opportunities , so creating a prosperity that makes it possible to achieve social objectives .
One result of the Lisbon meeting was that the European Charter for Small Enterprises was born .
The basic principle at work here was that small enterprises are an important source of dynamism , innovation and entrepreneurship .
We were worried last winter that the major importance that entrepreneurship had would be forgotten about .
It was not , however .
In March the European Council at Barcelona said again how important entrepreneurship was , reconfirmed the special status it had been accorded , and urged Member States to expedite the implementation of the charter on small enterprises .
At the same time the Commission published its report on competitiveness for 2002 .
It shows what a long way EU productivity is from that in the United States of America .
For this reason , per capita GNP in the EU is only 65 % of that in the United States .
There are various reasons for Europe 's poor levels of competitiveness , but the report highlights the poor levels of investment in information technology and communications technology and poor levels of utilisation of investment .
The results of this are visible in industry , but also in services .
Utilisation of investment in information and communications technology furthermore helps prevent a situation where there is a shortage of skilled labour in the EU .
The worrying conclusion of the report on competitiveness for 2002 is also that , unless the EU removes all the barriers , it will not be able to achieve the Lisbon objectives .
Dominique Vlasto draws attention in her report to various courses of action to improve EU performance and avoid any such eventual situation .
Finally I would like to lay emphasis on five matters . Firstly , the Internal Market is the basis of competitiveness for EU companies .
There is still much to be done to establish the internal market in services .
Liberalisation of the finance markets would help to make funding available to business .
Secondly , the Charter for Small Enterprises must be implemented with a measure of determination .
There are signs of progress , but Member States should not waste time .
Thirdly , better regulation means that the effects of every legislative proposal must be examined .
Last week the Commission submitted a proposal on this and I am very pleased with the speeches the honourable Members Mr Chichester and Mr Titley have made here on this issue .
Fourthly , we must do everything possible to exploit information and communications technology properly .
It is not enough that information or communications technology is showing signs of speeding up the US economy ; the necessary action has to be taken also .
Finally , we must first and foremost create a favourable climate for entrepreneurship .
We have to take risks and society must be encouraged to do so .
We shall return to this in the Green Paper .
These are all political measures .
We must concentrate on getting political action on the right track . That way the EU will be able to achieve the right kind of operational environment for companies - not so much by attaching too much importance to small-scale projects , as lucrative as they too may be in themselves .
As significant levels of funding are needed at EU level we already have the necessary tools at our disposal .
I wish to thank Mrs Dominique Vlasto for having indicated the very important areas of policy in which progress is needed .
In the final analysis we have to improve political action . That way we can bring the Lisbon objectives within achievable range .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0147 / 2002 ) by Mr Belder , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the Commission communication " eEurope 2002 : Accessibility of Public Web Sites and their Content " [ COM ( 2001 ) 529 - C5-0074 / 2002 - 2002 / 2032 ( COS ) ] .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank the members of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , in particular Mrs Read and Mr Harbour , and the Commission Secretariat , for their pleasant cooperation , and state that I , as the rapporteur , am delighted to have submitted this report .
It concerns the accessibility of government websites , especially to citizens with disabilities and to elderly people .
In this connection , our meetings with the European Commission have also been very fruitful .
The Commission communication aims to draw attention to the web accessibility section of the Lisbon strategy .
In order to make websites accessible to the equipment of people with disabilities , these websites need to be of a correct technical design .
For this purpose , the Worldwide W3C Consortium has drafted guidelines .
The Member States have committed themselves to applying these guidelines for government websites and the European Commission is monitoring the progress of this process .
Since all citizens need access to government information , the accessibility of public websites is clearly important .
Moreover , governments have a special responsibility towards the weaker members of society .
The European Parliament can , therefore , give its full support to this process .
It calls for greater efforts in the area of implementation .
Otherwise it will not be possible to realise the objective which the Commission mentions , namely to achieve accessibility of public websites by 2003 , in time .
I hope that the user , for example a disabled worker in government service , will gain access to government sites without any problems within the foreseeable future .
In addition , it is essential for this official himself or herself to be able to place information on a website .
Consequently , the software required to place information on the web must also be accessible .
However , a final end goal is not conceivable .
Internet technology is developing fast .
I would therefore call for the guidelines to be developed hand in hand with this technical dynamic .
Governments will thus need to follow developments very closely .
Which brings us to the question what these guidelines actually mean for government institutions .
First of all , accessibility for all will need to be accommodated in the draft process right from the outset .
Secondly , for the sake of accessibility for all , it is necessary for governments to offer their information in a technologically neutral format .
This means not exclusively via the Internet .
Subsequently , it is , of course , the question whether the guidelines will be formally complied with in an effective and practical format .
The report therefore asks Member States to set up information points where users can lodge their findings and complaints .
These signals from society will need to lead to improvements to the websites .
There has been discussion about the question of whether a more binding character of the guidelines would yield a better result .
This would not , however , get to the root of the current problem .
The root of the problem lies in the lack of familiarity with the guidelines , and not in any potential unwillingness on the part of the web designers .
In my opinion , there is certainly no reason to draft legislation at European level at this stage .
The Commission does also want private sites , however , alongside government sites , to become accessible as soon as possible .
In the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , one of the points of discussion was which type of websites was most urgent .
Since the field is making different noises , it would be useful to grant priority to websites with most relevance for user groups .
This could be either commercial websites or websites of social importance .
Furthermore , these websites of social importance also encompass websites that are commercial in nature .
Shops , banks and public transport companies spring to mind .
The report also pays attention to the candidate countries .
The extent of the objective yet to be realised means that in those countries too , accessibility is worth a great effort .
Lastly , improvements in the field will also need to be measurable .
The report therefore supports further research into measurable criteria for compliance with the guidelines .
We have received encouraging signals from the field .
The Dutch Institute for the Blind , Bartimus , which has given us excellent advice , has developed an initiative along these lines .
It hopes to be launching a website next week , on which it will be possible to register for a regular check of the website .
In this way , a seal of accessibility can be obtained .
Although the site will start off in Dutch , the institute does not rule out the introduction of an English version , thus allowing non-Dutch-speakers to have their sites tested too .
On the whole , I look forward to a situation in which people with a disability , just like people without a disability , can have access to the medium of the Internet without any problems .
I hope that this report can make a contribution to this .
After all , the Internet is a source of information and , do not forget , a means of communicating which is playing an ever greater role in society as a whole .
Technological development should not exclude any groups , but rather help them in their social participation .
Indeed , effective technology is at the service of mankind .
Mr President , I should like to thank Mr Belder for his outstanding work on this report .
It is an extremely comprehensive document that involved a lot of research .
The task of the shadow rapporteurs has been relatively easy because we have agreed with a lot of the content and we have been looking for ways to further improve the direction of his text .
I want to pick up a few specific points in relation to issues that he has kindly incorporated in the final report .
Firstly , it is correct to emphasise , as he has done , the remarkable opportunities offered to disabled people in society .
The digital revolution will improve the quality of their lives and access to services .
That is something we need to try to exploit together in the most effective way possible .
Those of us who have sat with someone who is partially sighted and seen them use a website realise that there should be better design , and it would not cost anything .
It is a question of education , training and best practice .
That is something the Commission is working on , but we need to emphasise it .
It is something where public authorities can demonstrate best practice and set a lead for others .
As an integral part of that , it is crucial to ensure that we have the instruments in place to benchmark and give access ratings to websites , because public comparison and encouragement of best practice will stimulate everybody to move forward . That is something the Commission is also working on , but we are right to emphasise that in our report .
That , of course , links in to the question of commercial services .
The users ' groups I have talked to - in the United Kingdom in particular - have emphasised the importance of encouraging commercial operators and commercial providers of services to make their websites user-friendly for disabled people .
Those crucial commercial services - such as banks , home-shopping services , access to transport - being able to order transport and look at timetables - need to be made accessible to disabled users .
They will really help them engage with this new revolution .
Having those benchmarks and star ratings will encourage commercial firms to pick them up and to make their websites more accessible which will really deliver the sorts of benefits we are looking for .
I am keen to encourage both of those aspects , but overall this report is extremely worthwhile .
We will not support all the amendments on this side , but that is more an aspect of detail .
The overall thrust of this report is very commendable and I encourage the House to give it its full support .
Mr President , I want to echo Mr Harbour 's congratulations to Mr Belder .
He really has worked not only very hard , but also in a very open , intelligent and approachable way .
I think we are seeing the fruits of that method of working in this report .
It has been a great privilege to be part of that .
Indeed , access at its best is the great equaliser , the great force for democracy .
That is why this report is so important : it is providing a mechanism in terms of active citizenship , which is becoming more and more important , for instance electronic democracy .
We are moving towards electronic voting ; methods of being engaged as an active citizen more and more depend on access .
But the reason why I wanted to be shadow rapporteur on this report , and to support Mr Belder , was that , for disabled people , access to work depends more and more on access to the web .
Mr Harbour is quite right that much of this does not depend on money , or at least not on huge sums of money , and Mr Belder has been absolutely correct to enter into wide consultation with disabled people themselves .
They already are in a position over and over again to explain to us what is needed , what will work and what will help them .
I want to draw attention particularly to paragraph 4 of the motion for a resolution , and I shall quote from it , because it says that disabled people not only should be able to read web pages , but also should be enabled to manage the content of web pages .
In other words , they are not only passive receivers of information , but also serious contributors .
That is absolutely important .
My final point is that this is all part of the Lisbon agenda , making Europe e-friendly and e-workable , and it is going to mean that if this principle is carried through into other areas of work , disabled European Union citizens will be able to participate on much more equal terms in this respect than we have seen to date .
Mr President , Commissioner , democracy must include the right to information ; it is needed to improve how people manage their own lives .
Information must be available to all .
The public sector has a responsibility to ensure that the potentially excluded also have the chance to gain access to information .
The Commission 's aim to bring the information society within everyone 's reach is democracy .
There is no information without learning how to produce and use it oneself .
A connection to the Internet and other tools for accessing information are not enough . People have to be able to and want to use them .
The rapporteur draws attention to the availability and compatibility of special hardware and software .
As a separate issue , I wish to stress the importance of language . Machine language should be translated into human languages .
We need links between people and not just to machines .
In the shadow of privatisation we must not destroy the social institutions that democratise information .
Information services that everyone can use should be produced on television .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we see the Internet as an opportunity for everyone and not as a new source of inequality , exclusion or isolation .
This is why we will always support organisations dedicated not only to fighting ' info-exclusion ' , but also and principally , in a positive and pro-active way , to enabling the extraordinary resources offered by information technologies to best respond to the needs and aspirations of vulnerable and traditionally marginalised social groups , such as the disabled and the elderly .
We must consequently give this boost all the support we can .
It was during the last European presidency , held by my country , in June 2000 , at the summit held in Santa Maria da Feira , that the ' eEurope 2002 ' , action plan was officially adopted . One of its aims was to make the information society accessible to all the citizens of the European Union , focusing in particular on the disabled and on combating ' info-exclusion ' in general .
We have kept extremely busy in this field .
The EIB and the Member States ' adoption , in 2001 , of the guidelines for Web sites was an extremely important development .
Against this background , we welcome the Commission communication and the extraordinary work carried out by the rapporteur .
Although we have doubts about the charitably generous view that the guidelines will be fully implemented by the end of 2003 , we feel we must insist on this aim and make particular demands with regard to those public Web sites which , having a specific social function or being of particular importance for the disabled and the elderly , must be the first to fully meet this objective .
There is no logical reason why there should be a delay in this matter .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on focusing on the priority of accessibility , particularly accessibility for the elderly and people with disabilities .
As regards the priority of the accessibility of the content of sites , particularly for the elderly and people with disabilities , I feel that we must focus our attention on civil and political rights , on the accessibility of these rights through the Internet .
I believe that this is the priority as far as content is concerned .
There is an urgent need for on-line publishing of all the formally public parts of institutional life - not just the political process but the judicial and administrative processes too - if we are to recapture one of the basic principles of liberal democracy .
In this regard , I and another 62 Members - and I would point this out to Commissioner Liikanen too - have tabled a motion for a resolution on e-democracy , calling for European citizens to be able to fully enjoy the rights of citizenship guaranteed by the European Union Treaties through the Internet .
I feel that this applies to all levels of public administration : in other words , our priority must be precisely to make it possible for everybody , including , that is , those who have most difficulty , the most trouble in gaining access to the Internet , to be able to fully exercise their civil rights through the Internet , the civil rights of the publishing of information on the work of the institutions , of access to democratic rights , in other words , the civil rights which can be exercised through the Web .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Commissioner Liikanen again for his excellent presentation , which was also socially sound , as well as the rapporteur , Mr Belder , for his sterling work .
On-line services for all is the European principle on which we compete with the Americans .
Unless everyone is involved our society will flag .
Numerous special groups , such as the disabled , the elderly , single parents , the poor , the unemployed , and so on , are in this position .
The number of old people is increasing .
Even we in the European Union may shortly be going around in blinkers .
Technical barriers must be removed .
That can be dealt with by the engineers , just as long as there is the political will .
Finances are not a barrier .
There exist different solutions , for example , in Sweden and Finland , but everyone , ourselves included , must aspire to the Liikanen objective .
It is important to make it easy to access the web .
Hard copy texts today are already too difficult so for many they will be too difficult on a screen too , but this is a measure of democracy , a measure of e-Europe , Europe 's gauntlet of competition for others to pick up .
The extent to which our democracy has developed and matured will be measured by how democratic we are on the web .
Then it will not be a question of accessibility but whether we are included , whether we can participate actively , and whether we are able to bring our own input to the web .
Democracy is not a one-way process , as it can easily be on the web . The elderly , the disabled and all our citizens , the special groups in particular , all must be able to participate and bring their own input to the web .
We therefore have to aspire to that .
If that does not happen democracy will be distorted .
Mr President , my words are also addressed to the voters present , who have come here today in the expectation of an interesting debate , and to the Commissioner , who has just yawned . As yesterday we did not even manage to decide what minimum would make lively debates possible , I shall henceforth be taking the liberty of stating the number of members present when I address them , so I greet fifteen ladies and gentlemen .

This is about the Internet , that is to say the alternative to the performance laid on for you here , and about direct access for you to something that can constitute the democratic opinion-forming process .
We are talking about eEurope ; have you tried it out yet ?
Have you yet visited Parliament 's website , or the Council 's , or the Commission 's ?
If you did , did you feel the way I did ?
You feel as if you are facing a wall full of binder files .
Some people get aroused by the binder files , but most do not .
It is children and young people who are looking for something different , seeking information and debate .
That is possible ; Europe has the chance to make it so , but we - by which I mean also we in this House - have to work like crazy on the design of our websites and also on their subject matter .
The most important information is not there .
That having been said , the Internet is of real importance to democracy .
That brings me to my ceterum censeo : apart from that , there can be no democracy without transparency !
Mr President , I would just like to correct what Mr Hans-Peter Martin said : there were 18 Members listening to his speech !
Mr President , there are 37 million people with disabilities in the European Union , while the number of older Europeans is also steadily increasing .
Mr Belder was able to use much richer language here , but I share the same conclusion .
These groups risk severe social exclusion due to a range of technical barriers they face when using the Internet .
The Commission is fully committed to taking action to identify and remove these barriers at European level , in order to secure an inclusive society providing equal opportunities for all .
The Commission Communication on web accessibility is an integral part of the eEurope 2002 Action Plan adopted at the European Council of Feira in June 2000 .
One of its specific aims is to ensure that people with disabilities benefit fully from new technologies and the Internet .
Representative organisations of disabled people such as the European Disability Forum have been widely consulted and we will pursue this consultation on issues such as eInclusion and eAccessibility when implementing the eEurope 2005 Action Plan to be adopted by the European Council in Seville next week .
All the areas where we propose new actions must be available to anyone with a disability .
The Commission is committed in particular to promoting the Web Accessibility Initiative ( WAI ) guidelines , which provide a voluntary mechanism for public information providers and website builders to conform to a set of informal rules on designing and structuring websites .
Many of the Member States have already taken steps towards this goal .
The Commission therefore welcomes the overall level of interest and satisfaction that this communication has received from the European Parliament .
I would particularly like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Belder , who drew up a very balanced and complete report on this issue .
As regard specific issues raised in his report , the Commission agrees with the encouragement to Member States to ensure that the underlying objectives of improved web accessibility are achieved , to raise awareness and speed up implementation of the Guidelines and to organise follow-up of the achievements in this field .
Most of these objectives are also set out in the Council of Telecommunications Ministers resolution on this subject .
The Commission has already taken steps systematically to monitor progress in adopting and implementing the guidelines at European level as part of the eEurope benchmarking effort .
We agree with the requirement that web sites developed by the Commission and other European institutions should follow these guidelines .
During the European Year of People with Disabilities 2003 , the Commission will promote awareness of web accessibility and training initiatives for website builders and content providers .
The Commission will continue its fruitful dialogue with organisations representing people with special needs , including the disabled and the elderly , to have their experience and guidance in these matters .
I am convinced that the European Parliament resolution on this subject will be a significant milestone in understanding the role and importance of accessibility in the inclusive information society .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.50 a.m. and resumed at 12 noon )

Mr President , we held an important vote on Strasbourg yesterday .
However , you do not need to have a particularly developed sense of smell to notice that something is rotten in Strasbourg !
I would like you to ask the relevant department to do something to get rid of these unpleasant smells .
Mr President , on a point of order on the same issue , there is a distinctly unpleasant odour permeating this building , not just in this Chamber , but outside as well .
Last month the Quaestors told us that the reason for this smell then was that an animal had died in one of the drains .
Are we expected to accept the same excuse this month ?
It is not acceptable .
We should not be asked to work under these conditions .
Staff should not be asked to work under these conditions .
It is high time something was done .
We will refer the matter to the Quaestors .
Mr President , I just wish to declare that , due to a financial interest which has been registered with the parliamentary authorities , I will not be participating in this vote .
Would the Commission please inform us of its position regarding the amendments .
Mr President , I would like to endorse the thanks expressed by my colleague , Commissioner Bolkestein , to the European Parliament and especially the draftsman , Mr Berenguer Fuster , for their cooperation and efficient handling of this file .
As you know , the Commission supports the Council common position because it is fully consistent with the essential objectives pursued in the Commission proposal .
It also takes account of the most important amendments at first reading .
The Commission would like to confirm that it accepts Amendments Nos 1 , 3 to 8 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 15 and 16 .
With regard to Amendment No 17 , the Commission can accept it , although it considers that a minor redrafting is needed to avoid any legal misinterpretation .
The Commission cannot , however , accept Amendments Nos 2 , 9 , 13 , 14 and 18 , for the following reasons : Amendment No 2 excludes from the proposal a large number of insurance intermediaries , which minimises the scope of the directive .
It cannot therefore be accepted .
Amendment No 9 introduces transitional provisions to safeguard the acquired rights of existing insurance intermediaries .
The Commission has already accepted Amendment No 15 , which expresses the same objective in better terms and , in addition , meets all the concerns of the directive .
The Commission cannot accept Amendment No 13 , which introduces the principle of best possible advice .
It creates great legal uncertainty and would in practice be a source of legal conflict .
Amendment No 16 , which the Commission accepts , goes in the same direction as the common position and improves it .
Amendments Nos 14 and 18 put in jeopardy the key objective of high consumer protection , something that the Commission cannot accept .
Indeed , if they were accepted they would deprive the customer of the basic information requirements .
Amendment No 18 in particular would leave the customer in a position of uncertainty , as he would not be provided with the written advice on the appropriate insurer 's product recommended by the intermediary .
The objective of achieving a true single market with a high level of consumer protection would not be achieved .
The Commission strongly opposes this amendment .
I thank you for your rather limited attention .
( Laughter , applause )
Mr President , in accordance with the Commission 's comments , I would like to table an oral amendment to Amendment No 17 saying the same thing , but in a different place .
So instead of being at the end of the recital , the paragraph proposed in Amendment No 17 would be after ' other professional activity ? , so that the amendment would read : ' This Directive should not be applied to persons who conduct another professional activity , for example , a tax expert or accountant who advises on insurance incidentally as part of that other professional activity " , and here the paragraph proposed in the Amendment would be included , " or to those simply providing general information on insurance products ? .
The rest of the recital would remain as it was drawn up in the common position .
We will ask the services responsible to examine all the translations .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0208 / 2002 ) by Mr Konrad K. Schwaiger , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the proposal and amended proposal for a Council decision adopting a specific programme 2002-2006 for research and training to be carried out by the Joint Research Centre by means of direct actions for the European Atomic Energy Community [ COM ( 2001 ) 279 - C5-0334 / 2001 + COM ( 2002 ) 43 - C5 -0216 / 2002 - 2001 / 0126 ( CNS ) ]
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0193 / 2002 ) by Mr Srgio Marques , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a Council decision on the arrangements concerning the AIEM tax applicable in the Canary Islands [ COM ( 2001 ) 732 - C5-0691 / 2001 - 2001 / 0284 ( CNS ) ]
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Mr President , in paragraph 47 , the Group of the Party of European Socialists wishes to add the name , ' The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia ' .
The original version simply reads ' Macedonia ' .
Obviously , that is not a linguistic mistake but a highly political issue .
The Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party proposes that we vote on the original version .
If there are no objections , we will look into the matter at the appropriate moment .
Mr President , I too have something to say about paragraph 47 , but it is something rather more important .
There is something wrong with it .
It contains the words : ' ? a treaty concluded last month between the Republic of Yugoslavia and Macedonia ' , but the treaty was concluded last year .
It sparked the crisis in Kosovo .
I ask that this serious mistake be corrected .
Mr President , in negotiations , we accepted the text in its original version .
We recognised the undoubted error of not calling a state by its name , and so the correction was made to its present form , ' The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia ' , which is the state 's official name .

We think Parliament would only be making itself ridiculous if it were , on the grounds of particular sentiments or political tendencies , to call a state by a name other than that which belongs to it .
Mr Sakellariou , it is very simple .
The House can decide whether to accept the variation proposed by Mrs Malmstrm .
Mr President , we must be clear about what we are voting on .
I believe that the text you have says ' the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia ' .
If that is the case , then we need a split vote to remove the ' Former Yugoslav Republic ' .
Mr President , however we express ourselves privately or as a matter of personal preference - for my part , I always say ' Macedonia ' - we have to use the official name in Parliamentary documents .
I therefore see this as being about the official use of language rather than about voting .
So we should not be having a vote on it at all .
( Applause )
Mr President , we have just voted on texts referring , for example , to ' India ' rather than ' the Republic of India ' or anything else of the sort , and so this text reads ' Macedonia ' .
If somebody wants to change this for reasons that are recognisably political , that is an oral amendment , and has to be dealt with under the relevant procedure .
Mr President , what is ridiculous is that this Chamber , which is a political organisation , calls a state by an acronym .
However , it seems to me the existing text provides an interesting balance .
Certainly the title in the English version says " FYROM " and then the body of the paragraph sensibly says " Macedonia " .
Surely we can satisfy everybody with this text .
Let us stick to this text .
Mr President , I am speaking on behalf of the PPE-DE Group .
As a coordinator and negotiator , I have to say that it is true that we always refer to the official name for official documents .
However much I would like to use the word Macedonia on its own , it still appears purer to me to use the official name that is internationally accepted in this official text .
The fact is that this is FYROM , and let us adhere to this .
Mr President , contrary to the assertion that has just been made , the present report , from beginning to end , refers to ' Cyprus ' , ' Slovenia ' and ' Slovakia ' .
I ask that these should be replaced by the states ' official names in all instances where they occur .
Mr President , I would very much like to table an oral amendment to the Liberals ' Amendment No 38 , in which it is stated that the candidates for accession are to start with the transposition of the laws against discrimination .
However , I propose that they should speed the transposition up , which would include those candidates that have already started on this .
In other words , I propose that ' to start preparing ' be deleted and replaced by ' to speed up ' .
Mr President , before we vote on Amendment No 88 , I should like to draw the attention of my fellow MEPs to a mistake that has crept into the translation of Amendment No 91 .
In this Amendment , it is stated that if Amendment No 88 is adopted , No 91 will lapse , but there is a crucial difference .
Amendment No 88 contains the word ' prostitution , and the fight against prostitution ' .
In No 91 , the word is deleted from the English translation .
All other translations are incorrect .
Amendment No 91 therefore states that opposition is being expressed in respect of human trafficking and prostitution of minors , but not to prostitution itself .
This is the key difference between Amendments Nos 88 and 91 .
Mr President , there is a mistake in the Swedish text .
It reads , ' increased access for the Mediterranean countries ? , when it should read ' developing countries ' .
I hope that other language versions are correct .
Mr President , I wish to present to the House an oral amendment on paragraphs 33 and 34 to reflect the fact that at the beginning of the week Cyprus closed the competition policy chapter .
Paragraph 33 therefore needs to be updated to say that 28 negotiating chapters have so far been provisionally closed rather than 27 .
The start of paragraph 34 also needs to be corrected to read as follows : ' Notes that the only remaining chapters are those which will be dealt with on a horizontal basis for all candidate countries , namely agriculture , financial and budgetary provisions . ?
The remainder of this paragraph would then lapse .
Mr President , there is an error in Amendment No 1 in the Swedish text .
The correct version states that the ' increase ? in the total EU quota is kept within the limits proposed by the Commission , but the Swedish text reads ' reduction ? .
We will carry out the necessary check .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , according to the German version of paragraph 18 , the pedestrian casualties are to be pursued .
Perhaps the drivers should be pursued , but certainly not the victims of the accidents .
This should therefore be corrected .
In order to improve the operation of taxation systems in the internal market , the Garcia-Margallo y Marfil report wishes in particular to ' support the VAT strategy adopted by the Commission in 2000 ? .
The rapporteur says that he is ? convinced ? that ' the EU must continue to strive towards the definitive VAT system ? .
We voted against this report because we do not see why we should spend European taxpayers ' money on training officials so as to impose a uniform tax system that is one of the most inequitable in existence .
In fact , whether rich or poor , consumers pay an identical amount of tax on products they buy - nearly 20 % of the price of most products in France .
This tax is therefore heavier in relative terms for those with more modest incomes .
The predominant role of VAT in the budget income of a country like France , and more generally in Europe , reflects the fact that it is the working class that finances the majority of state expenditure .
Only by abolishing indirect taxation can we serve the interests of the majority of the population .
State expenditure should by financed by heavy taxation of company profits and by direct income tax based on a single and highly progressive scale weighted chiefly towards higher tax brackets .
. ( PT ) Although we agree with much of the report and broadly support it , our votes reflect the considerable care we always take when dealing with these matters and the permanent vigilance that must be maintained with regard to any changes to the status quo which explicitly or implicitly point towards a communitarisation of fiscal policy , something we are not in favour of .
. ( FR ) We are voting against Konstantinos Alyssandrakis 's report on the programme for research and training on nuclear energy .
This report in fact supports the Commission 's position in this field and is very much in the spirit of the Euratom Treaty , an outdated treaty with the very much official objective of promoting the use of nuclear energy , which is in itself highly questionable .
Financing is accordingly chiefly directed towards research on nuclear fusion , which the industrial establishment claims the same virtues for now that it once attributed to nuclear fission - and we all know what that led to !
It goes without saying that funds will have to continue to be committed to research on radioactive waste , given that such large quantities of this waste have been generated in such an irresponsible way .
However , they will not be managed in the same way given the political approach that has been adopted .
By emphasising deep geological disposal , the programme before us seeks to make nuclear generation socially acceptable by evading the most contentious aspect .
If we are really to tackle the problem we are faced with , the first step we need to take , as a matter of urgency , is to stop producing such waste , and then to steer research towards in situ waste management as part of a strategy of abandoning nuclear power .
.
( DE ) As long as nuclear power stations are operated in Europe , the highest priority should be given to protecting the health of EU citizens and their environment .
We have , by adopting Mr Schwaiger 's report , made an essential contribution to nuclear safety being able to be researched in even greater depth in the future .
I have in mind especially the safety of existing reactors in Europe and in the candidate countries .
Even before enlargement , there is a need for Europe-wide safety standards to be created for nuclear power stations , so that we can provide the citizens of an enlarged EU with a high degree of safety in this area .
I see it as a task for the Joint Research Centre to lay the foundations for common safety standards of this kind .
It is for this reason that the delegation of the Austrian Freedom Party has voted in favour of this report and of Amendments Nos 1 , 2 and 4 in particular .
Mr President , although I did not vote against the report on the arrangements concerning the AIEM tax applicable in the Canary Islands , that was because I did not want simply to follow the example of Commissioner Bolkestein and our rapporteur by accepting the entire ' Spanish connection ' which has been set up in such a way as to totally violate the principles of the single market and the free movement of goods .
I am in favour of adopting special measures for the peripheral regions under Article 299 of the Treaty .
However , the tricks that the Spanish authorities are getting up to for certain products , in terms of incongruity , discrimination and distortion of competition , have nothing to do with protecting local production , although they would certainly ensure full employment for lawyers , because the victims , such as producers of rum , gin and vodka in Spain itself , will not take this lying down .
What is more , it really is extraordinary that the Commissioner , who , when it comes to other dossiers , is so resolute about safeguarding the free movement of products within the single market , is willing to present a proposal as discriminatory as this , which is to apply retroactively and for a period of ten years , up to December 2011 . I think that this is over the top .
Moreover , this is all without any reference to the economic and social development of the Islands or to the promotion of local activities .
I would like to warn the Commission and the Member States , who in the Council have given way to real blackmail by the presidency , against the dangerous precedent that they are in the process of setting .
The Council would do better not to approve Article 1 of this decision in view of the Parliament 's opinion . This House would have been better advised to follow the opinion of its Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , which should ultimately have been responsible here .
On the pretext of preserving fish stocks in EU waters , the Commission wants to reducing fishing capacity with the loss of 28 000 direct jobs by 2006 .
This report emphasises that the studies the Commission has based its proposals on are not very reliable .
However , it in no way questions a process under which the biggest polluters are not paying . By that I mean pollutant waste from industry and large industrial fishing units , which nevertheless cause more damage to the sea than small-scale fishing .
Although we voted for the handful of timid support measures for wage-earners in the fisheries sector and for crew safety , we abstained on the report as a whole .
We accept that it is in our own future interest to safeguard the planet 's fish resources .
However , by refusing to deal with those who are really responsible for this threat , and furthermore by failing to tackle an anarchic economic system , under which competition and the pursuit of private profit mean that any attempt at rational planning is purely illusory , we are not dealing with the problem and are content to make small-scale fishermen foot the bill , which is unacceptable .
Although it is clear to me that there is a need to reform the common fisheries policy as quickly as possible , and although I recognise that the stocks covered by this proposal for a regulation have been weakened , I nevertheless consider that this reform , as envisaged here , is unbalanced and could make us forget that the protection of fish resources , while necessary , should in no way be at the expense of fishermen .
It seems to me that this report does not devote enough attention to the men and women who , aware that the very survival of their livelihood depends above all on the management and preservation of fish stocks , have already undertaken to make enormous efforts in that direction .
This report seems to me to be a kind of Trojan horse in terms of the future common fisheries policy as presented now by the Commissioner responsible , Mr Fischler .
I shall therefore be voting against this motion for a resolution , which I regard as a motion that ignores human beings and proposes measures with traumatic and brutal consequences for the fisheries chain .
We voted ' no ' in the final vote on this report , in spite of there being certain parts of it which improved the Commission proposal , including the new chapter on the important socio-economic impact assessments and the somewhat larger reduction in fishing effort with regard to sand eel and whiting .
We nonetheless believe , however , particularly against the background of the very necessary programme , recently presented by the Commission , for reforming the common fisheries policy , that , on quite a few points , this report is unfortunate in the way it forestalls the overall view of this reform that is required .
On this basis , we think it particularly unfortunate that the report states that the compensation to be paid to those fishermen and ship owners hit by a temporary cessation of activity ' shall be fully paid by the EU ? .
That is inappropriate in the way it sets in stone a certain approach when it comes to structural measures , and we believe that the Commission proposal , which recommends the co-funding of such compensation , is quite clearly to be preferred .
. ( PT ) With regard to hake , given the current relative level of exploitation , regardless of the reliability or the limitations of the basic information , the level of fishing is too high , and so temporary reductions in fishing would be beneficial and a reduction for the 2002-2006 period seems to be essential if we are to achieve an appropriate exploitation of these stocks .
We can , therefore , accept the Commission 's concern to reduce fishing efforts , but under no circumstances can we accept that this reduction should be undertaken by reducing vessel numbers , entailing the definitive loss of fishing licences .
There are other , equally effective means of managing fisheries so as to ensure appropriate fishing levels , such as , for example , reducing the amount of days per year on which fishing can take place until stocks recover to acceptable numbers .
This would significantly reduce the socio-economic problems of businesses currently holding fishing rights .
Where cod is concerned , the stock situation appears to be more serious , requiring rather more severe measures than those proposed for hake , although they could vary according to the species .
In any event , these measures must also be temporary and must never involve vessel reductions or the definitive loss of fishing licences .
We regret that the distinction between the two cases , hake and cod , should not have been accepted and this is another reason for our vote against the report .
The way the dossier on the recovery of cod and hake stocks has been handled is typical of an inward-looking approach by the Commission which misdiagnoses the situation because it is cut off from reality and thus makes poor decisions .
The misdiagnosis is this : it is true that in certain fishing areas stocks of cod are in a perilous state , but this cannot simply be attributed to overfishing : there are also many other factors that come into play here .
As for hake , the situation is specific and quite different : the biological cycles are much shorter and recovery has already started , so that the measures proposed by the Commission will come totally at the wrong point in the cycle .
As for poor decisions , managing the total allowable catch on a multiannual basis is a good measure , and one for which we have been calling for years , but it should be implemented by means of annual variations limited to rates which the professions involved can cope with .
With regard to the structural measures proposed , they do not take account of the economic and social consequences for the various professions concerned and reflect the same Malthusian spirit as the proposed reform of the CFP .
They are totally unacceptable .
. ( ES ) Amendment No 1 having been rejected by the plenary ( the Varela Amendment , adopted in the Committee on Fisheries ) , Article 1 of the Commission 's proposal is fully retained , which includes hake and also a precautionary biomass target of 165 000 tonnes .
Taking into account that this target was questioned by the most recent scientific recommendations , reducing it to 145 000 tonnes , and that the Commission itself said in meetings of the Northern hake workshop that a target of 120 000 tonnes could be acceptable , we cannot vote in favour of a Proposal that includes hake and that sets the target at 165 000 tonnes .
There is also a contradiction in the Stihler report , as in her explanatory statement the rapporteur herself recognises this quantity of 165 000 tonnes as being ' too high " ( Biomass Targets ) and in her conclusions she says that " a relaxation in the targets for hake [ ? ] should be allowed " .
The plenary has also adopted amendments that improve the Commission 's proposal , which we have supported , so neither can we reject those improvements which , although they are inadequate , do , however , prevent us from voting against the report , which is why we have abstained in the final vote on it .
.
( DE ) Mrs Ayuso , the rapporteur , has drafted a text that is much closer to the proposal for a compromise between the Council and the Commission on ethyl alcohol of agricultural origin .
Treating this matter as an urgent subject of major importance in Strasbourg now opens up the possibility of our vote being followed by an agreement at last .
Only thus can we give our farmers and traditional small-scale distilleries the security that they so urgently need in order to be able to plan ahead .
There is no sense in discriminating against the producers of agricultural alcohol while leaving synthetic alcohol unaffected .
It is for that reason that we referred this matter back to the Agriculture Committee weeks ago .
The changed language in the new Commission proposal at last allows the Member States to enact their own supplementary regulations at national level .
Only this will make it possible for small distilleries in the EU to survive .
The cultivation of potatoes and cereals for the purpose of extracting alcohol and the utilisation of fruit from flourishing fruit meadows ensures the continued existence of these valued cultural landscapes , which , without national supplementary regulations , will be in extreme danger .
.
( DE ) Parliament 's Agricultural Committee voted unanimously on the CMO for ethyl alcohol of agricultural origin .
I reject any COM in agricultural alcohol and call for a ' lenient regulation ' .
I therefore support , on the whole , the proposed compromise brought in by the Spanish presidency of the Council , that is , without the articles on subsidies .
If the present German regulations were to lapse and new promotional opportunities to be created by granting area payments , that would constitute a completely new approach , one that would be neither of equal financial value nor capable of being an effective promotional instrument .
The production of agricultural alcohol currently provides an additional income for many family-run farms , which thus see it as a secondary means of support .
This is indeed about fruit and caring for cultural landscapes - it is also about the many small and medium-sized enterprises that need the distillery on the family farm for the important additional income it provides as a secondary means of support .
I therefore ask the Commission to take on board the Spanish proposal for a compromise and Parliament 's position .
I voted for the joint resolution although there has not yet been ratification of the Nice Treaty in Ireland .
Until or unless another referendum is passed , this remains the legal position .
In its resolution on preparations for the Seville European Council to be held on 21-22 June 2002 , the European Parliament has made an appeal for a ' communitarised ' European immigration policy based on the provisions of the Treaty of Amsterdam .
There is a serious misunderstanding on this point .
The immigration situation may be getting out of control in Europe , but it is not because there is no supranational policy .
It is because for a long time neither the Member States nor the Commission have wanted to give absolute priority to the safety of the public and to controlling immigration , which inevitably means combating clandestine immigration and regulating legal migration flows .
Just the opposite has happened in fact . Both the Member States and the Commission have given priority to uncontrolled freedom of movement , to dismantling internal borders , to a benevolent attitude toward asylum-seekers - even those who are clearly abusing the system - and to the belief that massive immigration would solve our demographic problems and lack of dynamism .
The result is now clear for all to see .
But the solution is not supranational integration of immigration policy based on false priorities .
The first part of the solution is to change those priorities , but we are still a long way from doing that today .
The joint resolution on the Seville European Council once again calls on major international institutions like the UN and NATO to play a fire-fighting role in various conflicts , ranging from the crisis in the Middle East to the border conflict between India and Pakistan .
Unfortunately , in all these recent conflicts , without going back any further in time , these international institutions have acted as instruments of the major powers and have served the policies of those powers , which first and foremost still means maintaining their total world domination .
Fire-fighters who indulge in arson do not deserve our trust .
The remaining possibilities set out in this resolution on the future of Europe are totally at odds with what the people of this continent consider desirable .
The social part of this resolution at best rings hollow , and is limited to lifelong learning , whereas what Europe 's workers would like to be assured of is a lifelong job , that is to say employment throughout their working life .
Even worse , the resolution is full of new threats to the workforce , given that it advocates the idea of opening the market in public services and exposing it to the clutches of the private sector .
We will certainly not find a humane solution to the problems of immigration by closing access to Europe , for example by creating additional European border guards as proposed here .
We did not take part in the vote on this resolution .
.
( PT ) We are voting against the joint resolution because unacceptable positions have been adopted , particularly given the pressure still being put on the people of Ireland to ratify the Treaty of Nice by making an inappropriate link between its ratification and enlargement . Or given the insistence on an EU-NATO agreement on the use of resources and on the operational arrangements of the ESDP .
It is also unacceptable that attempts are being made to make more rapid progress on Community policies in the field of immigration and asylum that are even more restrictive than current legislation in some Member States .
What was needed , as proposed in the GUE / NGL motion , which was not approved , was for greater attention to have been paid to economic and social cohesion in the Member States , conducting a review of economic and monetary policies , specifically those of the Stability Pact , and stopping the process of liberalisation and deregulation . Particular care also needed to be taken with the social dimension of enlargement of the European Union and greater firmness and determination needed to be shown in producing initiatives for the developing countries and for promoting peace , with a particular emphasis on protecting the Palestinian people .
- ( FR ) The European Council in Seville , which marks the end of a very positive Spanish Presidency , will focus on the fight against illegal immigration , enlargement and the future of the European Union , including a presentation by President Valry Giscard d 'Estaing on progress with the work of the Convention .
The General Affairs Council , which met yesterday in Luxembourg , demonstrated the widespread confusion about the proposals on the reform of the common fisheries policy in all the countries where this sector is of economic , social and cultural importance .
We expect the Community to advocate reason , moderation and cooperation .
The European Council should approach the problem of illegal immigration in the wider context of a common policy on asylum and immigration .
It should concentrate on the common administration of the external borders of the Community of Fifteen and on integrating migration policy in the EU 's external relations .
It should address the public 's expectations without resorting to populism but with all the firmness that this very worrying situation demands .
The enlargement negotiations have made good progress under the Spanish Presidency .
However , the concerns of the agricultural and rural world which were demonstrated in Strasbourg on Tuesday indicate the vital importance of entering into dialogue before taking decisions affecting millions of Europeans .
( Abbreviated in accordance with Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
Discussions of European summits are so much hot air , for it is of course at these ritual gatherings - to which representatives elected by universal suffrage are not invited , still less ordinary citizens - that the future of 380 million people is discussed in the greatest secrecy .
The Seville Summit , like those of Genoa , Nice and Brussels , is a new and sad illustration of the democratic bankruptcy that characterises the construction of Europe .
This summit will be marked politically and ideologically by the liberal right and the extreme right .
The latter , buoyed up by its recent electoral successes in France and the Netherlands , has been able to impose its populism and xenophobic demagoguery upon the Fifteen , notably on issues of immigration and the right to asylum .
All that will be at stake is strengthening Fortress Europe , whereas it is urgently necessary to combat trafficking , mafias and secrecy through a policy of opening up frontiers , normalising the status of those without papers and giving nationals and foreigners equal civic and social rights .
Immigrants and asylum seekers easily serve as scapegoats for societies that have become the victims of economic liberalism and capitalist globalisation .
The anti-immigrant hysteria organised by the heads of government ends up by disguising the real agendas of the Seville Summit , the anti-social Barcelona Summit and the neo-colonial Madrid Summit .
The joint resolution is part and parcel of this trend .
I am delighted that Parliament has overwhelmingly approved paragraph 49 regretting the passing by the US Senate of a bill which would allow for the use of force by the US to prevent its citizens from being tried by the International Criminal Court ( ICC ) .
The overwhelming support for that paragraph ( 385 Members in favour ) indicates that D66 was right to raise this issue in Parliament because the success of the ICC is a European issue .
Despite these and other important positions I subscribe to , I hesitated to vote in favour because of the following passage : " 6 . Stresses that the ratification of the Nice Treaty by all Member States will facilitate a successful enlargement process " .
It is factually incorrect to suggest that ratification of the Treaty of Nice facilitates the enlargement process .
During the Nice summit , our governments ' leaders chose to make Europe slightly less democratic and less efficient .
Moreover , by going further down the road of intergovernmentalism ( and consequently less transparency ) the Treaty of Nice leads Europe in the opposite direction to where we need to go .
( Abbreviated in accordance with Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
Mr President , I have naturally voted in favour of the Brok report , but I regret that the results and the recommendations of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities have not been incorporated in the report itself but have merely crept in via amendments .
We should realise that half of the people in the candidate countries are women .
We have little or nothing to offer to those countries : no money , no immediate prospects of many jobs or anything else .
What do we have to offer ?
The acquis communautaire and the equal opportunities policy for women , and I regret that this has not been sufficiently highlighted .
This is a sine qua non .
We simply have to include this ; I cannot express it in any other way .
I hope that today 's results and the amendments in the debate on enlargement will be taken into consideration and that the debate on equal opportunities for women will be continued .
Mr President , I have restricted myself to a single explanation of vote , and I hope the Presidency will , at least , allow me that one !
I voted for the Brok report and , as representative of the Delegation to the EU-Bulgaria Joint Parliamentary Committee , I would like to point something out .
There is a translation error in the French version of the explanatory statement .
Indeed , ' Bulgaria continues to fulfil the Copenhagen political criteria ? , as stated in the original English version , as opposed to ' is striving to fulfil ? them .
Moreover , I feel that it is important to stress that , from the political point of view , we should provide for all the candidate countries of Central and Eastern Europe to become Members of the European Union en bloc and for those countries which are economically behind to receive help once they have entered the Union .
I feel that it is a political error not to accept all these candidate countries together .
In particular , as regards Bulgaria , I am concerned that the closure of units 3 and 4 of the Kozloduy power station will affect the Bulgarian people badly , especially the elderly , the unemployed and young people in search of employment .
. ( EL ) The Communist Party of Greece has stressed repeatedly that the so-called enlargement of the ? U is motivated neither by charity towards the nations involved nor historical necessity .
It is a classic example of imperialist expansionism which has found fertile ground following the collapse of the Socialist system in Europe and the break up of the USSR .
The aim is to bring small , weak countries under the umbrella of the western European wing of the international imperialist system .
As the European Parliament 's resolution reveals , enlargement goes hand in glove with the eastward expansion of NATO .
The entire accession process reminds me of colonial-type dependencies .
Its sole purpose to is hand the national wealth of these countries over to western European capital and bring them into line with capitalist restructuring ( the famous " acquis communautaire " ) , grab their public property and wipe out everything Socialism achieved , in collusion with the local Mafia .
The consequences for the multitude of small and medium-sized farmers in the candidate countries will be devastating .
As regards the accession of Cyprus , our party warned a long time ago that the Helsinki decision would make it easier to impose a solution which maintained the partition .
Unfortunately , events over recent months have proven us right .
Candidate status had a coercive effect on Cyprus and encouraged Turkish intransigence , with the complicity of the ? U. And the welcome reference in the report to a single sovereign Cypriot state does nothing to change this .
That is why the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece voted against the report .
The Brok report urges Member States and candidate countries to make the effort required to conclude the accession negotiations at the end of this year so that the accession treaties might be signed in about April 2003 with a view to ten new countries ' joining in 2004 .
We heartily approve of such a move .
At the Berlin Council in 1999 , six candidate countries had in fact been expected to join the EU in 2002 .
Well , here we are in 2002 , and no country has joined .
We cannot continue like this .
As I shall state in my explanation of vote on the Bge report , we have to break down the last barriers while retaining a sense of what is realistic .
In any case , there is at least one problem that is not really a problem : the non-ratification of the Treaty of Nice by the Irish people .
If , by chance they were again to reject this faulty treaty in a second referendum ( despite the blandishments of the Seville Council , with its teasing declaration of respect for Irish military neutrality ) , enlargement would not be compromised for all that .
It would be enough to include the relevant parts of the Treaty of Nice in the future accession treaty .
Moreover , the opportunity could be taken to revise them , which would be no bad thing .
The dismantling of public services ; industrial restructuring , leading to an explosion in unemployment , particularly in the Czech Republic , Slovakia , Lithuania and Poland ; the actual or planned closing-down of energy sources in Lithuania , Estonia and Bulgaria , with dramatic social and economic repercussions ; the planned elimination of millions of smallholdings in Poland , Slovenia and Hungary and the dismissal of those for whom they provide a living , albeit a meagre one ; and the policy for reducing agricultural production , which the European authorities want to emphasise everywhere .
It is a disastrous state of affairs for these countries and , more so , for those of their inhabitants who work in the towns and in the countryside .
It is a state of affairs on which , however , the EU authorities congratulate themselves , since the main European tobacco producer , Bulgartabak , is to be privatised and since the privatisation of the banks , insurance companies , telecommunications companies and other industries is progressing at the same time as direct foreign investment is increasing .
To put it another way , here we go again with the systematic bleeding of Central and Eastern European countries by big investors , particularly from Western Europe .
What , then , motivates the consortium of affluent countries constituted by the EU is , first of all , widening the scope for profit offered to their industrial and financial trusts .
Our vote is not a vote against the entry of these countries into the European Union , but a protest against the way in which their entry is being managed , that is to say under the aegis of big investors .
We have voted against the Brok report on enlargement .
Quite obviously , we are not opposed to integrating new countries into the EU .
Nonetheless , we have reservations about the way in which the negotiations are currently proceeding .
We are also concerned about the burden faced by the candidate countries in transposing the ' acquis communautaire ' , which varies between 70 000 and 90 000 pages of text , depending upon the translation .
Where agricultural , health and environmental matters are concerned , the challenges are enormous .
Moreover , making the entry of these countries conditional upon their strict observance of the legislation on the protection of biodiversity is unfair . Let us not forget that these countries are coming to us to consolidate peace on the continent of Europe , develop their infrastructures and make up for having been behind economically because of their insufficiently developed infrastructures .
Let us not forget this .
I welcome Mr Brok 's report , which shows that real progress has been made in the enlargement process .
There is now a real possibility of ten new Member States joining in 2004 and taking part in that year 's European elections .
It now also looks possible that Romania and Bulgaria could join in 2007 .
What is now required is a display of real political will and compromise on all sides to ensure that the momentum is sustained .
Copenhagen has the potential to be a truly historic summit .
. ( NL ) Enlargement is not progressing as successfully as its staunchest supporters in the East and West had hoped .
Four Member States , namely Germany , the United Kingdom , the Netherlands and Sweden , want the agricultural funds and regional funds to be reorganised first .
Germany and Austria are making demands on behalf of the German speakers who were driven away from the Czech Republic and Poland , and are taking measures against the influx of migrants from the east .
Poland , the Czech Republic and Bulgaria want to use EU money to build motorways right across areas of outstanding natural beauty .
Rumour has it that an election victory for the former Prime Minister , Mr Meciar , in Slovakia will exclude that country from the first wave of accession countries .
Dangerous nuclear plants in Lithuania , Slovakia and Bulgaria will only close if this is paid for by the EU .
The East remains poor because it exports cheap agricultural products and mining products , and has to import expensive technology .
In the existing EU area , political parties that are not so keen on solidarity with economically weaker states and that associate the enlargement to include new Member States mainly with higher costs and the influx of migrants , receive the support of a large proportion of the electorate .
A large accession wave in 2004 is therefore becoming increasingly less likely .
On account of a few positive points , I would nevertheless have been able to vote for this report , but the added plea for enlargement of NATO made it ultimately unacceptable to me .
. ( PT ) WE frequently hear one another talking in the name of Europe .
Nevertheless , this common platitude is actually a perversion of the truth : there are only 15 of us in the EU ; Europe has many more States , peoples and nations than only we 15 .
We are mentioning this in order to get across our basic viewpoint in this debate : enlargement is essential and is a political development of enormous significance , from which we cannot shy away .
Enlargement does , admittedly , pose challenges and difficulties , but we shall have to face them and overcome them , because this is our fate and in order for the European project , of which the Union is a part , to have real meaning .
We feel that that most important thing is for Europeans to be united , and that this should take precedence over all other political agendas .
For this reason we also reject the stubborn institutional fantasies of those Members who have turned the federalist credo into a religion and who worship the power of Brussels , believing it to be divine and interfere in everything and wish to regulate everything - future events and even those in the past .
By acting in this way , they are only creating unnecessary resistance and dangerous tensions .
The Union - it is time this were pointed out - was not established so that we could interfere in each other 's business , but so that we could cooperate in mutual respect and gain as much as possible from pooling our common energies .
.
( DE ) Preparation for enlargement does not need to be as rapid as possible , but it does need to be done as well as possible .
The report is defective in essential areas , and we have therefore voted against it , although it also contains proposals that correspond to our positions .

Paragraph 50 does not address the Czech Amnesty Law of 1946 , the repeal of which was determinedly demanded by Parliament in 1999 in relation to the Bene ? decrees .
The present text thus constitutes a retrograde step .
It is , however , gratifying that the report gives dates for closure of the Ignalina , Bohunice and Kozloduy power stations .
As regards Temelin , the report is disappointing when one considers that Parliament , as recently as last year , called for an international conference on phasing it out .
Amendment No 45 deals with reform of the CAP , and does so in a way that the Freedom Party delegation has been advocating for many years .
The amendment takes a positive line on the programme of support for border regions .
All the reasons stated mean that we have been unable to vote in favour of the report .
As we are in favour of the enlargement of the EU , with the populations of the applicant countries ultimately deciding on a membership , we have voted in favour of the report .
However , we cannot support certain parts of the report .
Firstly , the general support for the applicant states ' rapprochement with NATO and the reference to NATO as an important element in the security and stability structure of Europe .
We see NATO 's role as far more complicated than that .
We would therefore have found it wiser to keep this discussion out of this report .
Secondly , we voted against all the amendments in paragraph 50 , because the Bene ? decrees are a translation of the Allies ' Potsdam decisions .
They ensured the exiling of those Germans who had always wanted to live in Germany and therefore sought to oppress the non-German population .
This exiling should be supported even if , and particularly because , it still has legal repercussions today .
As an avid but critical supporter of the enlargement process , I felt the need to vote against the Brok report on the progress of the applicant countries .
Firstly , the Brok report incorrectly states that the applicant countries continue to fulfil the political criteria set in Copenhagen in 1993 .
That is incorrect .
If Parliament took the Commission 's country reports seriously , we could not ignore the numerous examples of corruption , discrimination against minorities , lack of human rights protection and weak judicial systems in some applicant countries .
I believe that human rights and the rule of law need to be the top priority for Parliament in the enlargement debate .
Therefore I regard the report , which explicitly denies the problems that still exist in this area , as unacceptable .
I am delighted that amendments underlining the absolute priority of the political criteria have been adopted along the lines of my own amendments adopted by the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs to its opinion .
Parliament must now take its own words seriously and look in detail at the human rights situation in the applicant countries .
( Abbreviated in accordance with Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
The financial perspectives established in Berlin in 1999 for the years 2000-2006 anticipated the arrival of six new Member States as from 2002 .
In reality , 10 countries might well join , but not until 2004 so that the economy , over time , should offset the extra burden represented by the additional Member States .
We approve of balancing of this kind , which will enable us to remain below the budget ceiling of 1.27 % of the Member States ' GDP .
We are also able to accept the progressive adaptation of payments made under the agricultural policy to the new Member States , as anticipated by the Bge report , bearing in mind that the idea here is to maintain a consistent policy .
We should also like , however , to see this policy reformed and converted into a ' durable CAP ' ( see my explanation of vote on the Olsson report ) .
On the other hand , we condemn the meagre efforts made by the Member States which at present benefit from the structural and cohesion funds and which should better understand the need to move these credits eastwards .
There must be a clear intention to abolish the present cohesion fund which , in any case , was designed to give the Eastern countries easier access to the single currency , a task which has now been completed .
Although I voted in favour of the report I would like to make it very clear that I am opposed to the text of paragraph 16 and that I regret that it was adopted .
The request for OLAF offices to be opened in the candidate countries before the end of June seems to me to be at the very least absurd and bordering on an insult to the candidate countries .
Moreover , it is impossible to comply with .
There are no offices in the current Member States either , nor is it known what powers OLAF may have outside the EU apart from inspecting our own offices .
In short , it is nonsense that the report did not deserve .
. ( NL ) In 1989 , Western Europe considered itself the victor in a long-term conflict .
This victory was to be crowned with the annexation of the East .
Many people in the East were amenable to this , in the expectation of receiving great financial support and imminent wealth .
Now that 2004 is on the horizon , it becomes apparent how difficult the accession of new Member States is .
Many of these difficulties are money-related .
Our agricultural policy , which promotes the economy of scale and keeps food prices artificially low in order to curb pay claims by the workers , will become unaffordable if the small farmers in Poland are allowed to take part .
The lion 's share of our regional funds , which , to a large degree , pump money from the rich Member States via the bureaucracy in Brussels back to the same rich Member States , would , on the basis of the current criteria , be intended for the new Member States , mainly at the expense of areas in Spain , Portugal and Greece which are currently still the poorest countries .
The monies reserved for accession are being distributed over far more candidate countries than was originally planned .
There will soon not be any money left for circulating around the rich Member States for propaganda purposes .
Like the rapporteur , I am quite happy to protect poor Member States from a role as net payers , but simply to exempt newcomers from payments in order to entice them , is taking things too far in my view .
Notwithstanding the self-congratulation of the European Union 's governing bodies , a rather sombre picture emerges from the situation of the Central and Eastern European candidate countries .
A goal which no effort is made to disguise is served by the observation , realistic as it unfortunately is , to the effect that there is ' a prosperity gap with a ratio of as much as ten to one ? between regions situated at the external borders of the EU and adjacent regions in the candidate countries .
The Commission has already agreed broadly to subsidise these regions and , in particular , the undertakings that operate there , explaining that , following enlargement , the regions at the present external borders of the EU will certainly attract less than prosperous labour from newly admitted countries .
As for the rapporteur , she adds that , in terms of the needs of the wealthy regions and their undertakings - and most certainly not in terms of the needs of the impoverished populations of Central and Eastern Europe - the subsidy ' is no more than a drop in the ocean ? .
For that reason , she proposes increasing the subsidies that are to be paid to the wealthy regions and their undertakings , while approving what are termed transitional measures which , even after enlargement , will hinder the free movement within the EU of workers from the newly admitted countries .
Indeed , these new countries are only being integrated into the EU accompanied by restrictions which make second-class citizens of their inhabitants .
We have therefore , quite obviously , voted against this report .
.
( DE ) My group supports Mrs Sommer 's report , as it takes up the specific problem of the situation which will face 33 million people living in 23 of the European Union 's border regions after the accession of the central and eastern European countries .
We are also glad that a range of proposals submitted by the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left have been incorporated into the report , for example the emphasis on the need to provide more funds to promote SMEs , and the call for an increase in the EU share in co-finance in order to take account of the calamitous gaps in terms of development .
We share the rapporteur 's fundamental conviction that the EUR 195 million in funding allocated by the Commission are far from adequate , and we support to the utmost the demand for additional financial resources .
This is all the more the case as the funds currently available are being found by means of reallocations , whilst at the same time the finance ministers of various countries can look forward to billions from the resources of the Structural and Regional Funds not being utilised and therefore being refunded .
We regret the fact that it has not been possible to bring about the acceptance of a legal basis specifically for the promotion of border regions , without which the longer-term funding of measures will be impossible .
By way of contrast , we welcome the orientation towards dealing more effectively with the connection of the regional transport systems to the Trans-European Networks .
( Abbreviated in accordance with Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
. ( PT ) The problem of the border regions is doubtless one that will become apparent with the forthcoming enlargement .
The financial endowment of this initiative is clearly inadequate - and was always bound to be so .
Nevertheless , being aware of these limitations , it demonstrates the due attention that needs to be paid to regions that will suffer from a form of ' geographical displacement ' within the future European Union and which could be harmed by competition from the EU 's new neighbouring regions .
We therefore hope it will be possible to establish - in some way , including through the best possible use of available resources - a new dynamism in these regions and that this will also have positive effects on those regions now located immediately beyond the EU 's current borders .
.
( DE ) My group supports the report by Mr Turco , who has done good work .
The Structural and Cohesion Funds are European Union instruments of extreme importance for bringing the EU 's less-favoured regions up to the level of development of the prosperous ones .
We take the view that these instruments of European incentive policy enable EU policy to have the greatest direct and visible effects on people 's quality of life and must therefore at all costs remain part of future policy after enlargement .
Support given by stronger regions to the weaker ones , in a spirit of solidarity and without reference to national boundaries , is symbolic of European unity .
We therefore oppose any discussion of even the partial renationalisation of regional and structural policy , as this would undermine the principle of solidarity and it is not foreseeable where such a policy might lead .
We are of course aware of the serious problems involved in realising structural and regional policy , and see the Commission and the Member States as sharing responsibility .
The poor implementation rates and constantly increasing backlogs , totalling - incredibly - EUR 112 billion in 2000 , give grave cause to consider the possibility of a radical re-examination of the procedures and structures that have been in place to date .
( Abbreviated in accordance with Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
. ( PT ) I wish to congratulate Mr Turco on the report he has presented , which makes a positive contribution to the debate on the importance of cohesion policy and of maintaining and strengthening this policy .
I should like , however , to emphasise two points that I feel are important to this discussion :
the need to maintain our efforts to simplify and speed up implementation processes in the field of structural actions , which are crucial to their sound and efficient implementation , guaranteed by appropriate assessment and monitoring systems ;
observance of the principle of additionality , the guarantee for a coherent structural policy , which reflects the added value of Community structural policy in national regional policies .
- ( FR ) The Olsson report and the Commission propose gradually extending the present common agricultural policy to the new Member States in the course of the ten years following their accession , with consideration being given at the same time to a new CAP , applicable to everyone but , for financial and technical reasons , unable to be put into effect before 2006 .
It would appear difficult to do anything else for the time being . Current EU rules cannot be applied to everyone immediately , for that would be too much of a burden financially .
Nor is a two-speed CAP acceptable on a long-term basis , for that would be unacceptable politically . At the same time , however , a situation should preferably be avoided in which inevitable transitional measures are the pretext for ending up with a huge and labyrinthine administrative and financial system spread right across the continent .
Let us therefore state right now the future principles of a new CAP : a concern for quality , respect for the countryside , support for multifunctionality and the maintenance of a proper social balance in rural environments ; in short , the defence of the European agricultural model , undertaken through border protection and therefore funded by the consumer rather than through an endlessly expanding Community budget funded by the taxpayer .
The proposals to integrate the new Member States are illustrative of colonial-type efforts to annex the CEECs .
There will be no single CAP in practice and the policy applied to the new Member States will be even worse than the policy applied to the current Member States .
Enlargement is being used as a springboard by the strong countries in the north to abolish direct income support by reclassifying it as " acquis communautaire " . This will wipe out vital agricultural sectors in both the CEECs and the ? U.
The aim is to secure markets for big business and develop neo-capitalist farming models which marginalise the agricultural sector and alter its social and environmental role ( paragraph 24 of the report speaks for itself here ) .
The ? U will throw a few crumbs at the CEECs , while at the same time turning them into markets for its own products - and not the other way round , as their propaganda would have us believe - with the result that the agricultural economy will shrink , small and medium-sized farms will be wiped out and employment and the social and economic fabric will be irreparably damaged .
The Communist Party of Greece is against the accession of any country to the ? U because accession has nothing to offer small and medium-sized farmers or the working classes .
However , as and when these countries join the European Union , they must have the same rights and receive the same subsidies from the first year of their accession and quotas must be determined on the basis of the real capacities and food requirements of their people .
Mr Olsson has already mentioned in his report the political and economic importance of agriculture in all CEECs and the structural changes that are required in their rural areas .
It is also crucial to bring agriculture and the foodstuffs industries into line with the European Union standards , especially hygiene and veterinary standards .
But we must also accept that many candidate countries practice far less intensive methods of agriculture and give a more prominent place to rural development .
To give a positive signal for enlargement , we should give the candidate countries equal voice in the discussions on the future of agricultural policy .
We should also concentrate on the issue of direct payments and the proposal for the phasing in of direct payments .
This must not be a stumbling block for enlargement .
Whilst agreeing that the gradual introduction of direct payments would prevent a sudden excessive influx of cash , with over-production as an end result , it would also mean the unequal treatment of the new Member States during the ten-year transitional period , which would be very discouraging for them .
The EU should make clear that there must in the longer term be a single common agricultural policy for all Member States , with all players starting on an equal footing .
My main reason for supporting this report has to do with the necessarily provisional character of the European automobile industry 's voluntary commitment to improving pedestrians ' and cyclists ' chances of survival in the event of collisions , weighed against the stricter and more solid Community legislation that is on the way and that will replace the voluntary commitment .
Although this voluntary agreement being considered between the various automobile manufacturers could be implemented fairly quickly and give rise to practical measures , I nonetheless think that , in the long term , a solid legal basis is the only satisfactory way of protecting pedestrians and cyclists .
A framework directive with a precise and realistic timetable seems to me to be the appropriate way of bringing about a genuinely dependable policy on roads .
The voluntary agreement does not , for its part , seem capable of offering the guarantees required of a trustworthy road safety policy .
In addition to the fact that such an agreement is of no effect if one of the partners decides to withdraw from it and that it suffers from a lack of openness and transparency , it also has the major shortcoming of not being really binding .
These are all reasons in favour of a framework directive aimed at introducing a genuine policy to protect pedestrians and cyclists , and all reasons which lead me to support the report in question , inviting the Commission to propose this directive .
. ( NL ) Due to the large number of road victims , road safety has finally become a political issue .
Public opinion is right to be indignant about the many vulnerable road users who are the victim of road traffic that kills .
The Petersen report helps to do something about this .
Cars should be safer not only for car drivers ; they should also be safer for the vulnerable road users .
I emphatically endorse the wish in the Petersen report that the European Parliament be involved in legislation in this area .
Road safety cannot simply be the concern of the executive and car manufacturers .
As long as increased car speeds are used as a sales argument , I shall remain suspicious of the industry .
After all , it is impossible to cut down significantly the number of victims of road accidents if the speed on the roads is not reduced , if car drivers do not adapt their driving behaviour and if the infrastructure is not conducive to caution and safety .
Road accidents are not natural disasters .
We must prevent them .
.
( PT ) This report should call for testing to be imposed , in order to end the tragedy of the around 2 000 deaths and the more than 18 000 serious injuries that occur in road traffic accidents across the EU every year .
After more than twenty years of debates , the Commission considers itself to be satisfied with a voluntary agreement with the European motor vehicle industry - and is reluctant to submit a legislative proposal - which we feel is unacceptable .
The consequences of this inaction are proving to be serious .
The phase A reduction from four tests to two , unlike the proposal by the European Enhanced Safety Vehicle Committee , will mean a 75 % decrease in lives saved , added to the fact that in only 10 years , the objectives proposed by this body will be achieved .
Only a framework directive can guarantee the effective protection of pedestrians in the EU and this is why we are abstaining on the report that has now been approved and which insists on this voluntary agreement .
. ( PT ) Our vote reflects the fact that we consider the compromise reached in the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism to be acceptable .
In this extremely sensitive area , which is so often overlooked and whose importance is so often underestimated - basically , a structured form of pedestrian protection - we endorse the drawing up of a framework-directive clearly establishing a timetable and procedures for an agreement negotiated with the automobile industry , specifically with regard to the monitoring assessments that are laid down .
This approach goes some way towards safeguarding the Commission 's line , which has the merit of speeding up a process which might otherwise drag on indefinitely and only achieve its objective after an extremely lengthy consultation process .
A study will then , of course , have to be carried out on the framework-directive , in which the Commission must , as specified , formalise the general conditions of the agreement negotiated with the automobile industry .
Only then , strictly speaking , can a careful , informed assessment of its content be carried out .
I welcome this report , which calls for a voluntary agreement on road safety and pedestrian protection , with a view to more binding legislation in the future .
The report has made significant headway in terms of reaching agreement between industry and citizens on important issues such as bullbars and pedestrian-friendly car fronts .
Hopefully these agreements will soon be matched by marked decreases in harm to pedestrians .
These measures will fortunately be implemented very soon .
However , we must guard against complacency to ensure that , in the long term , more binding and transparent legislation is forthcoming .
Voluntary agreements are useful tools to ensure that changes are made relatively quickly , but they are not a long-term solution to something as important as the protection of Europe 's citizens .
We have voted against this text , which is yet another plea for the European institutions to be placed still further at the service of private capital , for the latter no longer to face any obstacles at all in Europe and for open markets to become a reality in those sectors which have not been fully privatised , namely telecommunications , energy , postal services and transport .
The report is not interested in the users of services , who are in danger of seeing the complete deterioration of public services if these forms of privatisation end up being imposed .
What the report is interested in is the ' dynamic climate of investment and entrepreneurship ' which it intends to favour through a reduction in the ' tax burden ? and through ' access to funding ? , in particular for what are termed small and medium-sized enterprises .
It argues , in fact , for the European Union to give more attention , and more aid , to such enterprises , and although its ' explanatory statement ' is eloquent about the situation of ' small enterprises ? in Europe , it conceals the fact that the vast majority of these enterprises belong to large groups whose subsidiaries they are .
In practice , this means that these forms of aid on the part of the European Union will mainly add muscle to the largest companies .
Those elected by universal suffrage are therefore being asked to vote in such a way as to provide their democratic support for the private interests of the small minority of people who possess capital .
The Commission communication , ' Sustaining the commitments , increasing the pace ? has made it possible to draw up a complete inventory of the ' specific provisions of the Lisbon strategy in the field of entrepreneurship ? and to underline the ways in which these still fall short when it comes to small enterprises and businesses .
Progress in a large number of areas must still be made in order to support and develop apprenticeship , which is dogged by a poor image in many European countries .
It is time to promote apprenticeship as a modern and dynamic form of training .
I am therefore delighted that , by adopting Mrs Vlasto 's report , the European Parliament is offering , via the measures I have proposed by way of various amendments , to put in place a genuine policy in favour of apprenticeship , consisting of the following : an Erasmus-style exchange programme with a view to encouraging mobility among apprentices ; a European statute for apprentices and training exchange grants to enable apprentices to link up with entrepreneurs ; a policy to support small enterprises and craftsmen in connection with the European training pathways to which I have attached a lot of importance ; and , finally , training networks , set up for the purposes of these pathways , to act as lifelong vocational training outlets .
We have abstained from voting in the final vote on Mr Belder 's report on the accessibility of public web sites .
The report indicates a number of problems experienced by disabled and older people , a matter which is important and to which attention should be given .
Creating conditions enabling disabled people to participate fully in society is also very high on our liberal agenda .
We believe , however , that it must be the task of the Member States to take responsibility for measures designed to adapt public web sites .
In general , there should also be very considerable restrictions on regulating Internet services , for the World Wide Web depends for its dynamic development precisely upon its having operated without regulation or subsidies .
We believe in the principle of subsidiarity whereby decisions are to be taken as close as possible to the people they affect .
That is why we actively promote the issue of a constitution for the European Union in which the division of responsibilities is clear to everyone .
It must be perfectly clear to everyone that the EU should only concern itself with those issues it is best placed to deal with , namely the cross-border issues .
All other issues should be dealt with at local , regional or national levels .
I have voted against Amendment No 9 , even though I have considerable sympathy with the principle raised ; but Internet access does have a cost , and if the " at no cost to the user " principle is to be taken forward , the question of who bears the cost must be clarified .
This amendment introduces a very broad issue of major importance into a report on a very specific dimension of Internet access .
. ( PT ) We welcome this Commission communication and the superb report by Mr Belder , which are both committed to formalising and developing a fundamental approach , launched at the Feira Summit and again affirmed at the Nice Summit , to the fight against all forms of exclusion , specifically those related to disability and old age .
New opportunities provided by the new technologies must not be wasted , nor should they have , paradoxically , a negative effect as a result of a perverse form of info-exclusion arising from our insensitivity .
In our view , the EU and the Member States ' adoption in 2001 of the guidelines for web sites was extremely important . We also believe it is crucial to keep up the work and the efforts we are making in this field , on the exchange of information , on revising the relevant legislation , on encouraging best practices and on creating and coordinating centres of excellence in this field .
That concludes voting time .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.41 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

The next item is the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B5-0334 / 2002 , by Mr Srensen and others , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , on child labour in the football industry ;
B5-0337 / 2002 , by Mrs Muscardini , on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group , on child labour in the production of footballs ;
B5-0347 / 2002 , by Mrs Sanders-ten Holte , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , on child labour in the sports industry ;
B5-0351 / 2002 , by Mr Hughes and others , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on child labour in the football industry ;
B5-0360 / 2002 , by Mrs Martens and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , on child labour in sports goods industries ;
B5-0370 / 2002 , by Mr Vinci and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , on child labour in the manufacture of sports material .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I should like to emphasise that I am in complete agreement with this compromise text on child labour in the football industry .
I also hope that the European Union can give its stamp of approval , for it is up to Europe to put an end to this phenomenon .
I do not want to discuss child labour in general , as we are all against this .
Despite all previous agreements , conventions and codes of conduct , during this Football World Cup too , use was once again made of products which had been manufactured - under licence - by children , in an unacceptable manner .
I should like to draw the attention of the Council and the Commission to the World Cup that , in 2006 , will take place in Germany .
I cannot imagine that the Commission and the Council would accept that children would once again be used for manufacturing products for this World Cup which will take place on European soil .
I therefore expect from FIFA - the customer of industry - and from the European Commission not only a commitment in terms of effort but also a commitment in terms of result in the run-up to the World Cup in 2006 .
In this way , we can be certain that , in future , children only touch a football to play and to have fun with .
This is also why we need to call for alternatives for these children who now have to work , not least in the interest of the developing countries .
They too must fight these practices .
They need to ensure that these children can learn and work - work at school , that is - and that they receive education .
Why ?
Because these children are the economic future of the developing countries .
This is why I think , and hope , that this resolution will find widespread support , certainly with a view to the future .
Mr President , the World Cup is a truly international sporting event which arouses the interest of millions of people throughout the world .
However , in the shadow of this event , thousands of children use their valuable time every day making the balls used in football matches .
These children are deprived of any chance to acquire a better education at school or play with other children their own age .
Child labour and the inhumane working conditions which adults making footballs also work under are , unfortunately , still standard practice , despite the agreements concluded by the International Football Federation with companies which make sporting goods .
According to the report by the India Committee of the Netherlands tellingly entitled " The Dark Side of Football " , Pakistan is the biggest producer of footballs in the world , followed by India .
In just one area of India , the Punjab , about 10 000 children aged between 6 and 12 sit stitching footballs , while about 15 000 children work in the area of Sialkot in Pakistan .
These balls , which are hand stitched by children for a few cents , are the same designer and FIFA endorsed footballs which are sold in sports shops in the west for tens of dollars .
Despite the efforts of both international organisations and the sports companies themselves to introduce programmes and control systems to combat this awful practice , production has shifted to small villages where either there is no policing or the children work at home rather than in factories .
Similarly , according to the London Times , numerous children have been found making footballs for famous multinational companies .
We call on international organisations , sports companies and governments to use the World Cup , which has been dedicated to children , as an opportunity to work together and adopt a reliable system for checking if labour regulations are being complied with .
Because child labour is neither a hobby nor a game , I hope both FIFA and the industry will take the lead and make football a truly fair game for everyone .
We need to send out a message today that adults should be given work and children should be sent to school .
Adults at work , children in school .
Mr President , it is not because my country has not qualified for the World Cup , but along with my fellow MEPs from other groups and from our group , I think we should seize the euphoria surrounding the World Cup in Korea and Japan to consider the perpetual losers : the children aged six , ten or twelve , who stitch together footballs in India , Pakistan and other countries .
Three reports were presented at the press conference of Global March Against Child Labour in New Delhi last month .
They furnish the proof that child labour is still the order of the day in the production of sports equipment .
For example , according to a report from the Dutch National India Working Group , the number of children working in the Indian production of sports equipment full-time has hardly fallen over the past four years .
This despite an inspection scheme introduced by FIFA .
Other reports of a similar kind denounce the situation in Pakistan and China .
Admittedly , FIFA demonstrated its good will in 1996 by concluding an agreement with the international trade union on the code of conduct to banish child labour and poor working conditions .
However , this code has not been implemented to date , and the reports I mentioned earlier show that we are still a long way off the set goal .
Hence the express appeal to FIFA to speed up the implementation of this code .
We all know that child labour is a complex matter .
Our campaign should not only be confined to calling FIFA and the manufacturers to task over this in an overbearing manner .
The production of sports equipment is certainly not the only , and not even the most important , sector in which children work .
In order to tackle the problem at the roots , cooperation is required between industry , civil society , as well as the governments and international organisations involved .
After all , we need to look for alternatives where labour , education , income and education are concerned .
The countries involved must be reminded of their duty to monitor existing rules effectively .
I should like to underline that this resolution should not be considered as a targeted attack on one specific form of child abuse , or aimed at one specific sector in industry and one product .
However , the World Cup is an illustration of the extreme contrasts in our world .
Between the fit and healthy children who copy the World Cup on the streets in the richer world and the children on the Indian Subcontinent who stitch together leather footballs in sweatshops all day long .
In this way , the World Cup 2002 forms a starting point to remind everyone - manufacturers , governments , international organisation and the public - of their own responsibilities .
This is why I warmly support this urgent procedure .
Mr President , the title of this resolution on child labour , which we also support , is contradictory , because at that age children should be at school , not working .
The truth is that there are agreements , there are declarations , there is the FIFA Code , there are mechanisms banning child labour .
But child labour among children as young as 10 years old , as my colleagues have said , is increasing every year .
Child labour has other serious connotations : for example , it decreases salaries in the regions in which thousands of children work , takes work away from adults , causes poverty in families and , above all , deprives children of the right to education , which they should have from birth .
Recent data indicates that there are thousands of children in India and Pakistan , aged 10 or under , who are working to produce balls , and we believe that in the European Union 's talks in the World Trade Organization and in bilateral talks with each of the countries mentioned , one of our fundamental requirements should be that child labour should end .
But , as one of my colleagues has already said , it is not enough just to demand that child labour be ended , but alternatives have to be offered to the families in order for them to survive .
And of course monitoring and surveillance systems have to be put in place in order to ensure that it no longer happens , and it would be good if , as the World Cup is now being played , giving rise to so much passion , including in this House , we could say at the next World Cup in 2006 that child labour no longer existed , if not across the world , at least in part of it .
Mr President , yesterday , on the initiative of the International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) the first World Day against Child Labour was proclaimed .
Two hundred and fifty million children are regarded by their parents as an investment in their whole family 's survival .
They are exposed to the heaviest physical burdens from an early age , thus being robbed of a carefree childhood .
Not only are they put to work as cheap labour in plantations , quarries and mines , but they are also exploited by the manufacturers of sports goods .
Now of all times , when the World Cup is on in Japan and South Korea , it should not be forgotten that many footballs are made by children .
As long ago as 1998 , FIFA undertook to outlaw the use of child labour in the production of officially licensed products , but the world 's richest and most important football association has now had to admit that it cannot guarantee this .
The PPE-DE group , like all the other groups , condemns every form of child labour .
FIFA and the sports goods manufacturers must at last introduce a code of conduct and then monitor the way it is implemented , if this deplorable state of affairs is to be brought to an end .
Industry and organisations should work together with governments , as Mrs Martens and others of our fellow-Members have just emphasised .
The European Union and the ILO must check that these working guidelines are consistently adhered to .
One step in the right direction is the ' Red Card for Child Labour ' campaign started during the African championships in January this year .
We call on FIFA , national teams and the sports goods manufacturers to do everything possible to make the 2004 European Championships in Portugal the first international football tournament free of child labour .
Over and above that , I agree with the ladies who spoke before me that the fight against the causes of child labour - poverty , poor education and inadequate training - has to be stepped up .
Mr President , the Commission shares the concerns expressed about the use of child labour in the football industry .
It condemns all forms of child exploitation , as well as the worst forms of child labour .
It supports the calls on FIFA and the sporting goods companies to make sure that no children are employed in the production of FIFA licensed sportswear and footballs .
The Commission has not had any contact so far with FIFA on this issue .
It is ready to support NGOs which work with local partners for the elimination of child labour .
It has already financed several initiatives to combat child labour , especially in Africa .
The Commission considers that assistance for and protection of vulnerable children should be seen in the wider context of poverty eradication and therefore in the framework of the Community framework development cooperation .
Children are an important focal group in the Community 's external aid , particularly in sectoral policies such as education and health .
The Community is committed to applying the ILO core labour standards and has agreed to implement those standards in the framework of bilateral and multilateral agreements with developing countries .
A good example is Article 50 of the Cotonou Convention . In that article the Community and the ACP countries have reaffirmed their commitment to ILO core labour standards , including the fight against the worst forms of child labour .
The Community is increasing its support to universal and compulsory primary education in all developing countries as part of its commitments to the " education for all " framework and the millennium development goals for education and gender equality .
It sees this as one of the most efficient means currently at its disposal for rescuing children from the vicious circle of exploitation .
Assistance for , and protection of , children is channelled through a number of Commission programmes , including the European initiative for human rights and democracy .
The promotion of children 's rights was one of the priorities for funding in 2001 and will be mainstreamed in funding for the period 2002 to 2004 .
Furthermore , the Commission has also made children a cross-cutting priority for humanitarian assistance .
In its communication on the promotion of core labour standards and social governance , the Commission presented a comprehensive strategy proposing actions at European and international level .
This should , in the medium term , ensure better implementation of the ILO core labour standards through institutional support and capacity building and trading in developing countries .
As regards trade , in December 2001 the Council adopted a revised GSP scheme by which additional trade preferences are granted to countries that respect core labour standards .
This includes an improved social incentive scheme and extends the base for withdrawal of GSPs to cover serious infringements of all ILO core conventions .
Finally , the Commission played an active role in the UN General Assembly special session on children .
In this context , the EU considers a rights-based approach as fundamental to the promotion of the interest of children , given that the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child is the most ratified international treaty in the world and provides an already agreed normative framework .
The plan of action agreed at this special session contains strong elements aimed at combating child labour .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B5-0335 / 2002 , by Mrs Maes and others , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , on the tragedy in Kisangani and the situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo ;
B5-0343 / 2002 , by Mrs Sanders - ten Holte and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , on the massacre in Kisangani ;
B5-0349 / 2002 , by Mr Andrews , on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group , on the situation in DRC ( massacre in Kisangani ) ;
B5-0352 / 2002 , by Mrs Sauquillo Prez del Arco and others , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the tragedy in Kisangani and the situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo ;
B5-0359 / 2002 , by Mr Van Hecke and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , on the recent massacre in Kisangani , Democratic Republic of Congo ;
B5-0371 / 2002 , by Mr Miranda and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , on the tragedy in Kisangani and the situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the war in Congo has been raging since 1998 and has claimed 3.5 million victims in the process .
Two-thirds of the territory is still being occupied .
Recently , international opinion was once again startled by the report of a massacre of 200 people in Kisangani .
This massacre occurred two years after 1 200 people were killed in the same town as a result of the fight between two rivalling military factions .
The civilian population is naturally the victim , but those responsible have never been punished .
Amnesty International is therefore linking the events of then to now .
The war in Congo still receives far too little attention from international opinion .
During the Belgian Presidency , the European Union made greater efforts than before to get the dialogue off the ground .
But I am left with questions .
Why is MONUC not being given any reinforcement ?
MONUC is even being humiliated , officials are being expelled by DRC-Goma .
Why has Kisangani , despite resolutions by the Security Council , still not been demilitarised ?
What are we actually doing in order to help this peace process succeed , since the major parties are still not at the negotiating table ?
What are we actually doing in order to open up the Congo River ?
The population inland is denied any food or medicine .
Nobody can reach these people because the Congo River is probably the only route to access them .
In these circumstances , preparing for Congo 's reconstruction is wishful thinking .
Such reconstruction will not take place .
Quite the reverse , in fact : demilitarisation is not being maintained .
Only Namibia has done something .
I can understand that Rwanda wants to be safe , but why does international opinion not protect Rwanda and demand for everyone to leave the country , because they are , after all , only there to plunder the crops from the land .
They do not fight each other , but they rob the civilian population of the little it has left .
Mr President , the Inter-Congolese dialogue has not finished .
Its false closure in Sun City ( South Africa ) with a partial agreement means that clashes and , in the extreme , massacres such as that in Kisangani , are continuing .
The human tragedy is currently in Kisangani , Kivu and Bunia , but the fundamental political problem has lain for 40 years in the illegitimacy of the governments and institutions of the Democratic Republic of the Congo , as Mrs Maes said .
Only an honest democratic transition process , involving all of the opposition parties , will lead to peace and national sovereignty .
The Socialist Group condemns the Kisangani massacre and the presence of various foreign troops in the DRC , and supports the efforts for peace by Masire , Ajello and Monuc in order , respectively , to re-open integrated dialogue and to demilitarise the areas of the Congo occupied by armed groups and regular troops from the neighbouring countries .
With this in mind , we propose the following oral amendments to the compromise text :
1 .
Adding the following paragraph to recital H , which is in line with the declaration of the Council of the European Union on Sun City . " Whereas the European Parliament nonetheless regrets that some participants have not agreed to join this agreement and invites all the Congolese parties to take responsibility and to respect the framework established in the Lusaka agreements and the United Nations resolutions " .
This addition covers everything that the European Union said about Sun City .
Only quoting the first part would give a biased idea of the European Union 's positions , which we do , of course , support .
2 .
Adding the following paragraph to paragraph 5 of the resolution , after ' civil society ? : ' Regrets that the opposition parties ( UDPS , FONUS , PALU and MNC / L ) , and other parties and platforms representing civil society , have not signed the agreement of 19 April ? .
Paragraph 5 would therefore read as follows : ' Welcomes the political agreement on the consensus for transition in the DRC signed on 19 April 2002 by the Government of the DRC , the MLC of Jean Pierre Bemba , the RDC-ML , the RDC-N and other delegates of the unarmed opposition and civil society ; regrets that the opposition parties ( UDPS , FONUS , PALU and MNCL ) , and other parties and platforms representing civil society have not signed the Agreement of 19 April and supports the efforts of the special representative of the European Union to move forward the Alliance for the Protection of the Inter-Congolese dialogue , which includes the RCD-Goma and five unarmed opposition parties to this agreement ? .
The Socialist Group will vote against recital E , because we do not believe that , in the current political conditions in the DRC , it can be said that the population of Kisangani , or of any other province , has democratically expressed itself .
The date of the Sun City Agreement also needs to be corrected in the text , as it took place on 19 April and not on 19 May , as incorrectly featured in the resolution .
In a conflict as complex as that in the Congo , in which there are so many spurious interests in play , the role of the European Parliament should be one of conciliation and integration , of ensuring , as far as possible , that real democracy is established rather than mock democracy .
Mr President , anyone who has ever seen from the air the huge landscape around the Congo and its neighbouring great lakes knows that this is one of the world 's most fascinating regions .
It is actually a sort of continent within a continent , and so this cannot , alas , be considered as a normal internal problem ; the extent of this war is comparable to something like the Thirty Years ' War in Europe .
Just as , in Europe 's Thirty Years ' War , religious motivations were exploited by tough political and economic interests , the ethnicity of people in the Congo region and in the Democratic Republic of Congo is being misused as a tool in the interests and for the sake of corporations , raw materials and the major powers .
As in the age of the Thirty Years ' War , the troops of neighbouring states have become caught up in this civil war , never returning to their countries of origin and themselves joining the marauding bands in this gigantic country .
That is why this is , lamentably , a problem whose solution will take a great deal of time .
We have to start , in the first place , by constructing a State structure for this gigantic land that the decolonisation process carved out .
This can only be done step by step in a gradual process that must build on what was agreed in Sun City , but we must be clear in our own minds that it cannot be done overnight , that many , many small steps will be needed and that we will only be able to talk in terms of democracy when we have ensured that the State is able to perform its most basic functions .
That will involve , above all , a minimum of administration and communications and the reinstatement of shipping on the Congo , which is this great country 's lifeline , and without which it cannot be reconstructed .
Mr President , the Commission shares the concern about violence and repression in Kisangani and strongly condemns the terrible events of 14 May .
We recall , as did the declaration made on behalf of the European Union , the obligations stemming from the UN resolutions for demilitarisation of Kisangani , as well as the commitments made by the parties under the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement .
The Commission would like to reiterate that the Lusaka Agreement is at present the only commitment to a negotiated solution and the international community has stressed on many occasions the absolute need to respect it .
The Union has welcomed the power-sharing agreement reached by the Government and the MLC .
However , the Commission stresses the need for all the parties to subscribe to a consensus-driven and inclusive agreement for the transition in the Democratic Republic of the Congo .
The Commission believes that a political settlement of the crisis should be pursued by all parties and by the international community .
We fully support the recent initiative of the UN Secretary-General to further support the inter-Congolese dialogue by nominating a Special Envoy .
The Commission is in favour of an international investigation into the alleged massacre in Kisangani , but we believe that MONUC and other UN agencies present in the field can provide sufficient elements and evidence .
At this critical moment , the Commission considers that priority should be given to the international attempts to continue the peace talks and negotiations among the parties , including the foreign countries involved in the conflict .
We call on all parties to the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement to respect the end to hostilities and to refrain from any act which might hinder the search for an inclusive solution to the conflict .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
Equatorial Guinea
B5-0336 / 2002 , by Mr Rod and others , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , on the human rights situation in Equatorial Guinea ;
B5-0348 / 2002 , by Mr van den Bos and others , on behalf of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , on the human rights situation in Equatorial Guinea ;
B5-0353 / 2002 , by Mrs Sauquillo Prez del Arco and others , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the trial of the democratic opposition in Equatorial Guinea ;
B5-0361 / 2002 , by Mr Bartolozzi and Mr Posselt , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , on human rights in Equatorial Guinea ;
B5-0372 / 2002 , by Mr Miranda and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , on human rights in Equatorial Guinea ;
Belarus ( case of Andrew Carpenter )
B5-0340 / 2002 , by Mrs Schroedter and Mrs Isler Bguin , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , on the OSCE AMG Mission in Belarus ;
B5-0344 / 2002 , by Mr van den Bos , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , on Belarus ;
B5-0354 / 2002 , by Mr Wiersma , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the OSCE AMG Mission in Belarus ;
B5-0362 / 2002 , by Mr Sacrdeus and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , on the political situation in Belarus ;
B5-0366 / 2002 , by Mr Belder , on behalf of the Group for a Europe of Democracies and Diversities , on Belarus ;
B5-0373 / 2002 , by Mr Marset Campos , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , on Belarus ;
Syria ( case of Riad al Turk )
B5-0342 / 2002 , by Baroness Nicholson of Winterbourne , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , on the situation of human rights in Syria and the case of Mr Riad al Turk ;
B5-0350 / 2002 , by Mrs Boumediene-Thiery and others , on behalf of the group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , on the case of Mr Riad al Turk and the human rights situation in Syria ;
B5-0355 / 2002 , by Mrs Napoletano and Mr van den Berg , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the case of Riad al Turk ( Syria ) ;
B5-0363 / 2002 , by Dr Tannock and Mr Posselt , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , on the democratic rights situation in Syria , notably the case of Riad al Turk ;
B5-0374 / 2002 , by Mrs Eriksson and Mrs Boudjenah , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , on human rights in Syria ;
Malaysia
B5-0339 / 2002 , by Mrs McKenna , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , on detention without trial under the Internal Security Act in Malaysia ;
B5-0346 / 2002 , by Mr van den Bos , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , on Malaysia ;
B5-0356 / 2002 , by Mr van den Berg , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the situation in Malaysia ;
B5-0364 / 2002 , by Mr Cushnahan and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , on the present situation in Malaysia ;
B5-0375 / 2002 , by Mrs Morgantini and Mrs Frahm , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , on Malaysia ;
Abolition of the death penalty in Japan , South Korea and Taiwan
B5-0338 / 2002 , by Mrs Frassoni and Mr Wuori , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , on the abolition of the death penalty in Japan , South Korea and Taiwan ;
B5-0341 / 2002 , by Mrs Malmstrm , on behalf of the group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , on the abolition of the death penalty in Japan , South Korea and Taiwan ;
B5-0357 / 2002 , by Mrs Dez Gonzlez and others , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the abolition of the death penalty in Japan , South Korea and Taiwan ;
B5-0376 / 2002 , by Mrs Boudjenah and Mr Manisco , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , on the death penalty .
Equatorial Guinea
Equatorial Guinea is at present the scene of unacceptable violations of basic human rights .
Dozens of opponents of the regime of President Teodoro Obiang have been arbitrarily arrested and brought before the courts accused of conspiracy , incitement to rebellion and attempted murder of the president .
In reality , the only purpose of the trial , which began on 23 May , is to put the opposition leaders out of the running .
Along with their families , the latter are being held in inhuman conditions and are the victims of brutal torture .
Freedom of expression and of the press is systematically flouted , and independent journalists are subject to insidious daily pressure .
A repressive and brutal policy is being conducted against everyone with an ideology opposed to that of the regime .
The 68 opposition leaders have been sentenced to terms of imprisonment in the course of an unfair trial , which has made a mockery of people 's most basic rights to a defence . A number have even been in danger of receiving the death penalty .
It is vital that Equatorial Guinea respect its commitments to the international community and the European Union and engage in a genuine process of democratisation including the holding of free elections and complete respect for human rights .
A dialogue must be instituted between the opposition forces with a view to guaranteeing political rights , democracy and pluralism .
With this in mind , the trial must be annulled and the political prisoners freed immediately .
As for the press , it must be free to cover the events and to do so in safety .
In order for that to happen , it is essential that the problem of Equatorial Guinea be raised as a matter of urgency within the Joint ACP-EU Parliamentary Assembly and that the Council and the Commission be very firm indeed in their relations with the government of this country .
In order to guarantee the rapid re-establishment of the rule of law and respect for human rights , a consultation procedure between the government of Guinea and the European Union needs to be put in place as quickly as possible , and this in accordance with Article 96 of the Cotonou Agreement .
As Europeans , we cannot now remain indifferent to what is happening in Equatorial Guinea and to the human rights violations there .
Mr President , Commissioner , in the European Union 's foreign policy there are times and circumstances in which something has to be said out loud .
What is happening in Equatorial Guinea , which since its independence has had two extraordinary presidents and is now experiencing a highly unusual political situation , if we look at the latest United Nations report and the international press , sets a contradictory scene : while the international community is supporting Equatorial Guinea both technically and financially , perhaps because it is interested in its oil wealth , the authorities in the country are not respecting the most basic human rights .
This resolution is therefore appropriate in condemning those violations of human rights in this African republic , which for many years was associated with my region , the Canary Islands , the bridge between Africa and Europe .
This explains my political interest in supporting and defending the resolution .
The Liberal Group wishes to express our agreement with the Council 's position in expressing a grave concern for the political deterioration , procedural anomalies and lack of respect for human rights on the part of the Guinean authorities .
The European Union should therefore review its political relations with this African republic and call on President Obiang to establish the rule of law that has been lost and to begin to open up democracy for the good of his country .
Mr President , the trial conducted against 140 citizens in Equatorial Guinea is a sham that the European Union cannot keep quiet about .
The totalitarian regime in Malabo has tried to get rid of those who could represent a democratic alternative .
It is true that a few years ago the process would have meant that the opponents would have been physically eliminated and it is also true that the fact that the country has joined the ACP Community as a signatory of the Cotonou Agreement has led the regime to act with more respect for the standards of the rule of law , holding a trial and allowing international observers to attend it .
This revealed a grotesque set-up in terms of its lack of legal legitimacy .
There was talk of a plot to overthrow the regime and even to assassinate the Head of State , without putting forward the slightest bit of evidence , with brutally tortured witnesses and defendants , a public prosecution service that raised its initial petition of eight death sentences to eighteen , and a final verdict which , although not so extreme , punished the main people accused with long prison sentences , thus removing them as potential adversaries in any electoral battle .
We were struck by the contrast between the incompetence of the officials of the dictatorship , judges , public prosecution , police , etc. and the admirable dignity of the defendants and defence lawyers .
It is extraordinary that , despite the ill treatment inflicted on them , there was not a single witness or defendant who confirmed in the trial the statements that had been extracted from them in police stations .
I would first like to express our repulsion at such a corrupt and anachronistic regime and our solidarity and confidence in the democratic future of Equatorial Guinea .
In that country there are people of unquestionable bravery and convictions who undoubtedly represent a better future for their people .
This future is what the European Union needs to support , without , of course , falling into judgements that betray our own values .
For now , there are clauses in the Cotonou Agreement that we should activate in order to make it known in Malabo that practices such as the trial I mentioned are simply incompatible with its association with the European Union .
Mr President , it is important that the European Parliament makes its views known on the deteriorating human rights situation in Equatorial Guinea .
Since March this year , opponents of President Obiang 's regime have been arbitrarily detained and tried under deplorable and unacceptable conditions .
Detainees have been subjected to brutal and inhumane torture and often prevented from contacting their families and lawyers .
In some cases , detainees ' family members have been arrested merely because of their connection to the accused .
Independent journalists reporting on political trials have come under extreme pressure , while several human rights organisations report that deaths have occurred from injuries sustained from torture while in detention .
The nature and timing of the arrests lead me to detect a cynical attempt by the authorities to spread fear in advance of the elections due to be held next year .
I believe the Red Cross should be given immediate access to detainees , international monitors should be introduced and arbitrary detention must be brought to an end .
Equatorial Guinea is in clear breach of every human rights convention it has signed .
It is undermining its own commitment to the Union on democratisation and the full implementation of human rights .
This Union must take a firm stand with the authorities in Equatorial Guinea and demand that prior commitments be honoured .
To speak of justice in that country is to speak the language of torture and of systematic brutality .
This betrayal of core human values serves to remind us of the often-tragic gap between words and action and human rights in many parts of the world .
This House must meet the challenge of bridging that gap with vigour and authority .
We demand that the EU as a whole makes its concerns known to the authorities in Equatorial Guinea and call for an end to the current abuse of human rights .
Mr President , unfortunately , this is not the first time that we have discussed Equatorial Guinea in Parliament , to condemn the dictatorship that in practice the country is under , and also to regret the ineffectiveness of all the actions that we take .
The recent trial , which was a sham , and which was also , according to all of the observers and as confirmed by Amnesty International , riddled with evidence of torture , is an insult to the values that we defend in this Parliament .
We therefore have to express our solidarity with all those detained , with all the democratic parties that are doing an incredible job under those conditions in order to move forward in solving these problems through democratic values , and I say incredible because desperation is also appearing among the youth of Equatorial Guinea , and the seeds are appearing of what could be a violent response to so much brutality and dictatorship .
I therefore believe that we have to make an extraordinary effort to promote the path of democracy in Equatorial Guinea and not only condemn the dictatorship , but also those Western countries who , either by action or by omission , are in practice supporting the continuance of the dictator .
I therefore think that the work of people such as Onbam Ndong and Plcido Mik should be highlighted , as they are doing important work , the latter as the secretary of the Convergence for Social Democracy party .
Like the other parties , we support this resolution demanding that this trial be repealed and voided , that all those detained be freed and that the democratic future of the country be set in motion .
Mr President , although we cannot take away the torture to which the political opponents who were tried without any guarantees in Equatorial Guinea were subjected to , the country should void the trial , its results and the measures adopted during it , such as the suppression of the bar association , if it wants to be part of the association with the European Union .
Freeing those convicted and the members of their families and restoring the bar association should be demands from the European Parliament .
With this legal sham , the regime in Equatorial Guinea has surpassed all the limits that can be allowed for a signatory of the Cotonou Agreement , as Miguel Angel Martnez said , which is not only an agreement for economic cooperation , but also for political dialogue .
Equatorial Guinea has already committed itself internally with the European Union and with the whole of the international community , as a signatory of the Convention against Torture , to begin the transition to democracy , in other words , to hold free elections in a context of respect for human rights .
Failing to comply with that international obligation gives rise to sanctions that we request from the Commission and the EU-ACP Council of Ministers as part of the Cotonou Agreement .
In this sense , democratic conditionality , used in a constructive manner , is a key tool in the European Union 's development policy .
The Socialist Group will join with its African colleagues in a detailed debate on this in the next ACP-EU Joint Assembly .
The Commission is very concerned about the human rights situation in Equatorial Guinea and welcomes the attention which Parliament has drawn to it in this debate .
The Commission thinks that the recent court case demonstrates the shortcomings of the regime in relation to transition to democracy and respect for the rule of law and for human rights .
The Commission considers that the judgments have been severe and recalls the declaration made on behalf of the Union which condemns the irregularity of the procedures and the weakness of the proof presented .
The Commission deplores the decisions of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights to remove Equatorial Guinea from the list of countries to be observed by Special Representatives .
The Commission considers that , under the circumstances , the UN Special Rapporteurs on matters such as torture , independence of the judiciary and freedom of the press should visit the country as soon as possible .
Community assistance was blocked from 1993 to 1997 for non-respect of human rights and has only been partially resumed .
The 8th EDF National Indicative Programme emphasises support for democracy , human rights and the rule of law .
Obviously , this has had only limited impact , but it allows the Commission to make support conditional on respect for human rights without resorting to application of Article 96 of the Cotonou Agreement .
The Commission fears that the financial leverage of development cooperation risks being ineffective when compared to the level of resources coming from oil .
Therefore it considers it more appropriate at this time to maintain a robust dialogue with the Government as well as constant international and public pressure .
The Commission is closely following the situation in the country and would not rule out the possibility of opening consultations under Article 96 of the Cotonou Agreement .
Mr President , Belarus is the only one of the countries bordering on the enlarged European Union with which we cannot have normal relations , and President Lukashenko has set at nought all democratic rules since the day he took office .
Parliamentary and presidential elections served only to prop up his autocratic regime and give it the outward appearance of legitimacy .
After he abrogated the democratic constitution in 1996 , the OSCE sent a mission of observers to the country with the aim of re-establishing dialogue and helping to restore the foundations of a democratic order .
Its task was an unambitious one , but even that was too much for President Lukashenko .
Parliament , the Commission and the Council worked closely together with the OSCE mission , and the experience increased our regard for its achievements , as repeated attempts were made , in a situation with few - if any - prospects , to set up dialogue , even if only a tenuous one , to at least work towards the minimum criteria we had established , and to find a way to restore normal relations .
Yet even that was too much for Mr Lukashenko , who made it unmistakably clear , in a major speech last month , that he wants no more OSCE missions in the country once the presidential elections are over .
It is simply not as if we are dealing here with a country that is not a member of the OSCE and has not acknowledged its rules ; on the contrary , he himself subscribed to the OSCE rules and democratic standards .
This has not stopped him putting the media out of action , meaning that any dissident is at his mercy .
I believe that we must protest vigorously about this , and it is clear that normal relations with the European Union will not be possible if dialogue on the basis of the OSCE mission is not begun .
Thank you , Mr President , I should like to fully endorse Mrs Schroedter 's view .
It appears that the brutality of the regime in Minsk knows no bounds , and the way in which they are now managing to close down the OSCE office in that city by no longer issuing visas to diplomats who work there , is in itself a disgrace which once again illustrates how poor the quality of democracy in that country is .
It is also a rather personal matter to us because many in this House know the people who are now being ousted out of the country , if they have not been ousted already .
Over the course of two elections , we have joined forces with the OSCE team in Minsk in a very pleasant and effective partnership .
On two occasions , we , along with the OSCE , have had to conclude that the outcome of the elections was not legitimate , and this is the problem we are essentially faced with .
Also , we have always said that the European Union and the OSCE should be pro-active in supporting civil society and the opposition .
This is what Mr Lukashenko considers unacceptable and what he tries to avoid at all cost .
This is also why we are calling on the European Union too to find out when the office will actually be closing down and whether we should also consider ceasing the TACIS activities because these have probably become ineffective , since they share the same objective as the work of the OSCE .
Mr President , I entirely agree with Mrs Schroedter and Mr Wiersma and shall list a number of points by way of summarising how we Christian Democrats view the closure of the OSCE office in Minsk .
First of all , the closure is not an act of strength on the part of Belarus .
The event is , rather , an expression of weakness .
Secondly , Belarus is actually signalling , albeit in a desperate way , that it is seeking contact with the EU .
Thirdly , Belarus is seeking a bargaining counter , or something to play off against the European Union .
Fourthly , Belarus is trying in this way to give prominence to its basic need also to join the European Union in addressing the border issues and the refugee situation within Belarus .
On the basis of this analysis , we can openly enter into talks with Belarus , taking of course as our starting point our vigorous and fundamental criticism of the unacceptable incident at the OSCE office in Minsk .
I would appeal to the Commission and to Commissioner Liikanen , whom I would call upon to approach Commissioner Patten , to step up all their contacts with Belarus .
What has happened in Minsk in connection with the OSCE office is a sign that Belarus is ultimately appealing for some form of contact .
They are doing so in an unacceptable way . We cannot , however , allow neighbours of an enlarged European Union to behave as they have in this case .
It is also important for the European Union to state clearly that , within the framework of the union between Belarus and Russia , President Putin of Russia has a major and special responsibility for putting pressure on Belarus to act in an internationally credible way .
Mr President , over the course of the past four years , the OSCE mission in Belarus has done impressive work under impossible circumstances .
The present joint draft resolution is right to express its deep respect for this mission .
What is exactly the merit of the Advisory and Monitoring Group ?
Its former head of mission and great driving force , Mr Hans-Georg Wieck , has given a thumbnail description of this commitment : observation of the human rights situation and administration of justice in Belarus , legal assistance for the affected families , reporting of processes and interventions in cases of violations of the law , humanitarian aid to victims of state persecution on political grounds and by administrative and criminal penalties , development of the range of action and cooperation of political parties , the forming of a coalition of parties and social forces , observation of elections , also involving the local population , and finally , projects reinforcing civil society .
Needless to say , all these activities have been a thorn in the side of the authoritarian President of Belarus , Mr Alexander Lukashenko , from the very outset .
He has therefore done everything in his power to ignore or undermine the work of the OSCE mission , or what is worse , gave it a bad name in public .
This has certainly not done anything for the popularity ratings of the recognised ballot director Lukashenko .
Quite the reverse , in fact .
While in the opinion polls , his popularity is consistently declining , that of the OSCE mission so detested by him is on the increase .
It is therefore hardly surprising that the Belarussian Head of State is now trying to force the OSCE mission in Minsk to resign by refusing the necessary visa to be issued .
It is up to the Council and the Commission to stop him , in close cooperation , if at all possible , with the Russian Federation , since we cannot afford to abandon civil society in Belarus , which is finally regaining political and social consciousness , at this crucial time .
I therefore agree with Hans-Georg Wieck that nothing less than the credibility of the European institutions is in the balance here .
Mr President , I support all the statements made on this resolution by other Members , and as the rapporteur appointed by the Committee on External Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy to inform Parliament on a possible association agreement with Belarus , I would like to say that I am in no way satisfied with the progress of that country .
The visits that we have made with Mr Wiersma , Mr Sacrdeus , Mrs Schrder and other Members to gauge the situation have shown that in Belarus society there is a vast majority and wide range of social , political , cultural and professional forces in favour of democracy and the values of Western Europe , with strong desires to move their position towards the European Union .
I therefore think that we have a twofold commitment or challenge with Belarus : on the one hand , to strengthen relations and help the democratic transition to take place quickly and urgently , and on the other hand , to make the necessary diplomatic efforts so that this position of transition towards democracy can also be brought to the fore in Russia and elsewhere .
As has already been said , what happened with the OSCE mission is unacceptable .
The work done by the former Head of the Mission , Ambassador Hans-Georg Wieck , and by the subsequent heads , has been commendable , and we should therefore continue to exert considerable pressure so that work continues along those lines .
Our Group therefore supports this position , in agreement with all of the democratic opposition forces I mentioned , who want a different Belarus .
Mr President , Mr Sacrdeus has , I think , addressed something of essential importance .
Byelorussia , or Belarus , will , in a very short time , be one of the European Union 's neighbours .
What was termed Poland in the Middle Ages was in actual fact a federation consisting of Poland , Lithuania and Byelorussia , each part having equal rights .
Lithuania and Poland will , next year or the year thereafter , be able to become members of the European Union , whereas Belarus seems today to be further away than the Democratic Republic of Congo , about which we were speaking earlier .
This is a tragedy , responsibility for which lies principally at Mr Lukashenko 's door .
The people of Belarus played a part in the democracy movement that led to the fall of Communism and helped to bring about the dissolution of the Soviet Union .
It is for that reason that we have to give forthright support to the movement for democracy and human rights in that country , a movement that is supported not only by us but by former human rights campaigners in Prague , Warsaw and elsewhere ; we have to send a signal to the people there that we know that they are Europeans , and that they really belong to us .
We must , of course , use all democratic and diplomatic means to work towards the OSCE becoming genuinely operational there , to ensure the failure of the attempts at doing away with monitoring and concealing this oppression behind a veil of authoritarian measures .
I would , though , be very wary of involving Moscow in this process , as Moscow , being the former colonial power , of course bears some responsibility for what is happening in Belarus today .
We have to work together with everyone , including Russia , but I see the European Union as having a special responsibility to make it clear that this European people too will have a place among us , but that the OSCE , and then the Council of Europe , must do their work , and , above all and most crucially , human rights must be made to prevail .
That all this should be , as it were , obscured and befogged by one regime , is something we cannot permit .
Mr President , the Commission welcomes this timely debate and shares the deep concerns that have been raised by Belarus ' appalling record on human rights and democracy .
The EU and its Member States have supported all OSCE moves to keep the OSCE assistance mission in Belarus open and running .
The EU has issued a number of statements , either in the OSCE in Vienna or from the Presidency in Madrid , strongly condemning the action by the Belarus authorities to suppress the activities of the OSCE office in Minsk .
Via its delegation in Vienna or during the Council working group meetings , the Commission has been very active in the discussions on the OSCE position vis--vis Belarus .
The closure of the OSCE mission in Minsk would put in jeopardy many of the mission 's activities , notably the observance of Belarus ' commitments under OSCE human rights rules .
If the mission is closed , this reporting will no longer be possible .
The case of Mr Andrew Carpenter is just one illustration of the methods used by the Belarus authorities to gag OSCE observers working in their country in full compliance with OSCE and diplomatic rules .
The Commission has made it clear , in its contacts with the Belarus authorities , that it regards the OSCE Assistance and Monitoring Group as a significant test case for the authorities ' approach to the development of democracy , civil society and human rights in Belarus .
If Belarus intends to join the democratic family of European nations and to establish fully-fledged relations with the EU at all levels , it should demonstrate this by accepting the mandate and the services of the AMG .
We shall follow developments very closely and if need be propose further action to support the OSCE resolve .
Mr President , we are here to debate the situation in Syria and in particular the changes that have taken place since President Bashir al Assad took over from his father some three years ago .
Following the arrest of Mr Riad al-Turk , a 72 year-old lawyer and secretary-general of the banned Communist Party , there are suggestions that Syria might be about to enter a new phase of repression , following a gradual thawing of relations with the West and a desirable but limited opening-up of the Syrian economy to market forces .
Although no expert , I would certainly support the calls for all prisoners of conscience to be freed , in Syria and elsewhere .
It is vital that the Syrian Government understands the need to distinguish between those who advocate violence or rebellion and those who simply advocate political change .
I also fully support the paragraphs in the motion calling for the Syrian authorities to ensure that detainees are not tortured in prison .
Human rights cannot be detached from wider political developments in the region .
Only yesterday I was privileged to hear the very fine speech by the King of neighbouring Jordan , an exemplary role model of moderation and wisdom .
For many years Syria sponsored terrorism in both Israel and Turkey and was the main state to reject any compromise solution to the Israeli-Palestinian dispute based on land for peace .
There are signs that the end of the Cold War and the new geopolitical realities of the region have forced the adoption of a more reasonable and even pragmatic foreign policy by Damascus .
Syrian leaders need to recognise the importance of the recent shift in international opinion and , in particular , the widespread support for a viable democratic Palestinian state and to work with - not against - the international community for a comprehensive regional settlement , including the return of the Golan Heights .
Only then , I believe , will Syria be able to fully develop its potential as a nation and to offer its people the peace and prosperity which they truly deserve .
Mr President , I will start with an individual case .
After spending 18 years in prison for crimes of opinion , the lawyer , Riad al-Turk , was released in 1998 .
In recent months , he has been imprisoned anew , also for crimes of opinion .
The trial is in progress and the defendant is in danger of being sentenced to 15 years .
All this is happening in Syria , where , despite the hopes of renewal raised by the new president , Bashir al-Assad , I regret to say that there has been absolutely no increase in consideration for freedoms .
Let me tell you about Riad al-Turk , a political opposition leader who has paid an extremely high price for defending his ideals .
The lawyer , now an elderly man in poor health - and we can imagine what it means to spend 20 years in prison in that country - has suffered a deterioration of his health in recent months , since he was arrested again .
He is not a familiar face in the West , for he has never tried to claim that his is a special case .
He has displayed great dignity throughout his life and he was not even allowed books in prison .
In order not to lose all sense of time and reality , he tried to survive and to preserve his concentration by drawing with small stones that he found in his cell .
Among those in prison with him are two members of the Syrian parliament , who are being detained on the same charge . These are their crimes : taking part in political meetings not authorised by the regime .
We are scrutinising a key country in the region with interest and we hope that the association agreement being negotiated by the Commission will be concluded .
Clearly , however , respect for human rights is an essential condition of these agreements .
We therefore expect the European Commission 's negotiators to take a firm stand on the case of the elderly lawyer , Riad al-Turk , as well .
It is impossible to put this matter down to cultural diversity : these are basic conditions which a State founded on the rule of law must respect .
Mr President , the Commission participates fully in the European Union 's endeavours to support human rights in Syria .
Our aim is to establish a constructive dialogue with the Syrian authorities on human rights issues on the basis of the principles expressed in the Barcelona Declaration .
The EU Troika demarches were made after the arrests of opposition personalities , including Mr al-Turk , in August / September last year , and after the convictions of the two MPs , Mr al-Homsi and Mr Riad Seif in March / April this year .
Through the EC Delegation in Damascus , the Commission also participates in the EU observation of trials .
We regret that recently EU observers have on some occasions been excluded from the trial against Mr al-Turk .
While we welcome the opportunity to observe trials in Syria , we also realise that the mere presence of observers at trials must not become a substitute for the fairness of court procedures .
With this in mind , the Commission , through its Delegation in Syria , will continue , together with Member States ' Embassies , to follow as closely as possible the trial against Mr al-Turk .
The Commission will also continue to raise its concerns , regarding both the general human rights situation and individual cases , with the Syrian authorities and will call upon Syria to respect freedom of expression and of association in line with the Barcelona Declaration .
Mr President , I am dismayed by the way in which the human rights situation has developed in Malaysia , particularly since the events of 11 September .
Under the pretext of combating terrorism , Malaysia 's prime minister , Mahathir Mohamad , has made much use of the Internal Security Act , which authorises the detention without trial of anyone suspected of undermining national security , to muzzle all political opposition and to intensify the repressive measures contravening individual freedoms , notably freedom of expression .
In a few months , we have moved from the image of a country on the up and up , run by civilised people , to that of a country whose leaders are destroying with their own hands what they have built up .
That is why Parliament is duty-bound to condemn these abuses and call upon the Malaysian Government not only to guarantee respect for individual freedoms but also to abolish that notorious Internal Security Act and to ratify without delay the International Convention on Human Civil and Political Rights , the International Convention on Economic , Social and Cultural Rights and the Convention Against Torture .
It is also vital that the European Parliament send a mission to Malaysia in order to investigate the conditions under which the political prisoners are being detained and the violations of their basic rights .
Finally , the European Union should place this issue on the agendas of the forthcoming meetings between the European Union and the ANASE .
Mr President , since the attacks of 11 September , the Malaysian Government has stepped up its internal security measures , allegedly against suspected Islamic militants .
It increasingly resorts to the use of the Internal Security Act , which allows it to detain people indefinitely without trial if , in the Government 's view , they are suspected of threatening national security .
Human rights groups have consistently criticised the abuse of this draconian legislation .
The High Court of Malaysia has also called for the Parliament to review its use .
This resolution quite correctly calls for the abolition of the Internal Security Act and any other laws that permit detention without trial .
It is also clear that the Government is using the pretext of the crackdown on terrorism as a means of suppressing Government opponents and critics .
The repeated use of the Internal Security Act has often been politically motivated and politically selective .
It has been used to arrest and detain without trial various members of Malaysian civil society , including opposition leaders , academics , trade unionists and students , frequently without charging them and often denying them access to a lawyer .
The resolution highlights the fact that some 40 political activists have been arrested since 2001 under the Act .
The resolution rightly calls for either the release or charging of all political prisoners of conscience , including the six political prisoners specifically named in the resolution , who have been imprisoned for exercising the right to legitimate political organisation and dissent .
We want to see them either released or for them to be formally charged and receive an immediate and fair trial .
In conclusion , I would urge that all future political cooperation with Malaysia be conditional upon the Malaysian Government 's abolition of the Internal Security Act and also the release of all political prisoners , so that all Malaysians may be assured that their basic human rights as enshrined in their constitution are respected .
Ladies and gentlemen , I now have the honour of welcoming on behalf of Parliament a delegation of members of the National Assembly of the People 's Republic of Laos , who have taken their seats in the official gallery .
The delegation is led by Mrs Pany Yathotou , the Vice-President of the Assembly , and is visiting Strasbourg on the occasion of the Third Interparliamentary Meeting between the European Parliament and Laos .
We hope that your visit to Europe 's Parliament will be an informative one .
Mr President , Malaysia could , in many ways , be a model for much of Asia , and indeed of Europe .
When one considers the constitution created by the nation 's wise founder , Tunku Abdurahman , under which the various states are in a federation , with the nine sultans electing a common Head of State every five years , and diverse races and religions living together without violence and largely without conflict , one might say that Malaysia had what it takes to be a model state , and , in economic terms as well , decades in succession saw repeated and outstanding development , despite the setbacks in recent years .
It is , then , all the more dramatic a development that Mr Mahathir 's regime is beginning to take on the characteristics of an autocracy .
First he attempts to act against dissent in the name of politicised Islam .
Then again , he misuses the fight against terrorism , and its Islamic variety in particular , to take further action against dissidents , albeit under another label .
At one moment he tries to win worldwide acclaim as the representative of democracy ; the next he is a brutal autocrat , withholding even the minimum rule of law .
That is what is at stake with this Internal Security Act - that appropriate judicial review should have to take place ; that proper evidence should have to be produced ; that detention should be under proper conditions ; and that the law should provide proper means of appealing against detention .
Political detainees in Malaysia enjoy none of these things .
It is for that reason that we have to make use of both the next EU-ASEAN summit and the next EU-ASIA summit to push energetically for a partner as important as Malaysia to respect human rights , return to its roots , renew the peaceful coexistence of the various religions and ethnic groups , and , at the end of the day , for the disappearance of the repressive measures that have been constantly stepped up in recent years , have resulted in a growing number of political prisoners , and are incompatible with Malaysia 's status as one of the European Union 's key partners .
Mr President , I recently represented the Group of the Party of European Socialists at the Socialist International Asia-Pacific Committee in Manila , where we had a first-hand opportunity to learn of the increasingly repressive regime in Malaysia .
The government has used the tragic events of 11 September as an excuse for a crackdown on peaceful democratic opponents of the current regime who have no connections with either al-Qa 'ida or any terrorist or fundamentalist groups .
The Internal Security Act , the Emergency Public Order and Prevention of Crime Ordnance and the Dangerous Drugs Special Prevention Measures Act all allow for detention without trial .
It is important that pressure is put on the Malaysian Government by the Council , the Commission and Parliament to release those held under these laws , to repeal them and to fully restore the right to a fair and public trial and respect for human rights in that country .
Mr President , the Commission welcomes Malaysia 's commitment to the fight against terrorism and the concrete steps it has taken to implement that commitment .
However , the Commission takes seriously the concerns reflected in today 's debate and in Malaysia , as in many other countries , the fight against terrorism has at times impacted negatively on respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms .
Although the Commission does not yet have a permanent presence in Kuala Lumpur , together with the Member States present in Malaysia it follows the human rights situation in the country , including the application of the internal security act , through contacts with the Government , opposition parties , Malaysian civil society and the national human rights commission .
As my colleague David Byrne made clear in the debate on this subject last year , the Commission remains concerned about the use of the Internal Security Act ( ISA ) in particular for the suppression of legitimate political dissent .
The Commission believes that the Malaysian authorities should either release political opponents detained under the ISA or provide them with access to justice in an open court of law .
The Commission continues to support EU dmarches on human rights issues to the Government of Malaysia on all occasions .
On 8 May , the Commission adopted its strategy paper for Malaysia , in which it is proposed to use the appropriate EC financing instruments to support activities to strengthen governance and the role of civil society in Malaysia .
When implementing that strategy , we will seek to pursue a constructive dialogue with the Government of Malaysia on these issues .
Thank you , Mr President , more than half of the countries in the world have abolished capital punishment either in law or in practice , and this number of countries is on the increase .
Moreover , these are mainly former countries of the Soviet Union and surrounding areas .
In Europe too , important steps are being taken towards the abolition of capital punishment , even in times of war .
This has been rubberstamped by more than 36 European countries .
In Asia too , there is a trend in this direction , on the part of both governments and human rights organisations .
Despite this , and despite the positive steps being taken in the Japanese parliament , the situation in Japan is still very distressing .
The number of executions that take place every year is fewer than in many other countries .
Between 1993 and 2000 , 39 prisoners were executed .
The attendant system , however , is very different from what one would expect from a civilised and leading industrial nation .
The executions take place by hanging .
It takes 15 to 20 minutes before the condemned person finally dies .
There have also been cases where the lawyers were not even able to collect the bodies in due course , but only the cremated remains of the prisoners .
I welcome with open arms the announcement of the Taiwanese Ministry of Justice that capital punishment will be abolished in Taiwan in 2004 .
Executions were still taking place in Taiwan until 1998 .
This has now stopped , and in January of this year , the Mandatory Death Penalty Act of 1944 was repealed .
In South Korea too , we see very hopeful movements in the direction of abolishing capital punishment .
This too is to be welcomed .
Mr President , I think that we all remember various resolutions from Parliament against the death penalty , which led to an increase in recent years in the countries who have abolished the death penalty , or at least in those who have had a practical moratorium , in which executions have not taken place in recent years .
Today we are talking about three countries in particular : South Korea , Taiwan and Japan , in which some measures have been taken which at least give us hope .
In Japan there has been a bill , and the Japanese Diet has created a league against the death penalty .
In South Korea there has been a bill , which was signed by 155 of the 273 representatives .
In Taiwan the number of crimes punishable by the death penalty has been reduced .
I think that these three facts can lead us to believe that in these three countries , in the not too distant future , the death penalty could be abolished .
We should think not only about the harsh conditions under which prisoners condemned to death live , but also that there are 70 prisoners in South Korea and more than 50 prisoners in Taiwan who are still awaiting the death penalty .
In the European Union we have concluded that the death penalty is barbaric .
We therefore support the proposal from the European Council that universal abolition of the death penalty should be achieved without too much delay , so that we can look to the future with greater hope .
Mr President , the abolition of the death penalty is a cornerstone of the moral message which the EU wishes to convey throughout the world , not only to free and democratic countries but also , and especially , to dictatorships .
The abolition of the death penalty also expresses that view of the equal , unique and inviolable dignity of mankind which has its deepest roots in the Judaeo-Christian ethic of our Western civilisation .
The EU 's opposition to the death penalty therefore has a conscious and deeply entrenched ethical and moral basis that provides the foundation for our civilisation 's view of human beings .
Enlargement of the EU will also mean abolition of the death penalty 's being a principle that will be extended to new countries in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union .
We Christian Democrats and liberal conservatives in the group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats regret the fact that , in the present resolution , this unifying principle of the abolition of the death penalty , which we fully support , is only affirmed in relation to free and democratic states such as Japan and South Korea , where football 's World Cup is being organised right now , together with Taiwan .
For some reason , the Group of the Party of European Socialists , together with the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance and the left-wing socialists and former Communist parties here in the European Parliament have chosen not to say anything at all about the abolition of the death penalty in neighbouring countries such as China and North Korea .
We find that extremely one-sided and difficult to understand and therefore choose to abstain from voting in the impending vote at 5.30 p.m.
In the fight for the abolition of the death penalty , we must take our stance on a shared moral basis .
Singling out free and democratic states gives a one-sided impression .
That is deeply regrettable .
Mr President , I have some sympathy with Mr Sacrdeus .
I am opposed to the death penalty .
It needs to be abolished throughout the world , save possibly in time of war .
I myself in this House appealed to President Fontaine last year to write to the US federal authorities to protest against the death penalty for the right-wing terrorist Timothy McVeigh .
Yet I confess I voted against placing this issue on the agenda .
I am not convinced of its urgency in the light of the fact that in South Korea the government of Kim Dae-jung has not allowed any death sentences to be carried out since he took office in February 1998 .
In Taiwan , as the resolution itself states , there has been a recent reform in the penal code abolishing the mandatory death penalty for various violent crimes , while the Minister of Justice has stated that this is the first step towards abolishing capital punishment within the next three years .
In Japan there has been a Diet Members ' League for the Abolition of the Death Penalty since 1993 .
In one sense I am almost amused that the resolution welcomes its creation nine years on .
It almost warrants an entry in the Guinness Book of Records as one of the most belated welcomes in history , and I confidently expect in the future to hear in one of our resolutions that Mafeking has been relieved .
The League for the Abolition of the Death Penalty has 113 members from all parties in both Houses in Japan , representing almost one sixth of MPs .
Last year , only two death sentences were carried out and the government has announced that it will promote a new law that will create the possibility for judges to substitute life without parole for the death penalty for capital crimes .
Nevertheless , now that the matter is on the agenda , we will vote in favour of the resolution , of course , but maybe in future we can focus on those countries around the world where the carrying out of death sentences is virtually or actually a daily event .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like , in particular , to thank Mrs Frassoni , President of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , for having put this matter to the vote on Monday as an addition to the subjects for topical and urgent debate , and I should also like to thank Mrs Napoletano of the Group of the Party of European Socialists and Mrs Malmstrm of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , as well as the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats - whatever the views of Mr Sacrdeus - and the Communist Group for having supported and upheld this resolution .
I think we had to salute this remarkable Council of Europe initiative , which is aimed not at all countries but at specific ones , namely the countries with observer status within the Council of Europe and , in particular , the United States and Japan .
A delegation from the Council of Europe recently visited Japan to participate in a seminar organised by the Japanese Diet and , in spite of what Mr Ford says , the Parliamentary League , which has actually been in existence for nine years , had been somewhat in abeyance and has only resumed its work very recently .
That said , I think that the issue of the death penalty in democratic countries is one thing , while the death penalty in non-democratic dictatorships is another .
I freely admit that the vast majority of cases - the figure is 98 % - involve dictatorships but , where dictatorships are concerned , I think that the priority is not perhaps the abolition of the death penalty but a return to democracy and the rule of law .
The battle is quite different , as are the forces deployed , but I believe that this initiative , aimed at three democratic Asian countries , is important , and important for one essential reason .
When we meet the top leaders of the People 's Republic of China , we see them basically arguing in favour of a certain relativism in human rights whereby there is apparently a distinctively Asian approach to the issue .
What , then , we have to state is that there is no such Asian approach to human rights . There is a universal approach to human rights and democracy and , that being said , enlisting countries as important as Japan , South Korea and Taiwan in the ranks of the abolitionist countries is crucial to affirming this universal nature of human rights .
It is therefore obvious - and I hope , by saying this , to reassure Mr Sacrdeus - that we are not giving up the battle for the abolition of the death penalty in dictatorships .
It is just that , in such countries , the problem is just one among so many others . What matters now is to affirm this idea of universality , and I think we also need to start thinking about transforming the Council of Europe .
With the forthcoming enlargement , there is now an overlap between the European Union and the Council of Europe , and I think we need to think about transforming the Council of Europe into a Universal Council of Democracies into which we could integrate countries like Canada , the United States , Japan and South Korea and have them genuinely spearhead a campaign to affirm democracy throughout the world , beginning with the battles for the abolition of the death penalty and for the International Criminal Court .
Mr President , the Commission welcomes Parliament 's motion for a resolution on the abolition of the death penalty in Japan , the Republic of Korea and Taiwan .
The EU works towards the universal abolition of the death penalty , which is one of the pillars of its human rights policies .
In the process of attaining this objective and in accordance with the EU guidelines on the abolition of the death penalty , where the death penalty still exists the EU calls for its use to be progressively restricted and insists that it be carried out according to minimum standards .
The EU also presses , where relevant , for the introduction of moratoria .
The EU reaffirmed its commitment to the abolition of the death penalty by tabling a resolution at the Commission on Human Rights in Geneva this year .
Many activities which aim to contribute to the abolition of the death penalty have been supported under the European initiative for democracy and human rights .
Funding such projects has recently been reaffirmed as a priority in the Commission 's communication , or policy paper of 8 May 2001 on the Union 's role in promoting human rights and democratisation in third countries .
The Commission welcomes some of the recent positive steps taken by the three countries concerned , and , firstly , the frank exchange of views at a seminar in Tokyo in May 2002 on " Justice and Human Rights in Council of Europe Observer States : the Abolition of the Death Penalty " and the establishment of a Japanese Diet members ' league for the abolition of the death penalty ; secondly , the bill tabled to abolish the death penalty in the Republic of Korea which was supported by a majority of the National Assembly last year ; thirdly , the amendment to the penal code of Taiwan which reduces the list of crimes for which the death penalty is mandatory .

However , conscious that a great deal remains to be done to abolish the death penalty in the Asian region as a whole , the EU decided in 2001 to enhance its strategy for abolishing the death penalty in that part of the world on the basis of the 1998 guidelines on the death penalty .
The forthcoming EU Annual Report on Human Rights for 2001 / 2002 will provide an overview of the action taken in the region .
The EU will continue its efforts to abolish the death penalty in the region .
Thank you , Commissioner Liikanen .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following three motions for a resolution :
B5-0367 / 2002 submitted by Mr van Dam on behalf of the Group for a Europe of Democracies and Diversities on foot-and-mouth disease and the football World Cup in South Korea ;
B5-0369 / 2002 submitted by Mrs Redondo Jimnez and others on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , Mr Kreissl-Drfler and others on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , Mr Mulder on behalf of the Group of the Europe Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , Mrs Lucas and Mr Wyn on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , Mr Berlato and Mr Hyland on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group on foot-and-mouth disease and the football World Cup in South Korea ;
B5-0377 / 2002 submitted by Mr Jov Peres and others on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left on foot-and-mouth disease and the football World Cup in South Korea .
Mr President , many football fans in Europe are following the matches in South Korea very closely .
They are being overwhelmed by alternate feelings of surprise and disappointment .
Who , for example , had expected the French team to be out of the World Cup so early on ?
Captain Zidane definitely had not .
In fact , the team of the candidate Member State Slovenia has been eliminated too .
The homecoming of Zidane and his French team constitutes a risk to millions of animals in Europe .
South Korea is currently suffering with foot and mouth disease .
The virus can travel with returning players and fans in food and on their footwear .
Control at European airports and outposts is minimal and should be stepped up drastically , preferably along American lines .
Disinfection and completing a questionnaire by travellers who arrive back from FMD-sensitive areas should become standard procedure .
One by one , the European teams are disappearing from the green pitches in Korea .
It would not acceptable for all sheep and cows soon to have to leave the green fields through laxness at European borders .
Mr President , Commissioner , as Mr van Dam said , there are still many people left in Korea .
It is estimated that there are currently between 650 000 and 700 000 people from the European Union who are going to return to their countries of origin , and there was foot and mouth disease in Korea very recently .
Council Directive 72 / 462 on health and veterinary inspection problems upon importation of bovine , ovine and caprine animals and swine , fresh meat or meat products from third countries , does not apply to meat that forms part of the personal luggage of those tourists , insofar as it does not exceed 1 kg . , belongs to the bovine or swine species , is fresh meat and is for personal consumption .
Therefore , if we know that the foot and mouth virus can be transmitted by food carried by tourists that has been made with contaminated meat , and that it can be carried by the human body , which can be a vector even if it is not affected , as Mr van Dam also said , there is currently a degree of laxity in the inspections being conducted in the Member States , at the borders of the European Union , both external and internal , and even more so at the airports .
These shortcomings have been highlighted in the report by the Commission 's Food and Veterinary Office , which points out these serious defects in the inspections of imported food and animals .
Parliament therefore asks the Commission to urge the Member States to conduct more rigorous inspections at airports , to conduct a major information campaign among all tourists who have been to that part of the world regarding the risks that exist on their return , based on the International Animal Health Code ; and for there to be a signed acceptance of responsibility in order to authorise entry to the European Union if they are coming from a country that has not been clear of the disease for at least three months .
As the matches are finishing on 30 June and people are returning , the Commission should , as a matter of urgency , put forward a suitable administrative and legislative process containing the strictest possible standards to be applied to inspections at borders , similar to those that are being applied in other third countries , to ensure that foot and mouth disease is not reintroduced into the European Union .
Mr President , we can take it as read , on the basis of current scientific research , that foot and mouth disease is , of all viral infections , one of the most dangerous to our stocks of cloven-hoofed animals .
The situation is that this dangerous animal disease spreads in an explosive manner if it is introduced in unvaccinated stocks .
We saw that happen recently , when foot and mouth disease broke out in Great Britain .
We also know what damage then ensues .
It is irrelevant whether foot and mouth disease has broken out or is present in South Korea or in another country of the world .
The mobility of people and goods , which can be transferred from one place to another in the shortest conceivable time , means that the risk is always present .
So I ask the Commission whether the prophylactic resources are sufficient to avert this danger in the long term .
We know that the European strategy for combating animal diseases still has its flaws .
The state of knowledge , which must normally increase over time , is unchanged as regards what happens in the absence of vaccination .
I ask the Commission whether the attempt should not be made to alter the animal diseases strategy in future , with particular reference to foot and mouth disease , in such a way that prophylaxis is monitored far better .
As Mrs Redondo and her predecessors on the floor said , prophylaxis of course begins at the airport or on the train .
Prophylaxis is , though , also to a very significant extent , a matter for the individual stock farmer , and I must say , some very worrying things come to light .
When I run an open day for visitors to my farm , there is no doubt in my mind ; I always see people from the towns running through the stables without taking any steps whatever to prevent the spread of disease .
Taking all these things together , I would consider it possible to stop this dangerous disease in its tracks .
Let me plainly say here and now that I very much question the assumption on which we have based our actions over the past years , namely that we can stamp it out across the board .
So I urge the implementation of a prophylaxis worthy of the name , and I ask the Commission to give an appropriate answer on the subject .
Mr President , the principle of prevention being better than cure applies before anything else .
It is one of the tasks of the Temporary FMD Committee under the dynamic leadership of Mrs Redondo Jimnez to look into this and to publish a report on this subject later on in the year .
Every attempt should now be made , however , to prevent FMD from being imported .
The outbreak in South Korea is now in the limelight accidentally because that is where the World Cup is being held .
Many supporters travel to that destination .
Some return and some do so much sooner than they had wanted , and there is thus a risk of them bringing the FMD virus with them .
As Dr Kindermann rightly pointed out , however , travellers and tourists are already returning from Africa and Asia every day , where FMD , with its many varieties , is a common occurrence .
The big question is what the European Commission and the Member States have done since the most recent major outbreak last year in order to protect the external borders more effectively .
The daily traveller has noticed no difference at all since then .
Despite this , the latest FMD outbreak incurred billions  worth of damage to the European economy .
Better border control is also expensive , of course , but much cheaper than what we have had to spend in the wake of the FMD outbreak .
Financially , it is an extremely profitable investment .
We have to model ourselves on the United States , Japan , Australia and New Zealand and impose heavy fines on imports of foodstuffs from countries that , in terms of infectious animal diseases , are in the risk area .
Mr President , the Commission wants to thank the European Parliament for this timely reminder of the risks of foot-and-mouth disease .
The outbreak in the Republic of Korea coincides with the World Cup when many thousands of Europeans are present to support their football teams .
Clearly , we need to be alert to any potential risks that they may come in contact with the disease and return with it to the European Union .
We should not , however , focus our attention only on Korea .
The fact is that foot-and-mouth disease is widespread throughout the world .
All foot-and-mouth-affected countries represent a potential risk to Member States and therefore the problem must be addressed in a general way .
Although it would appear that the outbreaks in the Republic of Korea are at least 40 km away from the nearest football venues , the potential threat to Member States cannot be ignored .
Therefore , this issue was discussed with Member States at the meeting of the Standing Committee on the Food Chain on 8 May 2002 .
I also understand that Mrs Redondo , chairperson of Parliament 's Committee on foot-and-mouth , raised the issue directly with my colleague David Byrne .
This is no doubt in the context of the ongoing work of Parliament 's Temporary Committee on foot-and-mouth disease .
I understand the issue of controls , including on passengers at points of entry to the EU , is the primary focus of the committee 's work .
The Commission has subsequently reminded all Member States that , in accordance with EU law they are not authorised to import from the Republic of Korea foot-and-mouth disease susceptible animals and their products ( fresh meat , meat products , meat preparations , milk , milk products , etc . ) .
They have also been advised that imports of foodstuffs from Korea by passengers are not allowed under EU legislation .
The Commission has requested that all Member States ensure that public awareness of travellers visiting Korea is specifically addressed at airports and that controls at points of entry into the Community on goods coming from the Republic of Korea are reinforced .
Following the 2001 foot-and-mouth epidemic , the Commission has been preparing a number of proposals addressing the issues related to foot-and-mouth , including measures to raise public awareness .
The Commission intends to present a proposal shortly to raise public awareness and reinforce controls on passengers at points of entry .
However , the technical and logistical problems , and consequently the financial implications associated with such procedures , should not be underestimated .
It must be borne in mind , that unlike Australia or New Zealand , the EU has a long land border .
There is passenger traffic of millions each year between our Member States and third countries where foot-and-mouth disease is endemic .
In addition , there are air-traffic links with 90 countries that are not internationally recognised to be free of foot-and-mouth disease and infection .
The extent of the challenge is also highlighted by the existing difficulties in combating drug smuggling in international transport .
In conclusion , I wish to thank the European Parliament for raising public awareness of the risk from foot-and-mouth disease .
I am sure that the issue can be addressed in greater detail following the report of the Committee on foot-and-mouth disease and in the light of the Commission 's forthcoming proposals on foot-and-mouth disease .
I shall pass on the record of this debate to my colleague David Byrne .
Thank you , Commissioner Liikanen .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the debate on the following six motions for a resolution :
B5-0333 / 2002 submitted by Mr Messner and others on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , on Nepal ;
B5-0345 / 2002 submitted by Mr van den Bos on behalf of the Group of the Europe Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , on the situation in Nepal ;
B5-0358 / 2002 submitted by Mr van den Berg on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists on the situation in Nepal ;
B5-0365 / 2002 submitted by Mr Thomas Mann and others on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , on Nepal ;
B5-0368 / 2002 submitted by Mr Collins on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group , on the situation in Nepal ;
B5-0378 / 2002 submitted by Mr Di Lello Finuoli and Mr Seppnen on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , on the situation in Nepal .
Mr President , the renewed escalation of violence in Nepal gives cause for concern and puts the stability of the entire region at risk .
When the Maoist rebels attacked the Nepalganj army camp at the end of May , over 100 of them were killed , as were many soldiers .
The number killed since the conflict broke out six years ago has risen to 3 500 .
Despite international appeals for peace , there is no sign of the violence coming to an end .
What is worse is that families in Kathmandu and western Nepal - with whom I have had contact for years and whom I visit regularly - tell me that the fighting is getting more intense from day to day .
The rebels are destroying specific infrastructure targets , cutting off the public 's supply of electricity , and murdering both police officers - who are poorly trained - and government officials in the provinces .
The overwhelming majority of the Nepalese people are still backing the monarchy and supporting King Gyanendra , who has substantially gained authority in the past few difficult months .
He has dissolved Parliament early at the request of the Prime Minister , Sher Bahadur Deuba , and called new elections for 13 November this year .
He has appealed to all sections of the population to turn out to vote in large numbers and thereby unambiguously declare their support for democracy and play their part in bringing about internal stability .
The European Union is supporting Nepal to the tune of some EUR 15 million , and quite rightly so .
I speak on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats when I say that it should send independent observers to see that these November elections are fair and free and that the secrecy of the ballot is maintained .
Commissioner , the European Union should definitely be willing to act as a mediator in this conflict , should it be asked to do so .
Quite apart from that , there must be no let-up in the efforts to make use of every opportunity for negotiations between the parties that presents itself .
We are also looking to see a proper trial for Krishna Sen , imprisoned on suspicion of leading guerrilla operations , and for four other suspected members of the banned Communist Party .
I know Nepal very well - it is one of the poorest countries in the world , but also one of the most fascinating .
Its principal source of income is tourism , and of that it is currently deprived .
Why ?
It is because of the lack of security in this beautiful part of the Himalayas that thousands of foreign visitors are choosing not to travel to Nepal .
As much as they need the state 's internal affairs to be well ordered , Nepal 's people need even more sustainable interventions , economic and structural reforms in all parts of the country , if they are at last to emerge from poverty , which is one of the essential causes of violence .
Mr President , in relation to the last debate , I cannot resist noting that Commissioner Liikanen did not thank those European Union football teams who have made a thankless contribution to helping decrease the likelihood of transmitting foot-and-mouth disease from South Korea by departing from the competition early .
Speaking on behalf of the Socialist group on the resolution on Nepal , we have a situation where Maoist rebels are threatening a very fragile constitutional monarchy , and the situation is in danger of fast sliding into a civil war .
Several thousand people have died and hundreds have been arrested .
The way forward is clear : the Government must ensure respect for human rights and internal law .
The alleged massacres of 500 Maoist guerrillas in May , if it is true , will only make the situation worse .
We must provide the means from the European Union to try and find a peaceful solution to the current conflict , and the finance to help rebuild the economy , in particular in the rural areas .
The government of Nepal itself must restore the rule of law and order and there is a need to set up an independent investigation into the allegations against the security forces .
Mr President , I must admit that I was about to say that Finland generously allowed England and Germany to go to the World Cup because it wanted to be free of foot-and-mouth disease , but the real reason was bad luck in those two games .
I now turn to Nepal .
The Commission deplores the increasing number of victims of continuous clashes between Maoist and Government forces , particularly following the promulgation of the state of emergency .
The EC is also particularly concerned by the consequences of the suspension of constitutional guarantees and by reports of abuses perpetrated by terrorist attacks and counter-insurgency forces .
The EU was disappointed by the interruption of the negotiations with Maoist leaders started by new Prime Minister Deuba in November 2001 .
The new wave of terrorist attacks is having a disastrous impact on the economy and progressively disrupting the entire development process in Nepal .
The Commission is further concerned that the recent dissolution of the House of Representatives marks a blow to democracy in Nepal .
The anticipation of new elections on 13 November 2002 , the establishment of a " caretaker governmen