Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on 7 October 2010 .
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Announcements by the President
To begin with , I would like to inform you briefly of four matters .
It was with great satisfaction that I learned that Mr Liu Xiaobo had received the Nobel Peace Prize .
This champion of human rights is still in jail as a result of his peaceful activity for freedom of speech in China .
We appreciate the Chinese authorities ' latest efforts on the path to attaining the political , economic and social standards of the free world .
However , these are still not enough , and so we are redoubling our calls for the release of Liu Xiaobo , Hu Jia , winner of the Sakharov Prize , and other defenders of human rights from prison .
The European Parliament will stand as a permanent guard upholding human rights .
Secondly , this week , the European Parliament is organising a series of events linked with yesterday 's International Day for the Eradication of Poverty Many of us are wearing badges relating to this .
In addition to plenary debates devoted to this subject , I would like to invite you to take part in a ceremony at Bronisław Geremek Agora tomorrow at 14 : 45 , in which UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon will be taking part .
Thirdly , today , for the fourth time , we are observing the EU Day Against Human Trafficking .
We treat this problem very seriously .
We are currently negotiating a proposal for a directive on preventing and combating trafficking in human beings .
Fourthly , and finally , I would like to invite you , on Wednesday at 12 : 00 , to hear a mid-term review of my Presidency of the Parliament .
It will chiefly summarise the progress of the European Parliament and especially what you have achieved during this time , and also initiatives which I have personally undertaken , where we are , and where we find ourselves in a changed European Union , what the European Parliament looks like and cooperation with other institutions .
I believe that you are entitled to this information halfway through my term of office .
Signature of acts adopted under codecision : see Minutes
Composition of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Petitions : see Minutes
Oral questions and written declarations ( submission ) : see Minutes
Lapsed written declarations : see Minutes
Action taken on Parliament 's positions and resolutions : see Minutes
Order of business
The final version of the draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of 14 October 2010 , pursuant to Rules 130 and 131 of the Rules of Procedure , has been distributed .
The following amendments have been proposed :
Monday
No changes .
Tuesday
No changes .
Wednesday :
I have received a request from the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance to defer the vote relating to the 2012 calendar of part-sessions to one of Parliament 's next part-sessions .
They do want to vote , but at a later date .
This motion will be presented by a representative of the Group of the Greens .
Is anyone ready to speak ?
Mr President , please excuse me ; I was receiving a report about the situation in Belgium , and I did not fully understand .
If I understand correctly , this is about the vote on the 2012 calendar .
Mr President , in our group , as in others , discussions are taking place on this calendar for , I repeat , 2012 .
As it is not a legislative text , there is no debate and there are no amendments .
We are simply voting on the calendar .
We call for this vote to be postponed by one part-session and for it to therefore be held next month in Strasbourg , so that we can make contact with the other groups and see whether we cannot start taking some tentative steps towards reforming the calendar .
Mr President , this is the first time that this Parliament has voted on a calendar so far ahead of time .
Yet this is not such an unusual event because , in effect , the calendar reflects what we have always done ; there are no particular changes .
Contrary to what has been suggested by Mr Cohn-Bendit , it is possible to table amendments , indeed - according to the e-mail - some members intend to do so .
I see no reason in delaying the vote since , if it is true that the calendar will come into effect in 2012 , we will still have the power and the option to make changes in the event that they are deemed necessary .
Calendar of part-sessions : see Minutes
Improvements in the safety and health at work of pregnant workers and workers who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding - Precarious women workers ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
by Mrs Estrela , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Directive 92 / 85 / EEC on the introduction of measures to encourage improvements in the safety and health at work of pregnant workers and workers who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding - C6-0340 / 2008 - , and by Mrs Thomsen , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , on precarious women workers .
I would firstly like to thank the shadow rapporteur and the rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs for the collaboration and the work which we have accomplished together .
A word of thanks is also due to many non-governmental organisations and unions , to the experts who participated in the presentation workshop for the financial impact study , to the secretariats of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality and of my political group , to the Policy Department of the European Parliament , and to my assistants .
All of them were tireless , and showed great professionalism and ability .
This directive is already eighteen years old , and it is outdated .
The process of revising it has been long and problematic .
It is now time for Parliament to decide , without further delay , to meet the expectations and needs of European families .
The proposals adopted by the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality ensure the twin objectives arising from extending the legal basis : defending health and safety in the workplace for workers who are pregnant , who have recently given birth , or who are breastfeeding , and promoting gender equality and the reconciliation of professional and family life .
At the same time , this will help to stem the demographic decline of recent decades .
One hundred years ago , the European population made up 15 % of the world population .
In 2050 it is not expected to make up more than 5 % .
Ageing and the consequent reduction of the active population undermine the sustainability of social security systems and economic growth itself .
For this reason , motherhood cannot be viewed as an illness or a burden on the economy , but rather as a service to society .
The duration of maternity leave in the 27 Member States varies between 14 and 52 weeks , and payment for leave is also very varied , with 100 % of earnings being paid in 13 countries .
I realise that the current economic climate is not favourable to increasing social spending , but this is a good investment in our collective future , and it does not have the high costs that many are claiming it does .
The financial impact study concludes that the costs of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality 's proposal will be completely covered if it contributes to an increase of only 1 % in the participation of women in the labour market .
These are balanced and workable proposals , in line with the recommendations of the International Labour Organisation and the World Health Organisation .
Twenty weeks is a sufficient amount of time to help women to recover from childbirth , encourage breastfeeding and enable firm bonds to be formed between mother and child .
A longer period of time could affect the reintegration of women into the labour market .
A payment of 100 % of earnings is fair because families should not be financially penalised for having the children that they want and , moreover , the children that Europe needs to tackle the demographic challenge .
The right to paternity leave is already recognised in 19 Member States , with payment of 80 % or 100 % of average earnings .
The involvement of fathers in their children 's lives contributes to their healthy physical and psychological development .
It is a right for fathers and children .
Throughout the whole process , I have expressed my complete openness to a broader consensus , and I hope that those who care about the well-being of women , families and children will support this report .
In view of the Europe 2020 strategy objectives , there will be no justification for maternity leave not being a period of 20 weeks , paid in full , from 2020 .
I therefore urge you to support Amendments 126 , 127 and 128 .
For the same reason , I cannot support amendments which scandalously aim to reduce the rights of families .
Mr President , we are having this debate today on women 's working conditions because women and men experience different conditions on the labour market .
Women are trailing a long way behind men when it comes to wages , pensions , top jobs and executive positions .
More than ever , therefore , we need the EU to take initiatives that improve the position of women on the labour market so that we can bring Europe into line with the treaty .
We must ensure that women - whether they are from Portugal or Poland , Belgium or Bulgaria - are guaranteed equality on the labour market .
A major and important step towards complete equality is a new and modern piece of EU legislation on maternity leave .
There are many good reasons for us to have new legislation on maternity leave in Europe .
First and foremost , there is a risk that , before long , the EU will face a demographic crisis - a crisis that could be at least as serious as the economic crisis in which we still find ourselves .
Women in the EU are quite simply not having enough children .
If we are to retain our competitiveness in the future and create growth , which is necessary in order to maintain our level of prosperity , more children need to be born in the EU .
We therefore need a maternity leave law that motivates families to have children .
A common high standard for maternity leave is essential in order to create an effective internal market .
An internal market should not only be about cheap goods - it is just as important to ensure high social standards for workers .
We must not have disparate competitive conditions , where it could be advantageous to lower the conditions for women , who will then become victims of social dumping .
Fathers must also have the right to two weeks ' paternity leave on full pay .
If we are to create equality between men and women , we need to understand that men also play an important role in connection with paternity leave .
This will have a beneficial effect on equality , the children and , not least , the fathers themselves .
We hear from the lobbyists for professional associations that this is a crazy thing to do and that we cannot afford better maternity leave legislation .
I would venture to claim that quite the opposite is true .
We cannot afford not to ensure that we have new , modern maternity leave legislation .
It is a question of the health and safety of the EU 's women and children .
Thus , this is not something that we should gamble with .
We must increase the participation of women on the labour market throughout the EU .
The objective of the EU 2020 strategy is to get 75 % of all women on to the labour market .
As we know that currently , only 60 % of women work , this will be a major challenge .
We must succeed , however , and there is no doubt that good facilities for childcare are the way forward .
A second and equally important initiative , however , is full pay during maternity leave .
Only by preventing discrimination against women can we get more women on to the labour market .
Another important step towards more equality on the labour market is the report on precarious women workers , for which I was rapporteur .
Unfortunately , the situation is such that women are significantly over-represented when it comes to these jobs .
Women employed in private homes , in particular , have very precarious working conditions , characterised , among other things , by little or no job security , no social security , a high risk of discrimination and a poor working environment .
We must not allow women to work under such poor conditions .
The EU should therefore support the Member States to enable the precarious jobs to be replaced by proper jobs with decent working conditions .
For a long time , we have neglected to focus on these vulnerable women , and it is my hope that the Commission will take this report seriously and help to take care of some of the EU 's most vulnerable citizens .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , I am very glad that I can replace Vice-President Reding tonight in this very important debate because we are going to discuss two very topical reports which are at the heart of fundamental rights and gender equality .
On behalf of the Commission , I would like to warmly thank the two rapporteurs , Ms Thomsen and Ms Estrela , who both have done tremendous work .
These two reports concern the often challenging situation of women in the EU labour market .
The contribution of women is crucial to meeting our ambitious targets of an overall employment rate of 75 % by 2020 , but this cannot be done without ensuring the fundamental rights of women workers .
This is what we are going to discuss tonight .
Let me start with precarious women workers .
We have made a lot of progress in integrating women into the labour market during the last few years .
As we know , women are more likely to be in precarious jobs than men .
Certain forms of precarious work performed by women , such as paid domestic work and care , are simply not visible on the labour market .
If women do not have decent jobs , they cannot enjoy economic independence - which is a prerequisite for having control over their lives .
We need to tackle the reasons why women are more likely to have precarious jobs : the stereotypes , the unequal sharing of family and household tasks , and the undervaluation of female-dominated jobs .
We also need to ensure that the growing female migrant workforce , which is often exploited in the grey economy , is integrated into the labour market .
Our new equality strategy covers all these issues and we need to mobilise all the instruments available to make progress in implementing it .
If you allow me , I shall add some remarks on the pregnant workers directive .
It is quite clear that stronger maternity leave standards at EU level are crucial to ensuring the health and safety of the mother and child , as are increasing participation of women in the labour market , changing family models and dealing with demographic pressure .
The main points of the Commission proposals include extension of maternity leave by four weeks to reach the International Labour Organisation recommendations ; encouragement to grant a higher allowance ; more flexibility for women to work until shortly before giving birth ; and the right to ask for flexible working hours .
With this , the Commission aims to protect women 's employment rights , give women sufficient time to recover from birth and bond with her child , and allow women to be financially secure during the maternity leave .
I would therefore like to compliment Ms Estrela on her work on this comprehensive report which , in many ways , improves the Commission 's original proposal .
Firstly , the Commission fully agrees with the emphasis on the role of fathers .
The reinforcement of parental leave through the new directive adopted earlier this year is an important step forward .
However , introducing paternity leave under the maternity directive is neither in line with the overall objective we are pursuing , nor with the legal basis on which the proposal is made .
The proposal is based on Article 153 on health and safety at work for pregnant women , and on Article 157 which allows the EU to intervene in the field of equal pay for men and women .
Having said that , I would like to underline that the Commission will consider this issue further .
It is currently undertaking an in-depth cost / benefit study on the subject in view of a possible separate initiative in this area .
Similarly , the Commission cannot accept weakening a woman 's right to refuse night work .
As regards the lengths of the leave and the payment to be received by women during this period , I would like to say the following . Vice-President Reding has met many Ministers over the last few months and they have explained that the national leave systems work well and that it is not possible , given the current financial constraints , to increase the length or payment , but the Commission made it very clear that it is not prepared to reduce the level of ambition of this proposal .
This being so , I would like to stress that the Commission aims to set the minimum level of protection which takes into account the different models of reconciliation and family-related leave in the Member States .
The Commission believes that its proposal would constitute a good basis for an agreement between Parliament and the Council .
The Commission would also like to thank Parliament for introducing a number of amendments which either strengthen or clarify the proposals .
To sum up , the proposal should aim to strengthen the protection of the health and safety of women , increase their employment prospects and help tackle demographic ageing .
I very much look forward to your contributions and suggestions for both these very important items .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , I wish to tell you that our intention has been to contribute , through the improvements set out in this report , to those policies which will help achieve the objective of increasing the employment rate and improving health and safety conditions at work .
However , when we talk about the EU 2020 strategy objectives , we must think about people and put people first , which means women in this context .
The new approach which we are adopting is that motherhood must stop being penalised , especially with the birth rate falling , not to mention the population getting older and poorer , thereby creating an urgent problem in terms of the sustainability of social security schemes .
All the measures we are proposing will protect women at work , both when pregnant and after giving birth .
The measures proposed by the report are also an investment in Europe 's future .
We want guaranteed , fully paid maternity leave .
Let us think about the need to stop penalising motherhood in the European Union in the 21st century and to ensure that women enjoy all the conditions worthy of a decent job .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we have undoubtedly made progress in recent years on the issue of equality between men and women , yet there are still many women who are forced into low-skilled jobs .
That applies not just to activities that are traditionally carried out within the family .
The deregulation that has taken place in recent years has frequently resulted in employment that provides mandatory social insurance being replaced by employment conditions that are atypical , precarious and uncertain .
Women , in particular , have been affected by this .
The trend in employment in Europe between 2000 and 2010 is for 60 % to be made up of new , precarious and atypical types of employment , primarily - two thirds - taken up by women .
Women are frequently debarred from democratic participation in organisations by virtue of being employed on a part-time basis and on precarious conditions .
Yet women are now much more committed and better trained than in any previous generation .
Nonetheless , on average , they earn 25 % less than men .
The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs has looked into this matter intensively and has developed good proposals on the issue of female employment : inclusion in social security systems regardless of job status ; the establishment of childcare facilities ; aligning retirement pensions and social systems with independent living ; and organising work according to ' good work ' principles .
All this is essentially contained in the report on precarious women workers .
The Employment Committee is satisfied with the results of this work and urges the House to vote in favour of the report presented .
This report is already the second attempt to formulate the position of the Parliament regarding minimum standards of protection for mothers in the European Union .
The opinions of nearly all of the 27 delegations in the seven groups differ .
This equally applies to my own Christian Democrat group .
Until today , many MEPs have recognised the consequences of our voting for their national economies since the aforementioned study took into consideration only 10 of the Member States .
I have been in politics for 20 years and only rarely have I experienced a situation this complex .
Human life begins in the body of the mother and that is why we must protect her health before as well as after the birth .
Protection of the mother as a social expense factor must not become an obstacle for her employment .
The mother must not be in conflict with the woman worker .
If we suggest to young , educated women that they ought to have children , and simultaneously refuse to recognise their motherhood and fail to give them the opportunity to care for their children , we shall never succeed in reversing demographic development .
Protection of the mother should be considered in relation to care for the father , the natural framework of the family , and the necessity of motherly love for the newborn .
Babies are more than future tax payers .
I personally agree with the maximum requirements proposed by the report .
At the same time , I advocate provisions supporting the reintegration of mothers should they decide to return to the labour market .
However , it is unfortunate to speak of protection of mothers in conjunction with equal opportunities .
I would personally prefer that the Commission put forward a proposal that would take into consideration a comprehensive view of pregnancy , birth and the subsequent healthcare .
This directive may be in force for two decades ; today , we are merely at the beginnings of a long and difficult decision-making process .
I am asking whether we intend to assess future social and economic development solely according to our current financial situation .
All of this is at stake today .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , although the Commissioner has spoken on behalf of Mrs Reding and the Commission to express the Commission 's reservations about integrating paternity leave into the text , I should like to take the floor today , above all , on behalf of all the fathers in Europe who do not yet have the right to paternity leave .
Nature did not grant us the right to give birth , but can society deprive us of the right to share the first moments of our children 's lives ?
Let us not forget that fathers are parents too .
Society must allow us to make the most of our sons and daughters so that we can forge a special bond with them from birth .
That is why I call on all my fellow Members to vote overwhelmingly in favour of the introduction of two weeks ' fully paid paternity leave throughout the European Union .
While I am on this subject , I also call on the European Commission and the Council to support us , and I repeat : how can you go against our request for the establishment of a new right for fathers at European level ?
I also call on all my fellow Members to support the Estrela report in its entirety .
As for those who cite the economic crisis as an argument for denying women a more acceptable length of maternity leave and , even more so , adequate pay , and men paternity leave , I ask them straight : why do you always go back on the social acquis when there is an economic crisis ?
Do you not realise that all the economic costs will be offset by greater female participation in the labour market , less discrimination , gender equality , a better work-life balance and , therefore , in the long term , real economic benefits ?
Lastly , to those who wish to sacrifice fathers and mothers on the altar of the economic crisis , I repeat : we cannot cut corners where fundamental rights are concerned .
This fight is also for a more humane society , and in these times of crisis , the family is increasingly our last bastion against the upheavals of life .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , for years , the European Parliament has consistently called for the protection of pregnant employees and the updating of existing legislation relating to maternity leave .
The directive dealing with this issue has been in existence for 18 years .
Europe 's demographic future is not encouraging , and , having discussed this situation , we adopted a resolution in this Chamber in 2008 which called for the adoption of measures relating to the length and protection of maternity leave , having ensured that , with an appropriate policy , it is possible to influence the fertility curve , creating a financially and psychologically beneficial environment for the family .
The European Union treaty currently in effect gives us in this Parliament a legal basis to adopt the directive under discussion .
We have talked a lot about equal opportunities for men and women , equal rights in the labour market , and it is clear that longer maternity leave , and paternity leave too , will create a better basis for that .
It is a fact that pregnancy and childbirth are a burden for a woman 's body .
The directive aims to protect women 's health .
It is therefore important to have a period of leave which would allow for the restoration of health , but which would also allow the mother to breastfeed her children for their health and development .
I would like to say a few words about paternity leave .
Who else but the child 's father should be supporting the child at this time ?
I support the introduction of paternity leave , compensating such leave by analogy with maternity leave .
Our citizens often complain to us that European Union legislation is complicated - do you not understand this ?
Let us not make the situation more complicated , but let us add leave covering the same period of time as maternity leave to the directive regulating it .
As for the cost : we are in an economic crisis , or rather , we are exiting it , but this is not a justification for fervently not wanting to pay for maternity leave the amount that would be appropriate in the 21st century .
The analysis has shown that we only need to raise women 's employment by 1 % and the costs would be balanced .
Madam President , this is not a good time for motherhood , but even less so for fatherhood .
This is because some political forces and some business groups are still stuck in an old-fashioned perception that having children is exclusively women 's work .
Well , ladies and gentlemen , that is not the case .
Not in any way .
It is a social responsibility that should be borne collectively by the whole of society .
That is what we are talking about today .
That is what we are discussing : who has to bear the responsibility and the cost of having children , who must also be our future ?
Obviously , only women can get pregnant and give birth .
No one is disputing that .
What we are discussing here is women being the only ones who have to bear that cost in their professional lives and shoulder that responsibility in their personal lives .
At the end of the last parliamentary term , we had the opportunity to make a giant leap forward on this issue at European level , and we were unable to do so because a large proportion of this House - the most conservative section of this House : groups from the Group of the European Peoples Party ( Christian Democrats ) and the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , some delegations , not all , but some delegations - prevented it .
This prevented mothers today from having more rights .
We should not forget that .
What we have on the table today is a fresh opportunity to correct part of that problem .
The Estrela report , which has already been adopted by the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , is a good point for compromise and consensus , which I believe we should support on Wednesday when we vote .
It gives more rights to working pregnant women in Europe , it ensures that their salaries are maintained , and it also obliges fathers to take their share of the responsibility , as well as ensuring that pregnant women will not lose rights if they move between European Union countries .
All of this is important , and we should not , under any circumstances , lose sight of it .
If , during the votes on Wednesday , we lose some of these fundamental points , I think it is important that we are clear and that European parents are clear that it has not happened by chance , and that the argument of the economic crisis cannot be used in such an important context .
There is obviously a crisis , and we need to take responsibility for it .
Mothers , however , do not have to take any responsibility for it .
This is understandable if we realise that we are not talking about a cost , but an investment .
It is an investment in the future and in much healthier societies .
This is the debate that we will have during the vote on Wednesday .
I am in favour of supporting the report by Mrs Estrela , and I am in favour of the majority of this House doing exactly the same , because if not , we will be risking not only the health of working mothers , but also the welfare state that we have worked for so long to achieve in Europe .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , a well-known businessman once said equality legislation , taken too far , actually reduces the chances of women gaining employment .
Businesses are not allowed to ask a woman if she is going to have a baby , so it is easy - they just do not employ her .
And that , unfortunately , is the grim reality of compulsory full pay maternity leave in this report .
Couple this with the economic effect on SMEs - in the UK , £ 2.6 billion ; Germany , EUR 1.7 billion - and this report is positively dangerous in today 's economic climate .

However , if the maternity clause were removed , what a difference that would make .
The report would focus on its original mandate , that of the health and safety of pregnant workers and those who have recently given birth .
I ask my colleagues in the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality to get back to basics and do what is right for women .
Women need to have choices .
They need to have the tools to make these choices .
Employers need to be able to support women without it meaning they are no longer economically viable .
Member States need to strengthen their economies too , thereby creating opportunities .
The ECR has put forward an amendment which deals with many of the issues created by the full pay compulsory leave clause and I would ask my colleagues to support this amendment and make this report workable .
The EU is not here to create social engineering with its policies .
The idea that paid maternity leave will encourage women to have children is naive .
Children are for life .
The cost is for life .
So please do not tell me that we will increase the population by giving 20 weeks fully paid maternity leave .
There are a lot of weaknesses in this report .
The impact assessment the ECR requested has proved this .
The question now is whether we strengthen it at this stage or send it back to the drawing board .
The debate on the Maternity Leave Directive and the own-initiative report on precarious women workers touches on the most important reason for all work to promote equality .
The opportunity and prerequisites for women to be able to support themselves form the platform for equality in all political areas .
This coming Wednesday , we will have the opportunity to open the way for women to participate fully on the labour market .
I regret the fact that , in 2010 , we are still talking about maternity leave rather than parental leave .
For me , it is self-evident that children have the right to both of their parents and I believe that we should also take a look at the Convention on the Rights of the Child in this case .
We are discussing the rights of mothers and of fathers , but we also need to discuss the right - the unconditional right - of a child to build a close relationship with both parents .
We have talked very loudly about the costs of this leave and in quite a different tone to the one we used to discuss millions of euro in support for banks and the motor industry , among other things .
Sometimes I ask myself whether it is easier to accept costs in traditional masculine areas than it is in connection with equality issues and the right of a child to have both parents .
I also think that the costs have been discussed without taking account of the benefits both to the individual and in socio-economic terms that this proposal entails .
Many have talked about the demographic future , that too few children are being born .
However , we now have the opportunity to try to ensure that it is possible to have more children .
The Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left and I support Mrs Estrela 's and Mrs Thomsen 's proposals , which we voted on in the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , where we improved the possibilities .
However , I see a number of problems for certain Member States that currently have considerably better parental leave .
I would like this to be legislation that confers rights , rather than imposing an obligation on one parent .
I would also like the Convention on the Rights of the Child and a child 's right to both parents to be much more evident .
There are also problems with the levels of remuneration in certain Member States .
Someone mentioned here in this debate that today employers ask women of child-bearing age whether they intend to have children .
I therefore hope that in the future , in the very near future , we will ask the same question of fathers , as children - one again - are the concern of both parents .
That is something that we need to take seriously .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the road towards a female-friendly Europe is still long and arduous .
The statistics are quite clear : the global crisis has struck the labour market , putting female employment , which shrunk by a further 0.7 percentage points in 2008 , to a difficult test .
Notwithstanding the provocations which , with regard to equal opportunities and employment , periodically fuel euro-propaganda , for which support is waning , to date , concrete measures have still not been adopted to guarantee women real fulfilment as both workers and mothers .
The Europe of the future needs to radically rethink its own welfare model and not simply change its label from time to time .
The directive which aligns the institution of maternity leave in Europe is therefore positive , but the decision to address on the sidelines , in the same report , the complementary and equally important issue of paternity leave , is unproductive .
The greater integration of women is not only a moral value , but also a strategic objective for the sustainability of the much publicised European social model , which continues to leave me unconvinced , given the lack of results .
( HU ) The proposal on maternity leave is inherently a health and safety provision , and the primary reason why the 1992 directive needs to be amended in terms of improving mothers ' living conditions is that the International Labour Organisation adopted an international convention in 2000 , setting the minimum length of maternity leave at 18 weeks .
In the meantime , however , we can witness such a diversified development - in terms of the length of maternity leave , financing and the level of allowances - of various healthcare systems due to the combination of maternal and parental leave that it is now practically impossible to find a common denominator .
Despite the good intentions we all have , whether we sit on the right or left side in this House , we are unable to make a decision which is received positively and welcomed by each Member State .
The good solution would have been to stay on the grounds of health and safety in this proposal , and strengthen equal opportunities in a different provision .
When I tabled the report on gender pay gap in this House , I pointed out the disadvantageous situation of mothers returning to the labour market after the birth of their first child .
Therefore , equal opportunities are also problematic , and we must resolve this issue .
However , as long as fathers and mothers are unable to perform the same task in terms of giving birth , that is , fathers cannot give birth to a child , we probably have to resolve equal opportunities in other areas .
The issue of equal opportunities must be resolved , and we have to make progress in this respect , as well , but not in this directive .
We have missed the opportunity to modernise the combination of parental and maternity leave .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , I believe that Parliament has a great opportunity today to reiterate that motherhood is a social value , that the protection of a mother 's health and that of her child must be strengthened , that a female worker must not be discriminated against for being a mother in finding and keeping a job , and that childcare should be better shared with fathers .
Notwithstanding the current crisis - as has already been highlighted - we must make the same observation which has already been made by the most advanced economists : the impact assessment which has been carried out shows the need for a more far-sighted and holistic approach .
Today 's costs , which can potentially be staggered , are a social and economic investment in the greater well-being of children , fewer diseases and the greater participation of women in the labour market .
Many claim that there will not be an increased and appropriately trained and qualified female workforce without a new welfare system and new opportunities to achieve a work-life balance : I fully agree with and thank the rapporteurs , Mrs Estrela and Mrs Plumb , for the complex work they have carried out , as I do all Members who have strived to find common ground .
I also agree with the facility which , I believe , many of us wanted , and which will provide mothers of disabled children , and in the case of adoptions and multiple births , with greater opportunities to have flexible working hours , the reversal of the burden of proof against breaches of the law and greater protection from dismissal .
Furthermore , I proposed , together with other Members , that with respect to the compulsory six weeks ' leave following childbirth , a safeguard clause be provided for those countries where legislation provides this compulsory period prior to childbirth too .
In conclusion , I hope that now , over these two days , we will be willing to find common ground so that we do not miss the important opportunity to adopt this directive in this parliamentary term as well .
Madam President , when speaking about sharing family responsibilities equally between men and women - and ultimately moving towards the goal of a more equal society in the context of promoting the best interests of the child in reconciliation policies - we have to remember that we are representing the people here in this House rather than the Council view .
Recently , I have noticed that there have been too many people from Permanent Representations going round and lobbying MEPs , which I do not feel is acceptable under our rules and the principle of independently elected MEPs .
It is argued that increasing maternity leave imposes higher costs on the private and public sector at a time of economic crisis , but this is only 0.01 % of GDP and we are talking about EUR 2 billion .
At the same time , I have compared the military budget of the countries mentioned .
That budget has actually increased by EUR 3 billion in one year and this has not been questioned either in this House or in their parliaments .
However , in a time of growing economic uncertainty and while we are facing demographic changes , it is vital to support flexible leave policies , which may help to reverse current demographic trends .
We should make our joint commitment to ensuring that women across Europe become part of the labour market and that their life choice is taken seriously through higher female labour market participation , with greater value being accorded to childhood and the importance of balancing family and working life .
In conclusion , I would strongly highlight that the European welfare system and measures as stipulated in this directive are of value and not a burden to the European market .
Madam President , it is very clear from the amendments submitted by some colleagues in ALDE , PPE and ECR - though luckily not all of them - that they have sold their souls to short-sighted corporate interests and to lobbyists from Member States who do not care about women 's rights .
If those amendments are adopted , life for new mothers and fathers in the EU will not improve .
If leave is not properly paid , only those women whose jobs do not matter can take it up .
You , my dear colleagues on the right , are perpetuating a traditional system with a male breadwinner and his little wife , with her little job on the side , kept neatly under his thumb .
For her , it does not really matter how much the compensation is .
But any independent woman who actually financially provides for her family had better get back to work after the six compulsory weeks - if the rest is poorly paid - whether or not she is still bleeding ; and she can forget about offering her child a good start by breastfeeding .
I hope with all my heart that those who really want to make life better for new mothers and fathers will win this vote .
This directive could be a cornerstone of a modern labour market policy for the ageing society .
The future needs politicians brave enough to have their own opinions , who can look a bit further ahead , and who have a vision for a society with many more working mothers and many more caring fathers .
The future can certainly do without those who buckle at the knees as soon as business CEOs with only the next financial report on their minds , and national ministers with only the next elections on their minds , start lobbying .
( PL ) The significance of this directive goes beyond the problem of equality for women and help for women during maternity .
We must look at this in a wider context , not just in a social but also in an economic context , over a longer period of time .
There is a certain paradox in that by trying , understandably and logically , to protect current financial management practices , we could lose a great deal both economically and financially in future generations .
Many experts believe that one of the main problems in Europe , which could possibly be the most important problem of all , is the demographic collapse .
Progress in medicine , an improvement in living conditions and a drop in natural population growth mean a very old and very costly Europe in the future .
Even today , the cost of caring for the elderly is estimated at almost 2 % of Europe 's GDP .
The reasons for the drop in population growth are very complex and transcend social issues and material security .
However , there is no doubt that the new proposals contained in the directive will create a significant impetus which will help many women in Europe to decide to have children .
Madam President , the level of support for pregnant women workers is very varied in European countries .
The significance of this directive will be felt particularly in those countries where the scope of protection is very weak , and where support for families is very low or even non-existent , including when it comes to looking after older children .
This is why I would like to thank everyone who worked on this directive , especially for their sympathy for women in other countries who will be able to face the future with greater hope .
As far as the children are concerned , of course they want a happy mother who is not afraid that she will lose her job and who is not afraid that she will not be able to feed them or bring them up .
Once again , thank you , and I am counting on a compromise in Wednesday 's vote . Thank you very much .
( FR ) Madam President , these reports are along the right lines and deserve much more publicity .
Eighty-five per cent of involuntary part-time work and 80 % of low paid jobs are carried out by women .
Women 's pay is 27 % lower than men 's .
Fifty per cent of women have a pension of less than EUR 600 .
The majority of the cases of false declarations or undeclared work that are uncovered concern women .
Even now , in the 21st century , we are still discovering cases of slavery in Europe , and every one involves a woman .
Yes , everything that can be done must be done to successfully eradicate scandalous practices towards women in the workplace and in society .
However , it will take more than goodwill .
The expected gains are so large and the penalties incurred considered so small that there are - to put it bluntly - ' bastards ' who have no hesitation in continuing to exploit human beings as if they were mere cattle .
We must , as a matter of the utmost urgency , make the Member States face up to their responsibilities and demand the strictest possible penalties for those who consider themselves above the law .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to draw your attention to a sector in which conditions for the female workforce continue to be precarious .
I refer to the agricultural sector , a sector in which women focus on innovation and , at the same time , on revitalising traditions and preserving agricultural heritage , keeping rural territory alive .
Yet female workers encounter a range of obstacles in their working activities , having to reconcile their working life with family life .
Mrs Thomsen , in her report , provides a figure which gives us food for thought : in the agricultural sector , 86 % of female workers are employed part-time .
Furthermore , the entry of young women into this sector is fraught with difficulty and for this reason , women managing the farms are often over 65 .
On the other hand , some other women assume the position of supporting partner , or rather , they help with their husband 's farm , without being entitled to a legal status and without being appropriately remunerated .
I would argue , therefore , that it is necessary to protect women and their employment in a sector in which their work is often temporary and seasonal , support them in the area of health and safety , and ensure they receive fair pay and appropriate recognition for their work .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , when we speak of reconciliation , we mean those initiatives which , taking into consideration the needs of the family and the needs of workers , allow a balance to be struck between professional and family life .
We are talking , therefore , about support mechanisms , without which a woman who works for pleasure , career ambition or , above all , out of necessity , faces a dilemma and the most drastic , and almost always final decision , is to leave her job .
Once she has left the labour market , returning to it is yet more difficult .
Such a situation brings a strong sense of frustration , on the one hand , and great economic sacrifices , on the other .
The text which is being debated today proposes numerous support mechanisms for female workers , providing the basis for legal certainty which will give women freedom of choice and , as a consequence , a real work-life balance .
I would also like to highlight another aspect with regard to the position of precarious female workers : as has been said , too often , women continue to endure inequality with regard to employment opportunities , quality of work and remuneration .
With regard to the quality of work , it should be noted that women , very often , do not report abuses and are compelled to accept employment at the fringes of legality in order to obtain a sufficient income to support their family .
It is time to bring an end to this .
It is necessary , therefore , to monitor all misconduct by employers with regard to female workers .
Any infringement must be prosecuted and punished without qualification .
Our commitment must continue to move in the direction of social policies which are increasingly just and effective .
Madam President , the report we are now discussing is crucial for parents and children in Europe as well as for Europe as a community .
The provisions in this piece of legislation contribute to ensuring that all women across Europe have the same minimum rights and assistance when deciding to have children .
They also ensure that women who decide to have children are not punished financially for their choice to be mothers by trying to combine it with their careers .
A very important factor is Europe 's demographic challenge .
Falling birth rates and an ageing population and , as a consequence , a falling labour force , are putting a huge strain on maintaining economic growth , especially in times of crisis .
Is the solution one of encouraging women not to have children , or following an American model where women have no or little support and have to go back to work before they have even recovered from giving birth ?
If it is , then I say no .
Not having children is more expensive for the community in the long run .
Women need to recover from giving birth in order to be ready to enter the labour market again .
Allowing them 18 weeks is a minimum and they should not be punished for this by direct or indirect cuts .
In 24 EU Member States out of 27 , it is the governments who contribute to the maternity leave and not businesses .
Would businesses not want to invest in the young women they have recruited and trained ?
We should have social responsibility .
Knowing that the EU and its Member States have spent an enormous amount of money on rescuing banks , we have to ask why money must always be saved at the expense of women .
Fathers should also be able to take time off to spend with their newborn babies .
We keep on talking about shared responsibilities and now we can do something about it .
Some here believe that it is not acceptable .
Hopefully , Commissioner Šefčovič will show us that he is going to be very clear and progressive on this .
Madam President , this directive was always intended , quite rightly , to provide minimum standards to protect pregnant workers and women who are breastfeeding .
However , I find that some of the amendments from the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality and the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs go too far .
They do not take into account the different traditions in different Member States .
Some countries have maternity leave , some have paternity leave as well , and some have parental leave .
They are paid in totally different ways and at different rates - some from the social security systems , some from businesses and some are a mixture .
We must not ruin some very good systems .
My amendments try to address the difficulty of achieving something that will suit all Member States .
Bringing in full pay would , in my opinion , stop a lot of young people - or young women in particular - being employed .
I am pleased that the second impact assessment was at least more detailed than the first .
As you know , it said that it would cost the ten Member States over EUR 7 billion a year if full pay was included .
It did not even look at the other 17 Member States , and I assume the cost of bringing in full pay for them would also be problematic .
As far as compulsory leave is concerned , I have always believed that it is for the mother herself to decide what time to take off and when to take it off .
In the 1960s and 70s , we fought for equal rights for women - not for them to be dictated to - and we seem to be going backwards instead of forwards .
( CS ) I have serious concerns that two quite different things are being confused relating to the protection of women : the employment conditions of women employees and the legal position of self-employed women , or entrepreneurs .
When it comes to women employees , we can generally talk about protection , particularly during pregnancy and after childbirth , through labour law .
It is not possible to protect self-employed women through labour law , as it does not generally apply to them .
On the other hand , these women entrepreneurs employ men and other women too , and so I was horrified by the fact that the directive , which was initially supposed to apply only to the protection of pregnant workers and workers who have recently given birth , would , under the amendments , be intended to apply to entrepreneurs too .
It is impossible , not only in practice , but also from a legal perspective .
I therefore sincerely hope that this Parliament does not adopt the amendments , which have unfortunately largely passed in the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality too , and which , in my view , have nothing to do with this directive , as they cannot apply to self-employed people .
Madam President , the Estrela report seeks to improve working conditions for pregnant workers and working women who recently gave birth or are breastfeeding , and those are objectives that we strongly support .
Now , set against an acute crisis in European and world capitalism , there has to be a real concern that vulnerable workers especially will be victimised by certain employers seeking to maintain profits and by governments embarked on the process of slashing social spending and public services .
Many working class women endure significant exploitation , through wage levels that are much lower than men 's , for example , and precarious work .
There is a real danger that pregnant workers or women who recently gave birth , who are in a more vulnerable position , will suffer discrimination in the current circumstances .
We strongly agree with making explicit a woman 's right to return to the same job , 20 weeks maternity leave and reasonable paternity leave .
We should also support maintaining the income level at 100 % .
We cannot just rely on the law , however .
There should be strong trade union organisation in every workplace that can guarantee in concrete terms the right of women to come back to work after giving birth , without fear of discrimination .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I have followed this issue very closely within the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs and the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality alike .
This is the second time that an attempt has been made to establish minimum rules for the European Union , and it has now been 40 years that I have been campaigning in my professional life for equality between men and women , the integration of young women via training programmes , and their integration into society via their integration into the labour market .
Equality is what we are talking about here : equality between men and women .
However , in this Estrela report - one need only listen to the speeches that have been made today - every possible issue has been covered .
Everyone comes along with his or her small contribution , and wants to add one section to another section .
We end up with a patchwork that is meaningless , when we should be focusing on the health and safety at work of pregnant women , in the same way , of course , that we will have to focus on gender equality in pay .
Baby leave is just about the only thing that has not been covered in this report .
I would like to say one thing to you : to vote today in favour of 20 weeks ' fully paid maternity leave is irresponsible and demagogic .
I insist that effective measures be taken to ensure that this does not backfire on women .
The more we extend maternity leave without emphasising women 's return to the workplace and their need to create a work-life balance , and the more we extend maternity leave without taking measures to protect women in the workplace , the more we are working against them .
The fact is , when we create policy , our duty is to be courageous and responsible , and to tell the truth .
Who is going to pay ?
Which of our Member States can pay for this increase ?
Which company can pay ?
Ultimately , women are going to find themselves trapped by a text that is being allowed to drift on all points and which will backfire on them .
I call on you to be responsible .
We have a heavy burden for the future .
( Applause )
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question by Marije Cornelissen and Anneli Jäätteenmäki under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
Madam President , Mrs Morin-Chartier is not the only one who has said this .
There were a couple of speakers who said that maternity leave of 20 weeks would hurt women 's chances in the labour market .
I would like to ask where that idea comes from because , if you look at the research , as well as what happens in Sweden , Norway , Iceland or Bulgaria , you can see very clearly that you can have extremely high female participation in the labour market and a properly long period of maternity leave .
( FR ) Madam President , I would like to make two points in response to that comment .
The first is that there is no mathematical link between the length of maternity leave and women 's fertility rate , and to prove it I need only mention the situation in France , since France is a country which provides for 14 weeks ' maternity leave and which , today , has one of the highest birth rates in Europe .
The second point of my answer is that , with each birth , the gap between the professional lives of women and of men is found to widen .
With each birth , with each period of maternity leave , women first reduce their professional responsibilities - unless the initiative comes from the company or the public sector .
With the second birth , they reduce their working hours , and they continue to reduce them with each subsequent birth , while men , on the other hand , increase their professional responsibilities with each birth .
From a professional point of view , then , the gaps widen throughout their careers .
Therefore , I urge you : pay a little attention to what is actually happening , in the public sector and in the private sector alike .
( FI ) Mrs Morin-Chartier , do you accept the double standards whereby all employees of the European Union , those of the Commission , the Council , Parliament and Parliament 's political groups , would be on full pay for the 20 weeks of their maternity leave , while at the same time proposing that this would not be the case for other people ?
I would think that mothers should be put on an equal footing throughout Europe , and we ought not to accept double standards or the Janus face .
( FR ) Madam President , we did not say that we advocated double standards .
The European Commission has submitted a proposal for 18 weeks .
We are proposing to introduce a bridging clause .
As a basis , this is entirely possible , but there is a difference between what is possible and the Utopian idea of proposing 20 weeks on full pay ; between what is feasible and what one can promise in Parliament , which will not be accepted by either the Council or the national parliaments .
If we vote on Wednesday in favour of the Estrela report and the 20 weeks , the European Parliament will be disavowed three times : the first time by the Council , which will be unable to give its support - the Member States will be unable to give their support ; the second time by the national parliaments - the national parliaments , with their budgets , will be unable to give their support ; and the third time by women , when they realise that we have worked against them .


( NL ) Madam President , we have to stand by mothers and fathers in the rush hour of their lives .
They must be given the peace and quiet to enable their full involvement early on in the life of their child ; to breastfeed and fully recover from childbirth ; to be able to roll up their sleeves once more after their leave and participate fully in working life .
Mothers , fathers , unions , non-governmental organisations ( NGOs ) - everyone wants this .
Opponents wrongfully put a price tag on women : no additional costs can be incurred to the ever ageing European society .
Yet we must invest now in women as workers and in improving work-life balance so that our society remains affordable in the future .
Of course , it is important that maternity leave be on full pay .
Why should women , by virtue of being the only ones with the biological possibility of bearing children , take a pay cut during their leave ?
We say that we consider it important that men and women be able to enjoy a healthy work-life balance , that women be given equal opportunities in the workplace , and so we must stop squabbling and assume joint responsibility .
We must not let mothers and fathers be the ones to suffer .
( DE ) Madam President , the question that we must ask ourselves is what is this directive intended to achieve ?
There is relatively substantial agreement that there should be health protection for mothers-to-be and new mothers .
The great debate concerns the areas in which the aspect of equality should also be included .
On the other hand , as the European Parliament , we also need to be aware that we are adopting a directive that will be in force not just for five years , but perhaps for the next 20 or 25 years .
However , I hope that by then , women 's working conditions will be substantially better and companies will be keen to employ young mothers - not least because of a shortage of skilled labour - and , above all , will also build up the appropriate infrastructure for this .
We need to bear in mind this perspective too .
Notwithstanding this , I also realise that at present , we do not have a majority that is prepared to adopt this perspective .
In view of this , we will probably arrive at a point where we agree on a compromise such as eighteen weeks , a higher rate of statutory payments or the continued payment of 75 % of salary , which will indeed bring about an improvement in some European countries in particular .
A much more important point , and one which goes beyond the aspect of maternity leave , is the framework conditions surrounding young families .
This means childcare facilities ; in Germany , for example , there are still not enough of these .
That would be a real equality policy that gives women a chance to go back to work .
Madam President , how typical of the Greens to sneer at those who dare to disagree .
We dare to disagree with a small part of these proposals ; therefore we must be derided .
I applaud your commitment to these proposals - indeed , I agree with the vast majority of them - but there are one or two parts that I do not agree with .
So I can applaud your commitment but I cannot applaud your tolerance .
Come back in 30 years ' time and preach to me about advancing women 's rights when you have done as much work on this as I have .
I will not be pigeon-holed as regressive .
There are aspects of these proposals which are regressive : the idea that European women should have more European babies in an overpopulated world is socially regressive .
To impose 20 weeks ' fully-paid maternity leave in the UK - I cannot explain our system quickly enough here - is financially regressive .
A disproportionate number of higher paid women in the UK will receive the vast majority of the extra GBP 2 billion .
It will not go to the lower paid women whom , I think , we would all want to help the most .
So where is the progression ?
Member States are best placed to decide these details ; the principles of subsidiarity should apply .
( Applause )
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , mothers need special protection .
On that there is agreement in this Chamber .
Having a child is physically and emotionally demanding , and is a profound experience for any woman .
The physical changes , new life circumstances and , above all , the recovery and recuperation period - all these things make adequate maternity protection essential .
This is something that society must provide .
Hence , there is no dispute as to the principle .
The debate concerns how this is done and the conditions under which it is done .
In this regard , we should not forget that the EU lays down a minimum standard and it is up to the Member States to implement , organise and pay for maternity provision .
We are not starting from nothing .
The Member States have organised their maternity provision in very different ways , in some cases , supplementing this with parental leave to include fathers .
Fathers need to be involved in family responsibilities - and we are talking here not about leave , but about shouldering the responsibilities involved in bringing up children and in family life .
However , paternity leave is not part of maternity provision ; rather , it must always be part of parental leave .
Neither do fathers become ill as a result of a birth .
I congratulate all the Member States that have established paternity leave ; likewise , Commissioner , I am pleased to hear of the Commission 's proposal that has just been announced .
We cannot allow the important matter of maternity provision to be diluted by an extension of parental leave .
Maternity provision is about health .
No mother is sick for 20 weeks ; neither are breastfeeding mothers sick .
We have a responsibility to women who participate in working life to make maternity provision justifiable .
Our proposal is for 18 weeks in total , with the last four weeks of this being subject to national variation in the level of the financial payments made .
This is set out in Amendments 115 and 116 , which I urge Members to support .
In addition , I call on the Member States to exploit their opportunities to offer all families and mothers more payments that can then be adopted on a voluntary basis .
Mothers are building the future , and they need every support that we can offer them .
( EL ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in voting for the Estrela report , we are basically responding to the demands of millions of women for greater protection for pregnant workers and workers who have recently given birth , or who are breastfeeding , and their babies .
By increasing maternity leave to 20 weeks and paternity leave to 2 weeks , on full pay , we are supporting the recovery from the international crisis and economic growth in the European Union , because we are helping to reconcile family life and work .
By protecting working women from dismissal during pregnancy and for six months thereafter , we are providing an incentive to implement the objective of the EU strategy and achieve a 75 % female participation rate in the labour market by 2020 .
In voting for the Thomsen report , we are trying to protect working women from precarious jobs which perpetuate the wage divide between the two sexes , undermine professional deployment and increase the risk of women losing all forms of social , pension and trade union rights .
A positive vote for both reports is a positive vote for a more balanced , decentralised , social Europe and gender equality .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we are talking today about the working conditions of women , which we want to improve in Europe .
I will specifically address the Thomsen report , for which I was shadow rapporteur ; in other words , the subject of ' precarious women workers ' .
This year is the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion .
It is an established fact that poverty disproportionately affects women .
Naturally , we cannot , on any account , allow this to remain the case .
Poverty among women may be the result of various things .
It may result from the fact that women are not paid as well as men .
Naturally , that is not the only cause .
Women also take more career breaks , for example , when they have children and take time off to bring them up .
Women also perform the lower skilled jobs .
Things are particularly serious in the case of women whose employment conditions are precarious , because in some cases , they may not even have an employment contract or may have irregular employment contracts ; they may have no protection whatsoever and they may have little access to information .
The situation is particularly bad for women with a background of migration .
This can lead to the poverty continuing , so that they also end up poor in old age .
We need to break out of this spiral , which affects women more than men .
One of the ways this can be done is through education and training .
Every woman - every girl - needs to get a qualification , whatever their background , and they need access to a profession which will genuinely secure them a proper living .
Lifelong learning must generally be possible for women too .
We also need to ensure that we have more women and girls going into the better paid professions .
These are frequently the professions that are more heavily dominated by men .
In other words , access to education in any event , and access to social security systems - that way , we can achieve many improvements for women .
( PL ) Establishing minimum standards for the duration and payment of maternity leave is difficult in the current economic and social climate in Europe .
In some countries , the proposed minimum exceeds the level of protection which national legislation currently offers pregnant women .
On the one hand , we are still contending with the consequences of the crisis : governments of individual states are raising taxes and introducing severe expenditure cuts , and we still have a high level of unemployment .
On the other , we have to deal with the problem of the falling birth rate , negative natural growth , and , consequently , an ageing population .
In the not too distant future , we are being threatened with the failure of pension systems or possibly their total breakdown .
In this sort of situation , there are no free or easy solutions .
Yet we must realise that in investing in women and creating favourable conditions for them , we are encouraging them to decide to have children .
Of course , fully paid and longer maternity leave is not enough on its own .
We also need pro-family tax solutions and stable employment .
In this case , we have no alternative .
There is no other way of increasing the number of Europeans who will be professionally active in 30 years ' time if we do not invest in the family now .
This is why we need a fair and just minimum standard for the duration and payment of maternity leave in Europe .
We are giving women the possibility to choose and to decide on motherhood .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , what I feel is missing from this debate is the necessary distinction between national transposition in the Member States and the task that exists at European level .
We all realise that we need to take the special features of individual nations into account .
However , where the debate in Germany is concerned , for example , I must say that I can definitely see how Germany could implement this report .
What we are concerned with here is creating minimum standards at EU level to establish social framework conditions for women .
We are always keen to make reference to the ILO when it comes to good work , protection at work and protecting health , so I ask myself : why not in this case ?
As far as the debate on costs is concerned , I would like to remind everyone in this House that in Germany - as well as in some other European countries - the anti-discrimination directive brought about a huge amount of lobbying on the part of enterprises .
There was talk of an avalanche of costs , of companies going bankrupt , of burdens on the economy and on workers themselves .
Looking back years later , how much of this happened ?
None of it .
I find this debate , this lobbying , very reminiscent of that time .
I urge you at last to put the economy on one side and to put people at the heart of what we do .
I am not one of those merely sermonising here .
I have stated that I advocate a social Europe .
For me , that includes women .
In this situation , women need our help .
( FI ) Madam President , in its votes , the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality adopted a number of amendments to the Commission 's original proposal for a directive .
Unfortunately , in its amendments , the Committee has completely ignored the principle of subsidiarity with regard to the allocation of costs .
The attempt to harmonise the regulations on maternity leave in 27 different Member States has resulted in a muddled proposal .
Furthermore , mixed up with it all is a proposal for paternity leave , which , under the legal basis , does not even fall within the scope of the directive , as the Commissioner clearly stated right from the outset , luckily .
Paternity leave needs to be regulated in connection with the system for parental leave , and not in connection with leave in the sense of recovering from pregnancy or childbirth .
The proposals put forward by the Committee on Women 's Rights also ignore the progressive maternity and parental leave schemes in other countries , including the Nordic countries .
The Committee 's proposals confuse these parental leave systems , which offer freedom of choice at national level , and in certain respects , they would even detract from the welfare of mother and child .
For example , under the Committee 's proposal , if mothers only begin the compulsory six week period of maternity leave after confinement , there is increased risk to pregnant women at the workplace due to give birth soon , as well as their children .
Mothers who are almost due will not make it through to the end working an eighthour day , and this proposal will result in more cases of sick leave prior to confinement .
The Committee 's proposal ignores as compensation the national schemes under which maternity leave is closely linked to a significantly longer parental leave , because it does not happen on full pay .
For example , in Finland , parents can look after their child at home until the age of 18 months , on average , and we can afford it , because at various stages , employers , workers and taxpayers , too , share the costs .
If employers were saddled with the full amount , there is no doubt whatsoever that it would weaken women 's employment opportunities and do a disservice to women as employees .
( SV ) It is now important for us to find flexible solutions with regard to the controversial details in this directive .
At the same time , we also need to see the bigger picture .
What do we want the situation to be in terms of equality in Europe in 10 years ' time ?
With that in mind , it is crystal clear that the proposed regulations would bring about progress in the area of gender equality .
Gender equality and the gender equality perspective would be enhanced .
It would be possible to meet the target set in the EU 2020 strategy of increasing the employment rate of women to 75 % .
More women in work would be of definite benefit to society .
There would be better incentives for having children and establishing a family , which would be a positive counterforce to the ageing European population .
Therefore , let us not forget the big picture in our debates .
( FR ) Madam President , in general , with time comes wisdom .
Unfortunately , that is not the case with this second report , which was adopted by a majority in the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality and which we are discussing here in Parliament 17 months after the first report .
In its present form , this second report is just as muddled , counterproductive and overloaded with texts that do not belong in a legislative act as the report that was referred back to committee in May 2009 .
We have already wasted two years improving maternity protection .
If we vote for this report as it stands , we will waste at least the same amount of time again debating with the Council in codecision , when the Commission 's initial 2008 proposal was reasonable .
It guaranteed substantial progress in Member States in which the length of maternity leave and maternity pay are still below that which exists in some countries ; rarely are we granted 20 weeks ' leave on full , uncapped pay , paid for by the state .
Let us not forget that , in this case , the aim is to establish minimum thresholds , and that we cannot impose radical solutions on the 27 .
Indeed , in order to encourage an employed and , above all , highly qualified woman to have children , it is more important for her to have the right to a shorter period of leave but on full pay than to have 20 or 30 weeks ' leave or more without a full pay guarantee .
Not only are the proposals in the Estrela report counterproductive where women 's employability is concerned ; they are also difficult for governments and businesses in certain Member States to finance .
It is better today to take one real step in the right direction than to make a promise for the future , to be realised 10 years from now .
Personally , I shall not be voting for this report in its present form , and I call on all my fellow Members to reject all those amendments that have nothing to do with maternity protection , such as the provisions concerning self-employed workers .
Barely four months ago , we voted in this House for a directive on maternity leave for self-employed workers .
The same applies to paternity leave , Mr Tarabella , and I am in favour .
The Belgians can introduce 20 weeks ' fully paid paternity leave tomorrow if they have a government ; there is nothing stopping them from doing so .
Similarly - since this is another point to consider - the social partners are currently discussing a directive on paternity leave .
Let us wait for them , and action will be taken on this matter as it was on parental leave : this is the right way to go .
I call on my fellow Members to vote in favour of the amendments restricting leave to 18 weeks and of the considered amendments , Madam President , tabled by your group and mine .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question by Marc Tarabella under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( RO ) Eliminating any form of discrimination in every sphere of social and economic life is a vital prerequisite for protecting human rights and the welfare of every citizen .
The promotion of the principle of equal opportunities for men and women , along with ensuring greater involvement by women in economic and social life , as fully entitled participants , must constantly be issues of concern .
I believe that this approach must be reflected in the common agricultural policy in order to ensure that the sexes are represented fairly and equally .
On the other hand , this approach can ensure that various policies are implemented effectively at European level in every working sector , but especially in agriculture .
Bearing in mind that the principle of gender equality is promoted by European legislation and is one of the fundamental requirements of the Europe 2020 strategy , I consider it appropriate to include this issue in agriculture as well , which also means through using new instruments which will promote this principle .
I support both reports from Mrs Estrela and Mrs Thomsen , which bring women 's issues to the fore , related both to motherhood and their working conditions , which are important aspects in the life of every woman and of those of us who should show solidarity with them in terms of their issues .
( FR ) Madam President , I am grateful to Mrs Lulling for agreeing to my little interruption .
I should just like to point out that , in Belgium , fathers already receive 10 days ' paid leave .
Nineteen out of 27 countries in the European Union follow the same practice , with various pay entitlements .
I just wanted to know whether you were for or against upwards harmonisation at European level .
Admittedly , two weeks is not very much , but it is reasonable : two weeks for all fathers in Europe so that they can share the tasks involved in welcoming their new arrivals into their families .
I wished to know whether you were for or against this harmonisation .
I should be grateful for your response , Mrs Lulling .
( FR ) Madam President , I am of course for it , Mr Tarabella .
I am for a European directive but I am not for this issue being resolved in this directive , which concerns the protection of women and children .
The social partners , as I said , are currently holding talks on a directive on paternity leave .
I believe that we must await the outcome .
We will then have a sound proposal just like the one we had for parental leave , which , incidentally , we have just enhanced , although it is not perfect .
I believe that this is the right way to go .
I believe that the social partners should also be entrusted with the task of making proposals in this area , because they are the best placed to do so .
Therefore , I am in favour .
I congratulate you : you can improve the situation in Belgium .
I just wanted to say to you , and to all those women who have completely failed to understand that a European directive is a set of minimum , not maximum , rules , that everyone can go further , but that it is important to give those countries that are below - well below - the 18 weeks the opportunity to adapt .
Moreover , I believe that , if you and I had had to draft this report , we would have taken the right measures in this House in codecision with the Council a long time ago .
( DE ) Madam President , now I know how to go about changing and extending one 's speaking time .
The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs has called for 18 weeks ' maternity provision , which is four weeks more than was amicably agreed in Germany .
The Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality has called for 20 weeks on full pay plus two weeks ' paternity leave plus extension to self-employed workers .
What has been completely pushed into the background is the fact that 20 weeks will cost France an additional EUR 2 billion per year and the UK an additional EUR 2.85 billion , according to statements by the Commission .
For Germany the additional costs are estimated at around EUR 1.7 billion .
Sometimes , you have to think of the costs .
We recently had a joint study by the EMPL and FEMM committees that was drawn up with numerous errors .
Payments such as Germany 's maternity allowance were not included .
The reference framework for German parental allowance was incorrect .
The cost estimates commissioned by some Member States were not sufficiently taken into account .
You cannot make responsible policy on such a basis .
Germany is exemplary : during the parental leave period , two thirds of salary continue to be paid for up to 14 months .
This extends 14 weeks of maternity provision to up to 170 weeks .
This makes Germany a European champion when it comes to protecting infants , and consequently , it needs an exemption clause in this directive .
This is why I have tabled an amendment , together with 50 of my fellow Members from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , which is supported by the European Conservatives and Reformists and large parts of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe .
Our aim is for sufficient account to be taken of national systems .
We hope that a majority of this House will support this call for reason to prevail in the vote on Wednesday .
We want mothers to enjoy adequate protection ; but if such protection is carried too far , specifically for ideological reasons , this will represent a major obstacle to women 's employment - which is something that we must remove , not encourage .
( SV ) In many Member States , the reactions to this report have been strong and many politicians have attempted to score points by pulling this EU initiative to pieces .
What people forget is the fact that this is a revision of an existing directive .
People can think what they want to about what should be regulated at EU level , but , as I said , a directive already exists that we have the opportunity to improve .
The issue of gender equality has been given greater prominence with the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon and we have a responsibility to take it forward .
We can see today that Member States with well-functioning rules for maternity leave also have a high rate of women in employment .
This contrasts with the situation in those countries with poorer and less well-functioning rules .
If this directive goes through , we will also have a greater chance of achieving the target set in the EU 2020 strategy .
I agree that there are some controversial details in the proposal , but what is important is that we can improve it .
The critics claim that the proposal is too expensive , but I am convinced that increased equality is beneficial to society .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , today , this House - representative of all 27 States - has decided , with courage and obstinacy , once again to tackle a delicate , but at the same time topical , issue for our countries ' social growth .
We are dealing with a report which affects the social , employment and economic policies of our States , but which also concerns the whole of Europe in its desire to grow in unison .
The Estrela report , as debated and amended , pursues with conviction the principle of reconciling private and working life and that of equal opportunities , and therefore of healthy and balanced progress .
To ensure a minimum threshold to protect the aforementioned principles throughout Europe means improving the quality of life of our families and not only that of our women , and therefore also our quality of life ; this is what we are facing with conviction and with the appropriate compromises .
Balance is necessary in the ends as well as the chosen means and must safeguard both the position of women in the labour market and the prerogatives of the States in implementing their policies .
Jean Monnet taught us to grow by taking small steps .
Let us begin to take these small steps , without being afraid that others will follow them .
( LT ) Today , it really is very important to reconcile work and family life better by striving for economic growth , welfare and competitiveness in the field of gender equality .
As there is a steep decline in the birth rate in almost all Member States , we must take measures to create the best possible conditions for mothers to bring up children and to have a genuine opportunity to return to the labour market .
I also call on the Member States and MEPs to find opportunities and coordinate the cost of maternity pay and childcare allowance in order to ensure that women are not a more costly work force than men .
The sharing of family responsibilities and the opportunity to also grant men the right to two weeks paternity leave would give women increased opportunities to return to the labour market and would strengthen family relationships .
Therefore , I am convinced that an extended period of maternity leave would also facilitate the achievement of improved birth rates , in particular , given that our society is ageing rapidly .

( FR ) Madam President , as I see it , the need to increase family leave is patently obvious : raising the minimum maternity leave threshold is a step forward , an advantage , and one ought not to be completely demagogic by comparing the economic impact with a qualitative advantage that is difficult to quantify .



However , there are essentially two parts to the problem : the first is the economic context , that is true , but it is not reason enough to leave millions of families in the lurch for more decades to come ; the second is the legal loopholes in the report , because the text includes several types of family leave with incompatible legal bases .
Let us take adoption leave , which appears in the text alongside maternity and paternity leave .
I personally appreciate , as an adoptive mother and on behalf of all the women I represent , the will to grant the same rights as those of biological mothers .
I am , in fact , what Mrs Morin-Chartier referred to as the small additional package to be added to the Estrela report .
While the aim is indeed to improve the health and rights of women - of all women - in the labour market , adoptive mothers , who have become mothers like the others , are entitled to the same rights and the same protection at work .
Like the others , they are mothers in their own right , and this applies , moreover , whether the child they adopt is under 12 months old or not ; we must avoid the kind of discrimination that appears in the text .
On the subject of adoption , I regret the fact that the text goes into so little detail .
It does not even include any of the Ramboll impact assessment findings .
None of this has been dealt with very well , which is clearly a weak point .
Nevertheless , despite this reservation , I shall support Mrs Estrela 's report because , economic considerations aside , not only are there men and women who must better assume their parental responsibilities in a society that is increasingly abdicating its responsibility of raising its young people , but it is also our duty to ensure that people do not have to choose to sacrifice their children for their job , or their job for their children .
Lastly , we are not Members of the Council but of Parliament .
If we directly elected representatives are not ambitious , then tell me : who will be ?
( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , many things have been said , especially just now .
However , the various new developments and controversies surrounding Mrs Estrela 's report demonstrate one thing : it is still very difficult today to calmly address the issue of gender equality and especially that of a better work-life balance .
This legislative text has had - please forgive the expression - a difficult gestation period , mainly because attitudes still need to change a good deal in this area .
Impact assessments are undoubtedly necessary to ensure a broad understanding of the issues at stake .
However , they must be understood for what they are , and with caution .
Their contradictory conclusions are , I might add , clear proof of this .
Clearly , it would be foolish not to raise the issue of the potential costs of certain amendments tabled .
However , it would be just as foolish to refuse to consider the medium- and long-term socio-economic benefits as regards the health of mothers and infants , or as regards equality between men and women in the labour market .
What is more , our debate deserves better , I feel , than certain caricatures and certain stereotypes that one still hears today .
( PT ) Europe is ageing , and it has very low birth rates .
These factors pose great challenges to the European Union , and we must respond to them with concrete solutions .
We have agreed on this observation during this debate , despite the differing views that have become evident in the discussion .
In Portugal , for example , the birth rate is not high enough to ensure that generations are replaced , and this situation is jeopardising the future .
This is happening in my country , as it is in the majority of EU Member States .
I am sure that more flexible policies with regard to maternity leave can help to reverse these trends .
We must send families a consistent message of support for motherhood , with concrete measures for the better reconciliation of professional , private and family life .
Women must be protected so that they can choose to have children without having to leave the labour market .
Meeting this challenge is vital if we want to achieve the economic and social objectives set out in the Europe 2020 strategy and combat demographic ageing .
In Portugal , for example , maternity leave is already paid at 100 % of earnings for 120 days , in an attempt to counteract the low birth rate that we are experiencing .
I would therefore argue that women 's salaries should be assured during maternity leave in the manner described in the report under discussion .
Allowing each Member State to create conditions that will ensure an objective of paying full salaries during maternity leave by 2020 seems a sensible step .
Finally , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Estrela , for her persistence in defending measures which are aimed at protecting families , whilst also counteracting the ageing of the population .

( ES ) Madam President , I think that we are all aware of the responsibility that Parliament has to exercise today in revising the directive on working conditions for women ; a directive that we have been discussing since the previous legislature and on which , due to various points of view and difficulties , we have not been able to progress .
This is why I am saying that today , we need to take responsibility , within the different points of view that we may have , in order to move forward on equal rights between men and women and improve the living conditions of women in the labour market .
This directive goes beyond the number of weeks of maternity leave , as I am sure we are all agreed that 14 weeks is not enough and we need to increase the length .
However , aside from the number of weeks , we are talking about the dismissal of a woman who has become a mother being considered to be an unfair dismissal , or paternity leave being granted for the benefit of a working mother 's health .
I do not understand why people say that paternity leave does not benefit the health of working mothers .
Of course it does .
Enabling the mother and father to share the work of caring for their children in the first few days after they are born is essential and fundamental for making progress in terms of equality between men and women .
There are countries such as Spain that have already implemented independent and transferable paternity leave .
We have to make it possible for men to take responsibility along with women in order to improve on the path that we have on the table at the moment .
I think this is important .
I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Estrela , for the work she has done and for the responsibility for Parliament to ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Madam President , about five and a half years ago , I caused something of a furore by suggesting that any small businessman with his brain in the right place would be mad to employ a woman of childbearing age .
Since then , it has got worse and worse as the balance in favour of employees versus employers has got completely out of control .
One of my constituents from York wrote to me last year saying never mind about employing women of childbearing age , any small businessmen who employs anybody has got to be out of his mind .
We have an extraordinary situation here , do we not ?
We have young women desperately keen to get into work , desperately keen to work for companies , especially small companies - which are the driving force of the United Kingdom economy - and we have employers who are too terrified to take them on .
That is the problem we have .
We are making it - here in this place with so little commercial experience amongst our Members - almost impossible for small businesses to employ young women , which is something they want to do .
I used to think it was some sort of Chinese conspiracy where this place made it almost impossible for a European economy to function , and that behind the scenes the Chinese were making it so bad that eventually we had to import absolutely everything from China .
Well , I have another hypothesis here , namely , that perhaps the women who are making it so difficult in committees , in the Commission and in this place for small businesses to employ young women have an eye to the main chance .
I would suggest that when the electorate quite rightly look at them and boot them out in a few years ' time for their incompetence and their stupidity , they will only be able to get back into the workplace because they are in middle or late middle age .
The game will be cleared for them .
That is my hypothesis .
I can think of no other sensible answer to this sort of ludicrous interference between employer and employee .
If you think that is a weird hypothesis , anything that puts up with the way you talk about climate change , believe me , nothing is too stupid for this Chamber .
( IT ) Madam President , there is no doubt that bringing this draft legislation to Parliament for debate after 18 months of intense work should be greeted favourably .
It is clear that a project of this nature is characterised by various sensitivities , given that the equivalent laws in the Member States are profoundly different .
In any case , the innovative scope of the measure is a result which should be very positively received , as indeed should the assertion of the principle of the centrality of the family , the guarantee of a greater degree of social protection for women and for women in a particular condition , such as that of having a baby .
Consistency must likewise be ensured in the protection of women who give birth - and I say this despite the fact that I hold the regulatory scope of this measure to be broader than that which was originally envisaged - insofar as it should be highlighted that in Europe , and in many Member States , there is still a notable difference in the protection offered with regard to childbirth and unborn babies .
This activity must clearly be reconciled with the need to eliminate employer abuse , and we need to limit the scope of the amendments - some of which , in my opinion , make the legislation too inflexible overall - starting with paternity leave , which seems far removed with regard to a measure issued fundamentally for the protection of women .
There is no doubt of the need to give due consideration to the problem of immigrant workers and domestic workers , which constitute another element of this - the draft legislation on precarious female workers - in a flexible and elastic market , where women , especially now , must be seen as a resource at the service of the community .
Madam President , UK employers and the UK Government are urging British MEPs to vote against the proposals to raise the amount of fully paid maternity leave from 14 to 20 weeks - although I think this is rank hypocrisy from the Conservatives who , in committee , put in an amendment asking for 24 paid weeks .
As I say , hypocrisy apparently knows no bounds .
The British Federation of Small Businesses has stated that these plans are unaffordable and that they would cost British business over GBP 2.5 billion a year .
Even the coalition government in the UK , which includes the Liberal Democrats , is opposed to these changes .
The proposed changes will cost the UK up to GBP 2 billion at a time when public and private sector workers are being made redundant in order to save far smaller sums .
It is also the case that the changes may be self-defeating as , according to the UK Government , it will be the highest paid workers who will benefit most and lower paid workers the least .
These changes , however well-meaning , will actually have the effect of setting back the process of achieving equality for working mothers .
It will also be the case that these changes will encourage employers to choose male candidates over women .
Madam President , there are other ways of enhancing the rights of nursing mothers , such as more flexible leave systems .
We must also respect the diverse social and cultural differences of various Member States .
One size simply does not fit all .
The working families who are so reliant upon us getting the legislation right to live , work and raise children are in the real world , not some ideological Eurodisney land .
These changes are being proposed at the wrong time and they benefit the wrong people .
At a time when governments across the EU seek to cut public expenditure , you seek to increase employment costs , which will hit a sector where women are disproportionately represented and therefore more exposed to the possibility of job cuts .
The UK already has the best , fairest and most generous standards of maternal and paternal leave .
British mothers currently get six weeks of 90 % salary , followed by 33 weeks statutory maternity pay of GBP 125 a week .
I shall vote in the interests of the British people .
I shall follow the advice of Her Majesty 's government and I will vote against the amendments of the maternity pay .

( NL ) Madam President , having listened to everything that has been said here in this plenary sitting , I am certain that the equal treatment of men and women - which , indeed , has required a great deal of courage and effort and also large amounts of money - has not been achieved .
I am saying this not only to a number of colleagues from my own group - who , incidentally , have left the Chamber - but also to others .
That was my first point .
My second point concerns ageing and the top-heavy age structure in this society .
This is an extremely important issue as far as Europe is concerned , and so it is of paramount importance to make having children easier .
For example , I value the interview that the French Minister for Finance , Mrs Lagarde , has now given on the position of women in the workplace , which was perfect .
Indeed , I hope that we keep to this .
My third point is that equal treatment is a commitment to a social Europe .
We have said that , in this social Europe , men and women must enjoy equal opportunities on the labour market and must also be able to have children .
Currently , we are all aiming for 18 weeks , and we have now more or less agreed on this 18 weeks , but we do not yet know how we are going to afford this .
I have no objections at all to the compromise tabled by my own group to set a maximum of 75 % for those four weeks .
What I do object to is the fact that the compromise concerned also contains a link to health costs .
That is where my main objection lies , as this gives countries such as the United Kingdom and Ireland - in France , such costs are also heavily subsidised - the opportunity to evade the 75 % that must continue to be paid .
Therefore , I wonder whether we can perhaps vote down that part of the compromise .
This would also mean we were able to deliver a consolidated opinion here that could be expected to gain a majority in the Council .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we need European legislation that will protect the health of pregnant women and women who have recently given birth or who are breastfeeding , and we must rise to the demographic challenge we are facing and encourage an increase in birth rates in Europe .
However , this advance must not serve as a disincentive to employ women .
I would emphasise three points .
Firstly , I welcome the European Commission 's proposal on the health and safety at work of pregnant workers and workers who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding .
Indeed , I would emphasise the title , which is the legal framework of this directive , because too often , we tend to forget what exactly this text is about .
We are talking here about women because , until we receive proof to the contrary , men cannot give birth .
The debate tends to become diluted as a result of the reference made to paternity or parental leave .
Let us solve the problem faced by women first , by focusing on their health when they bring a child into the world .
We must implement genuine guarantees to protect the health of these women in the labour market .
Paternity and parental leave will be dealt with in another directive .
Secondly , the debate revolves around the number of weeks .
Currently , the average leave period is set at 14 weeks .
The European Commission is proposing 18 weeks and the report 20 .
Obviously , as a woman and mother of three children , I want mothers to be able to stay with their babies for as long as possible .
However , this then begs the question : who is going to pay for this extension from 14 to 20 weeks ?
The state ?
Businesses ?
I am convinced that the average increase from 14 to 18 weeks is a major European advance and a real investment by our economy towards promoting a rise in birth rates in Europe .
Twenty weeks is liable to have a negative impact on female employment : it would put a brake on their employment .
Businesses and our States cannot support this additional huge financial burden at this time of crisis .
Thirdly , more priority must be given to improving childcare so that mothers can achieve a work-life balance .
Little progress has been made on this matter despite the many appeals by our Parliament .
Therefore , let us not be counterproductive and let us not send women back home .
( RO ) I wish to take this opportunity to convey my condolences to the family of Maricica Hăhăianu .
This 32-year-old Romanian nurse had gone off to Italy in search of a better job .
She lost her life last week after she was attacked by a young Italian man in a Rome underground station .
I believe that precarious employment conditions must become a concern for Europe .
Women are concentrated in low paid jobs and account for the large majority of part-time workers in the European Union .
However , there are some cases where the impact of the crisis has been limited on women participating in the labour market .
In Romania , for example , the proportion of women who found a job continued to increase during 2009 .
I must point out the dire situation which women who work abroad are in .
They often work outside legal regulations and do not enjoy any rights ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( RO ) I must refer again to the Maternity Leave Directive .
I have listened very closely to the debate this evening and I would like to say that those against this draft , and I am referring to extending maternity leave and full pay , can only come up with one argument - economic .
However , this is simplistic because , looking beyond the budget deficit , we are dealing with people .
They are unaware that the balance of benefits is weighted in favour of this report , both for employees and employers .
I do mean employers , too , in the sense of investing in the future .
In addition , opponents fail to realise that actually penalising motherhood and the idea of it at a time when the birth rate is falling , not to mention the population getting older and poorer , has an impact on the sustainability of social security schemes .
( FR ) Madam President , I , too , have listened carefully to everything that has been said up to now , and I note that , as is very often the case , having too much can make us worse off .
The arguments that are being made to justify this super-maternity leave - 20 weeks , of which six must be taken before the child 's birth and two after it , on full pay - are unconvincing .
It is clearly not with this kind of isolated measure that Europe is going to rise to the highly complex challenges of demography and female employment .
Who can seriously think that people decide to have a child , a baby , to take advantage of five months ' leave instead of four and a half months ' ?
On the other hand , I do not believe that denying women their freedom of choice helps improve their situation .
Furthermore , let us please bear in mind the effects , the collateral damage of the decisions we take .
Protecting women primarily means not going overboard with our demands and thus not paving the way for new forms of discrimination against them when they are initially recruited and when they return to work , as all the experts from the OECD and from the Union of the Middle Classes , for example , confirm .
I am therefore clearly in favour of 18 weeks ' leave , of the principle of paternity leave and , of course , of the scope for the Member States to go further .
( DE ) Madam President , I would just like to make a brief point and it concerns the recognition of parental leave periods in the individual countries .
Mr Mann and his colleagues have also tabled amendments on this matter , including Amendment 115 , the first part of which really concerns whether or not the four weeks should be counted .
Unfortunately , this is associated in the second half of the amendment - and I will read it out now so as to be absolutely clear - with the fact that the remuneration may be the average of the remuneration for the 18 weeks of maternity leave , which shall be at least 75 % of the last monthly salary or of the average monthly salary as stipulated according to national law , subject to any ceiling laid down under national legislation .
What this in fact means is that we are giving up on European harmonisation when it comes to financing in this area and how much women receive during this period .
That is not acceptable .
I would consider it a great pity if this were voted through together because , in the final event , we are not giving up on harmonisation at European level , but rather want to increase it in order to bring about an improvement for all men and women .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we should ask ourselves what we are actually trying to achieve with this whole debate .
Are we trying to bring about a small improvement in equality and a little assistance for families as cheaply as possible ?
Of course , making family life compatible with work costs money .
I would simply like to ask my fellow Members from Germany : what is expenditure of EUR 1 billion in Germany if , at the same time , we are handing out EUR 450 billion in bank guarantees ?
What do we actually want in this area ?
Full pay for parental leave is quite correct .
What else should it be ?
It is not time off , it is not holiday ; this is work that people are doing .
Of course we want the period extended to 20 weeks , because we believe that this is the only way this work can be accommodated .
Moreover , we do not merely want to bring about a bit more equality in working life .
We want complete equality , for women and men .
We need to take drastic steps if we are to achieve this , such as a statutory minimum wage in all Member States .
( DE ) Madam President , the matter of maternity protection should remain a matter for the Member States on account of the cultural differences in Europe .
Austria has 16 weeks of maternity provision .
Extending this would cost EUR 17.4 million per year for each further week .
Making 20 weeks ' provision mandatory would cost Austria more than EUR 60 million .
The additional costs would be even higher if there were also two weeks ' paid paternity leave for every father .
Let us be clear in our deliberations : firstly , this is a completely personal decision by the parents , and secondly , I see this as presenting a risk of further discrimination against women of childbearing age .
This could encourage an increase in precarious working conditions , to which 31.5 % of women in gainful employment are already subject .
The question is : is that what we really want ?
( GA ) Madam President , we had an excellent debate here this evening and , in general , many good points were made in the Chamber .
The points raised were idealistic , but Mrs Estrela deserves to be praised for making those points for us .
At the same time , however , we must be practical and realistic .
I have my doubts .
If we take all these suggestions on board , it is possible that young women , in particular , will be unable to find employment .
I am looking at this as a parent .
I have two daughters and I want them to have the same chance as boys have to get jobs .
That is the main thing !
In Ireland , we are currently in a quandary as regards finances .
There are 20 % of young people unemployed .
Four businesses a day in the small and medium sector are closing down and we are facing the worst budget we have ever had to face .
Thus , although it contains many good suggestions , they might be better at a later time .
I do not think they are currently practical .
( SV ) This has been a very exciting debate .
I think it shows that there is a possibility of us finding a compromise so that we can take a decision on this .
I believe that it would be very good if we could do this and , of course , it is necessary for us to proceed on the basis of the fact that we have different systems .
There have been different amounts of progress in the different Member States .
I come from Sweden , where we have parental leave that is longer than a year , with a high level of remuneration and where the father is obliged to take some of the parental leave .
I do not think that it would be possible to achieve something that has been so good for men , women and children , as well as for the level of participation among women on the labour market , at EU level .
However , let us ensure that we obtain a minimum directive that enables us to reach an agreement .

( PL ) Turning to the issue of women 's professional activity , I would like to consider two age groups : the first group , which has been discussed a great deal today already , are young women who are very well-educated and cannot find a job due to the fact that employers are often wary of costs linked with pregnancy and maternity leave .
The second group are women over 50 , who are seen as less productive and less creative .
According to the statistics , women aged between 59 and 60 make up only 25 % of employees in this age range .
The percentage of women over 60 still in work is even lower .
This is why , when we are discussing precarious women workers , we should consider both of these groups and do everything we can to help women find that first job , return to work after maternity leave and increase their qualifications .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( ES ) Madam President , the aims of this initiative are to improve the health and safety of working women who are pregnant or have given birth and apply measures to balance family and working life .
European women are looking to the European Parliament today and are expecting us to implement the modern measures that the 21st century demands .
We therefore need to talk about the possibility of 20 weeks ' leave , covering 100 % of the mother 's salary , including self-employed workers , the possibility of fathers having leave following the birth and establishing equality between men and women in taking that leave .
This is not just about women .
Talking about the cost of maternity leave is not only one more punishment for women ; it demonstrates a lack of responsibility , taking into account the birth rate crisis and the ageing population in Europe at the moment , which is also contributing to the development of the economic crisis .
Has it occurred to you to ask , for example , what the cost of absenteeism is in Europe ?
I have not heard a single word about this .
We have the opportunity to make progress on equality between men and women , so let us not disappoint the people of Europe .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , I would like to thank all the honourable Members for taking part in this important , stimulating and , I would say , also very passionate debate .
Even though we are looking at these issues from different angles , most of us can agree on several things .
Maternity leave should not be penalised ; we have to work very hard to achieve equality of pay ; and we have to study very carefully the economic consequences of the decisions we take here .
Several of you referred to the issue of paternity or parental leave .
I would like just to remind you that the newly adopted parental leave directive grants a minimum of eight months for parents per child .
For the first time , we have legal encouragement for fathers at EU level to take leave .
A whole month of leave is lost if the father does not take his responsibility .
This directive will soon be in force and we will build on this progress and look carefully at further proposals on paternity leave .
As I said in my opening remarks , we are now studying the situation and we will be back to you very soon with our results .
Allow me to underline the encouragement of fathers to take part in parenting with a personal remark .
I was lucky enough to be present at the deliveries of two of my three children .
Of course , during that time in the hospital , the most I could do was put on a brave face and pretend that I was neither worried nor scared and try and offer my wife the highest moral support I could .
Sometimes , however , it was my wife and the kind nurses who took care of me , so I could offer this moral support !
I will never forget the very important moments after the delivery and the first few days when I could help my wife with the newborn baby .
It is very clear that it is not just mothers who need to bond with a newborn child .
The fathers need to do the same and we need to encourage them and change the paternal pattern and create the conditions where fathers can also bond with their newborn babies .
Coming back to the reports we were discussing today , and with regard to Mrs Thomsen 's report on precarious work , I have taken careful note of what has been said .
I can assure you that the Commission will back up action to improve the working conditions of precarious female workers by monitoring national employment policy and by providing structural fund support in particular .
With regard to Mrs Estrela 's comprehensive work on the Commission 's proposal for a strengthened maternity leave directive , we are indeed trying to strike a very difficult balance .
We need to ensure the fundamental rights of female workers , but we should not give an excuse to Member States to stop these very important negotiations .
We need to study the models which offer us a high employment rate and high fertility rates at the same time .
In this vein , the Commission welcomes the amendments which are aimed at maintaining the 18 weeks minimum leave , set an alternative level of remuneration , keep the reference to sick leave , and allow for other forms of leave to be counted as maternity leave .
All this under the proviso that it does not lead to the weakening of existing protection .
Rolling back in this respect cannot be an option for the European Union .
I very much hope that Parliament and the Council will be able to reach a compromise .
The Commission position aims to breach the gap between the positions of the two institutions and to provide a solid basis for future discussion .
The improvement of conditions for women in Europe must be our ultimate goal .
They contribute enormously to society and society must find a way to pay them back .
Madam President , I am afraid that there are many colleagues who were given the floor and they certainly came after me and my colleague here .
We asked for the floor already when President Buzek started this point tonight , so I am objecting to your injustice in giving the floor in the catch-the-eye .
Many thanks for your request to speak .
As I mentioned , there were many more people requesting the floor than we were actually able to accommodate .
We had 19 people wanting to speak in a slot lasting just five minutes .
I have therefore tried to give those people on the lists that I have here a chance to speak .
Naturally , your comments will be minuted .
We will try very hard in the coming debates to make the whole thing as fair as possible .
Madam President , Commissioner , I would like to thank you for the sensitivity that you showed in your opening remarks and your closing speech , along with your personal testimony .
I think that it is very important that this is associated with the testimonies of other people , such as the other MEPs who have also spoken in this debate , as this will certainly help to alter certain prejudices and change the stereotypes which still exist in our society .
Therefore , it is also important that we also include paternity leave by making the most of the dual legal basis in this directive , which aims to promote gender equality and the reconciliation of family and personal life , because one of the stereotypes which prevails in our society is that women are associated with reproduction , while men are associated with production .
Men are just as much fathers as women are mothers , as well as being workers , and thus they are entitled both to professional achievement and to raising their children from birth .
The Member from the UK who spoke is not here .
I would have liked to ask him whether David Cameron is better than other Europeans who would also like to take paternity leave , but who are discriminated against in at least eight Member States .
We are still in the first reading process , and so we will have the opportunity to improve these proposals together with the Commission and the Council .
I would also like to thank my fellow Members for their involvement .
I feel that this broad consensus is very important .
We are certainly living through difficult times , but this is when societies have the greatest need of daring decision makers , because , as the Roman poet Horace noted thousands of years ago , he who is afraid of turmoil ends up crawling .
Madam President , I would like to thank my fellow Members for their comments on my report on precarious women workers and the Commission for its willingness to take initiatives to improve the situation .
As many Members have pointed out , women constitute the vast majority of those working under poor working conditions and for low wages .
This not only means that women in Europe earn less than men , but also that women receive smaller pensions than men , and we will see many more poor women in the Europe of the future , because marriage no longer provides automatic financial security in old age .
The most vulnerable group on the European labour market is that of female immigrants .
Among this group , we see a high level of exploitation , especially among the 11 million women working as domestic workers .
This group also includes au pairs .
Au pair means ' on equal terms ' , but many of the women who come from the Philippines and the former Soviet Republics to work as au pairs do not come for cultural exchange .
They come to earn money , and the scheme is exploited in many places in Europe as a way of obtaining cheap labour .
This situation is one that I would like to call on the Commission to investigate .
We should not allow this form of exploitation to be legal in Europe .
We must therefore exercise greater stringency in connection with the au pair scheme .
Pay differences between men and women begin , according to the Commission 's own pay statistics , when children come along .
If we want to achieve complete equality between men and women on the labour market , women need to be fully compensated during maternity leave , and men need to be involved in looking after the children and thus granted paternity leave .
The debate is closed .
The vote on the Estrela report will take place on Wednesday , 20 October .
The vote on the Thomsen report will take place on Tuesday , 19 October .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Equality between men and women represents one of the fundamental principles of the European Union .
It was already defined in the Treaty of Maastricht in 1992 , some years later , in the Treaty of Amsterdam ( 1997 ) and in the present day in the EU strategy 2010-2015 .
The social agenda of the European Union includes , amongst its priorities , the need to promote policies aimed at supporting the reconciliation of the working , private and family life of women .
In this context , in my opinion , motherhood is an absolutely fundamental right for the purposes of social stability .
The European Union is , at present , facing a demographic challenge arising from low birth rates and the steady increase in the proportion of older people .
I believe that the improvement of provisions aimed at promoting a work-life balance for women is part of the answer to this demographic decline .
I recognise the importance of introducing stronger protection from dismissal during the period from the beginning of pregnancy and the months immediately following the end of maternity leave .
As such , I support the amendments that have been introduced for this purpose , including , in particular , the right of a woman to return to her job or to be assigned an equivalent position .
The report 's main objective is to improve security and healthcare for pregnant workers , workers who have recently given birth and workers who are breastfeeding at work .
Personally , I consider the most important proposal to be the extension of the minimum length of maternity leave from 14 weeks to 20 weeks , which will contribute towards improving the health and psychological state of the mother , who will also therefore be able to take full care of her child .
Extending the minimum length of maternity leave will also encourage breastfeeding , which has a demonstrably positive impact on the health of the child and the mother .
Just as important in my opinion is the current proposal that the contribution to maternity leave should be the full amount of the employee 's salary - that is , the average monthly salary - or at least 85 % .
These measures are sufficient to ensure that families , particularly single parent families , are protected from falling below the poverty line and from social exclusion .
Part of the report is devoted to the traditional status of women .
Women , unlike men , still bear the main responsibility for the care of the child and other dependents , and are often forced to choose between motherhood and professional development .
It is therefore particularly important that the new forms of parental leave do not reflect or reinforce existing social stereotypes .
The proposal only affects the Czech Republic with respect to the amount of maternity contribution , and not the length of maternity leave .
Women are the favourite victims of the recession due to redundancies primarily affecting precarious jobs .
Those most affected by redundancies , salary cuts and abuse from employers are women employed in paid domestic work , providing care and working on temporary contracts .
Domestic work accounts for almost a tenth of the total number of jobs in developed countries , which represents a large group of citizens , especially women , in a vulnerable situation .
This encourages abusive treatment by employers , especially when the workers are immigrants originating either from the new European Union Member States , like Romania , or third countries .
I believe that the removal of the employment restrictions on Romanians and Bulgarians must be the first step towards eliminating discriminatory behaviour , which still imposes an inferior , precarious status on them in most old Member States .
The tragic example of a Romanian nurse killed recently in an Italian underground station , under the indifferent eye of passers-by , must ring the alarm bell about the dangers of collective discrimination and stigmatisation , which can have , as in this case , unforeseeable and extremely serious consequences .
I also wish to press for the minimum period of maternity leave to be extended to 20 weeks so that women can have the time they need to look after their children accordingly .
in writing . - I support this report which seeks to extend EU maternity leave to 20 weeks on full pay and to introduce two weeks of paid paternity leave .
It is vital that the governments now support the EP 's recommendations in the EU Social Affairs Council on 2 December .
Opposing this measure will have the effect of excluding many women from the labour force , thereby losing a valuable resource .
Instead of penalising women for having children , the EU needs to support them and help them better balance work and family life .
Better maternity leave is an investment in the future good health of our society .
The first few weeks of the lives of newborn children are invaluable for the development of trust , sensory-cognitive skills and a bond with both their parents .
Studies have also shown that social measures such as maternity leave help increase the female employment rate by 3-4 % .
Providing better maternity leave and introducing paid paternity leave is a sensible investment .
The impact assessment of this measure demonstrated that just over a 1 % increase in female labour participation would cover the costs of 20 weeks paid maternity leave and two weeks paid paternity leave .
in writing . - Over the last 50 years , European women have made huge progress towards gender equality .
Among the most important goals achieved is the entry of women into the labour market .
However , the increased over-representation of women in ' non-standard ' employment is extremely worrying and I would like to repeat the report 's calls on the Commission to encourage Member States to ' exchange best practices and make full use of the cofinancing opportunities offered by the Structural Funds ... to ensure broader access to affordable , quality childcare and elderly care facilities so that women are not forced to undertake these duties on an informal basis ' .
It also ' stresses ... the need to ensure that precarious domestic care jobs are transformed , wherever possible , into decent , long-term jobs ' .
Precarious work has long been a cause of concern ; however , the current economic and financial crisis has made the issue of precarious work and especially the issue of women in precarious employment very urgent , and I would urge the Commission to act to protect women in a vulnerable situation employed in precarious circumstances .
Keynote speeches make much of the need to promote the status of families .
The promotion of equality is a priority in employment strategies .
It is time for action where it concerns families .
Families require concrete deeds and better coordination of work and family life .
Employment and birth rates among women are higher in countries where good systems of family leave and childcare services ease the burden that results from having children .
Good examples include Sweden , Denmark , Iceland and Finland .
It is therefore possible to combine women 's participation in the labour market with high birth rates , and that should be supported in the EU .
I back the proposal by the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality for maternity leave to last 20 weeks on full pay .
Women and families should not be penalised for having children .
In addition to the call for full pay , the proposed directive is also suggesting that maternity leave should count towards service in employment when pensions are being calculated .
This issue is connected to the EU 's call for equal pay .
If the directive went ahead , it would narrow the earnings gap between women and men .
The directive would also improve the status of multiple birth and adoptive families and that of families with disabled children .
It is indeed difficult to think of any reason not to support the proposed directive with the amendments tabled by the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality .
Better coordination of family and professional life promotes the well-being of families , employment and economic development .
We are unanimous regarding the need on the part of women who are pregnant or who have just given birth for special protection in society and the labour market .
This is ultimately about the basic unit of society , about strengthening the status of the family .
We nevertheless disagree on what sort of legislation should actually be enacted to realise this goal in the Member States .
I support the Commission 's view that the minimum period for maternity leave should be raised across the Union from the present 14 weeks to 18 weeks , with compensation paid at the rate in place for a period of illness , at the very least .
This would be a significant improvement in Europe .
When , in addition , we bear in mind the changes to parental leave made last year , we may conclude that protection of the family is improving in the EU .
The Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , however , has adopted amendments that do not respect the differences between national systems or financial realities .
The Member States have widely varying maternity leave systems .
Cramming them all into the same package would result in poor legislation and breach the principle of subsidiarity .
For example , in Finland , maternity leave combined with paternity leave and a long period of parental leave lasting more than six months makes for a wideranging system , the cost burden for which is shared among different parties .
The system has an additional component : the possibility of childcare leave , during which the contract of employment is not discontinued .
The costs of maternity leave lasting 20 weeks on full pay , which is now being proposed , would go up in Finland from the current level of EUR 30 million to EUR 80 million .
In many Member States , it would mean even higher costs .
In this economic situation , such a proposal can only be made completely free of budgetary responsibility .
From the perspective of equality , I also regard as worrying the dreaded scenario where women 's employment opportunities could , in fact , weaken if employers were saddled with the massive costs arising .
It is 15 years since the adoption of the Beijing Platform for Action .
The document summarises the status of women in the world and recommends steps for improving it .
It emphasises women 's working conditions , particularly in the economy , health and education .
The European Parliament and the Council have adopted several directives to implement these recommendations .
Based on the results , which appeared to be largely positive , further tasks were undertaken and presented for implementation by the Member States in the road map for equality between men and women for 2006-2010 .
February 's annual report by the European Parliament on equality between men and women for 2009 says that , as a result of the economic crisis and the budget cuts in the EU countries , there have been job losses , particularly amongst women .
Women often submit to pressure by employers , which particularly favours multinational retail chains .
The workload has a bad effect on women 's health , family , legal working time or training .
Few employers are willing to create favourable conditions for their employees for reconciling professional and family life .
The most difficult working conditions are faced by female immigrants .
The obstacles they face include language barriers , an unfamiliar working environment , family or cultural traditions , and so on .
The crisis has impeded the attainment of many fixed objectives .
The European Institute for Gender Equality should immediately assess the current situation , and the European Commission and the European Parliament should take effective action to halt the worsening of the status of women .
The long gestation ( a fitting choice of term in this case ) of this proposal for a directive is due to the conflict between those who wanted to include impossible objectives in the document in order to give it a symbolic quality , and those whose sole aim was to advance our society by promoting certain rights in practice .
In the end , the compromise does not fully meet the protection requirements outlined : the protection of the health of pregnant women ; the guarantee of equal treatment for female workers , including self-employed workers ; and the increased sharing of childcare responsibilities between parents .
However , the new features introduced - the extension of maternity leave to 18 weeks and the 6 weeks ' compulsory maternity leave after confinement ; the introduction of remuneration at the full amount of the woman 's previous earnings ; the increased protection against redundancy ; and the introduction of the right to request flexible working patterns , notwithstanding the option for Member States to set different limits and to maintain more favourable provisions , mean that we are indeed taking a step forward .
I voted in favour of the resolution , although my opinion differs even from that of my group on many amendments , in an attempt to highlight the fundamental importance of the measures linked to health and safety protection at work .
For a long time , gender inequality in the labour market has been a very important subject for the EU , and for years , it has tried to find a solution .
Nevertheless , even today , we cannot report positive developments in this area .
Thus , for example , according to Eurostat data , the number of women in precarious employment - that is , women working part-time - has increased significantly , reaching 31.4 % , while the figure for men is 8.3 % .
It seems reasonable here to locate the reasons for this in the current economic and financial crisis , which has exacerbated the problems of women in precarious employment even more .
I believe that precarious employment is not just a reason for the difference in pay between women and men , but also a barrier to career opportunities .
As the proportion of women in precarious employment is excessively high today and , therefore , the abovementioned harmful consequences have a disproportionate effect on the situation of such women , I think that the EU should strengthen the legal regulations on temporary , part-time and agency work .
Perhaps then , one day , we will be in a position to say that the EU has guaranteed equal rights between men and women and abolished gender discrimination in the labour market .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Mrs Estrela for her creditable report on the amendment to the Council Directive to encourage improvements to the safety and health at work of pregnant workers and workers who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding .
The reforms set out in the report are important for the improvement of the rights and well-being of EU citizens and the creation of healthier competitiveness in the internal market .
The European Union needs a coherent social policy .
The harmonisation of maternity leave systems is an important step towards a more social Europe .
The report proposes a period of maternity leave lasting 20 weeks on full pay .
This would increase maternity benefits in many EU countries .
A long and well remunerated period of maternity leave has been shown to have a positive impact on women 's participation in the labour market .
The greater contribution made by women to the labour market would quickly cover the costs of the reform , which many claim are insurmountable .
Better maternity benefits also raise birth rates .
An ageing Europe needs taxpayers in order to maintain security of the supply of services in the future .
The call for full pay during maternity leave is also an important step in narrowing the differences in income between women and men .
A period of maternity leave would no longer mean less income for women and , furthermore , full pay during maternity leave would increase women 's pension accrual .
In today 's Europe , older women are especially liable to live in poverty .
The majority of precarious jobs have always been taken by women .
There has been talk for a long time about improving working conditions for women but , unfortunately , nothing is changing .
Against this background , I wish to draw your attention to the plight of the seasonal workers picking strawberries in Spain .
I am familiar with their situation not only from the countless complaints received from Romanian workers or the trade unions , but also from direct experience on site .
Every year , thousands of Romanian women go to pick strawberries in Spain for a period of between three and five months .
Some are very often subjected to abuse from their employers .
The original contracts are replaced by contracts in Spanish , which they do not understand .
They are often not given health insurance , being forced even to pay for it out of their own pocket .
Their work sometimes requires them to pick strawberries sprayed with pesticides , without any protective equipment .
However , they cannot complain as they are afraid that they will be sacked and sent home .
I have drawn the European Commission 's attention to their situation through questions which have been submitted requesting a directive for regulating the rights of seasonal workers in the European Union .
However , the response I have been given is that this issue is not on its list of priorities .
This is why I call on the Commission again to table a legislative proposal on this matter .
Supporting women as they reconcile their working and family conditions is one of the biggest challenges of modern times .
The amount or length of maternity leave certainly does not determine the decision to start a family or whether or not to have a child .
Nevertheless , the conditions under which these decisions are made are important .
This is about the degree of certainty that women have during this time that they can dedicate themselves to motherhood , in peace and without fear , during the first weeks and months .
It is also an expression of the importance society assigns to these women .
It is about whether we basically consider motherhood to be merely an unfortunate obstacle in the professional life of women , who are at the mercy of the harsh conditions of the labour market , or whether society is able to provide women with the necessary protection .
If greater protection for women in the labour market in the context of childbirth and motherhood primarily means an economic burden that European society is not willing to bear , then we need to think about the values of this society .
This is a question of society 's priorities .
in writing . - Many speakers have understandably referred to the economic impact of extending maternity leave from 14 to 20 weeks .
Unfortunately , costs often come up because they are easy to measure .
However , benefits , too , can be measured .
In fact , one subject which has been well researched quantitatively is the impact of paid maternity leave on prime-age female labour force participation rates ( FLFPR ) .
One of the most authoritative econometric studies by the ECB clearly shows that the FLFPR for prime-age women is always on the increase up to 43 weeks of such paid maternity leave .
Only beyond that point will the rate be actively affected .
For many Member States whose length of maternity leave is close to the legal minimum and , as a consequence , their female participation is low , an increase in paid maternity leave is economically beneficial .
For these Member States , the cost of extending maternity leave will be money well invested rather than a burden .
Revision of the framework agreement on relations between the European Parliament and the Commission - Adaptation of Parliament 's Rules of Procedure to the revised framework agreement on relations between the European Parliament and the Commission ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on :
the report by Mr Rangel , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on revision of the framework agreement on relations between the European Parliament and the Commission , and
the report by Mr Rangel , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on adaptation of Parliament 's Rules of Procedure to the revised framework agreement on relations between the European Parliament and the Commission .
With regard to these two reports , I would firstly like to congratulate and publicly mention , as I did at the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , the remarkable work carried out by my colleagues , Mr Lehne , Mr Swoboda , Mrs Roth-Behrendt , Mrs Wallis and Mrs Harms , who made up the team of Members of this House that negotiated this framework agreement with the Commission .
I would also like to mention the great openness and highly constructive spirit of collaboration shown by the President of the Commission and , after the new Commission had taken office , Commissioner Šefčovič and his teams .
I believe that a remarkable piece of work has been achieved , and that this has led to an historic agreement that represents the first framework agreement following the signing of the Treaty of Lisbon , and the first framework agreement with a direct , explicit basis in the treaties , but specifically on Article 295 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
Actually , I would like to say that this agreement creates a highly transparent , greatly dynamic and extremely close association between Parliament and the Commission , and that it essentially represents a compromise : a balance between the respective visions of the two institutions on the new role that falls to each of them following the Treaty of Lisbon .
I believe that the work carried out by our team was , in fact , very positive , as in this framework agreement , it has managed to give expression to the new competences and the strengthening of powers arising from the Treaty of Lisbon .
This applies to the legislative procedure and to programming or planning , especially , to give just two examples , in Parliament 's involvement in the Commission 's programme of work or , for instance , in matters relating to the Commission 's use of ' soft law ' in Parliament 's legislative powers .
Secondly , one very important aspect is Parliament 's increased powers of control and monitoring , whether in the details of specifying rules for the election of the President of the Commission and of the latter as a body , or , for instance , where this relates to the involvement of Parliament in issues such as the reshuffling or the possible removal of a commissioner , or , to take another example , hearings for directors of regulatory agencies or even the monitoring of international negotiations .
In all of these areas , the powers arising from the Treaty of Lisbon have been confirmed .
Access to information is also very important , particularly when it relates to classified or confidential information , and , moreover , the very exchange of information and points of view between the leaders of Parliament and those of the Commission .
For example , we know that these days , it is already possible for the Commissioner responsible for Constitutional Affairs and the President of the Commission to participate in the relevant parts of the Conference of Presidents , or that there are various platforms for direct dialogue between the Conference of Presidents , the Conference of Committee Chairs , the President of Parliament , the President of the Commission and the College of Commissioners .
Even the Commission 's presence in Parliament has also been strengthened , especially through the implementation of question time , not only for the President of the Commission , but also for the commissioners .
In view of this , I would like to say , with deep respect for the Treaty of Lisbon and its new balance of powers , and also with deep respect for the idea of the separation of powers , that here we have a clarifying agreement that will make the Treaty of Lisbon current , active and applicable .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , it is a great pleasure for me to join your debate on the revised framework agreement on relations between our two institutions .
I am very satisfied that the resolution on which you are going to vote on Wednesday recommends that Parliament should endorse the framework agreement .
This will successfully bring to a close a process that started almost one year ago with the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty .
On this occasion , I would like to express my sincere thanks and gratitude to Mr Lehne and the whole working party : Ms Diana Wallis , Ms Dagmar Roth-Behrendt , Ms Rebecca Harms , Mr Hannes Swoboda and , of course , our rapporteur , Mr Paulo Rangel .
We have been working in a great spirit , with great intensity , and our discussions have been very constructive and , at the same time , very frank .
It is evident that Parliament 's increased rights and competences under the new Treaty have an impact in many ways on working relations between our institutions .
This was reflected by Parliament 's resolution of 9 February 2010 and by President Barroso 's related statement the same day .
It is therefore of great importance that , with the revised framework agreement , our institutions will now get a solid and formally agreed basis for mutual relations and will be able to start implementing all elements of the agreement in daily practice .
This revised framework agreement builds on the existing framework agreement from 2005 which , as we have seen , has been a very successful instrument for governing relations between our institutions .
It was in this spirit of successful cooperation that we started our negotiations on the revision of the framework agreement in March .
I believe that we should all be very satisfied with the outcome .
Like your rapporteur , Mr Rangel , I am also of the opinion that this revision is a significant achievement which will deepen the relations between our institutions and offer practical solutions in line with Parliament 's increased competences following the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty .
This is how we are putting the special partnership between the Commission and the European Parliament into practice .
Let me single out a few elements which constitute real progress .
The agreement sets out rules and a timetable for an intensified and structured dialogue between our institutions that allows Parliament to provide important input when the Commission is preparing its work programmes , as its contribution to Union programming .
It sets detailed rules on how the Commission will inform Parliament about the negotiation and conclusion of international agreements .
It brings the rules on the provision of classified information to Parliament up to international standards and will thus facilitate informing Parliament , for example , on international negotiations .
It also sets rules to enhance the information provided to Parliament relating to the work of experts advising the Commission .
I expect it to enhance our dialogue and coordination with regard to the planning of Parliament 's part-sessions and ensuring the presence of Commissioners .
Even though the agreement is not yet in force , we have already implemented important elements of it .
Let me just mention a few examples related to the preparation of the Commission 's work programme for 2011 .
On 7 September , President Barroso held his State of the Union address in Parliament , and I attended the Conference of Presidents with information on progress in preparing the Commission 's work programme .
On 7 October , the College and the Conference of Committee Chairs met in the Berlaymont .
Furthermore , President Barroso will meet Parliament 's Conference of Presidents again on Wednesday .
All this aims at intensifying the political dialogue between our institutions and , from my perspective , we seem to have designed the right instruments for this in our framework agreement .
As you all know , the negotiations for the revised framework agreement were long and required a major effort by both institutions in order to arrive at a text that caters for both our institutions ' interests and concerns .
We also knew that for a number of aspects in our relations - for example the Union 's programming , introduced by the Lisbon Treaty - we would have to involve the Council too .
As the Council had chosen not to be part of the negotiations on the revised framework agreement , we have taken care not to pre-empt on issues that need to be agreed with the Council .
The negotiators from both sides therefore made sincere efforts to fully respect the balance of the institutions , as defined by the treaties , and the commitment to loyal cooperation between them .
This is repeatedly evoked in the agreement and the Commission is , moreover , firmly convinced that the text we arrived at , after sometimes difficult negotiations , does indeed fully respect the rights and competences of each EU institution and stands the test of legal scrutiny .
Nevertheless , there are voices that consider that the framework agreement already goes too far , and the possibility of a legal challenge against the agreement or against specific instances of its implementation cannot be excluded .
In this context , the Commission notes that the motion for a resolution on the adoption of the revised framework agreement will officially set out Parliament 's own interpretation of the agreed text .
On some important issues , this interpretation goes beyond the text agreed after sensitive discussions .
This concerns notably the provisions regarding informing Parliament about negotiations on international agreements and the inclusion of Members of the European Parliament as observers in the Union 's delegations to international conferences , as well as the definitions and conditions for the application of soft law .
When questioning this approach in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , the Commission was told that these interpretations were , in fact , intended to put Parliament 's initial objectives on record and that only the text of the framework agreement as such had legal value .
To avoid all ambiguity , it is in this sense that the Commission reads Parliament 's interpretation of the text .
The Commission stands firmly by all the commitments that it has made in the agreement , and it intends to apply the agreement following the agreed text .
Let me make it clear that the Commission will not be bound by any unilateral interpretation of this framework agreement .
The framework agreement text as negotiated will , in practice , give us all necessary possibilities to find solutions in the interests of both Parliament and the Commission without disregarding the rights and interests of other institutions .
In this spirit , we will continue to put into practice the special partnership between our two institutions and , at the same time , loyally cooperate with all the institutions .
I am looking forward to the signature of the agreement and its successful implementation thereafter .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - ( ES ) Madam President , I joined Parliament 18 years ago now .
Then , the European Parliament was a consultative parliament .
It was a parliament that did not have any powers .
In this process over the past 18 years , we have seen Parliament change from a consultative parliament to a fully colegislative one .
Our good friend , Francisco Lucas Pires , who witnessed this process , said that it changed from a deliberative parliament to a legislative parliament .
Therefore , the text that we are going to adopt on Wednesday is the culmination of negotiations between the Commission and Parliament on the framework agreement .
I confess that when I tell my family that I am going to Strasbourg to take part in the debate on the framework agreement between Parliament and the Commission , I have to give them quite a lengthy explanation .
This is because , obviously , these things do not exist in national parliaments or at national level , so people do not understand why an agreement has to be reached between the Commission and Parliament in order to implement what the treaties say .
However , it does have to be done .
It has to be done for a very basic reason , which Mr Rangel and Mr Šefčovič have already stated : because we want to be efficient .
What the framework agreement is essentially seeking to do is to resolve all the practical obstacles that could arise in terms of legislation , parliamentary control and codes of conduct .
I therefore believe that it is a good blend of European democracy .
It is ' consensual ' democracy rather than the ' conflictive ' democracy that we have in our countries .
In consensual democracy , the intelligent thing to do is to find solutions to any problems that could arise .
Therefore , the framework agreement is an instrument for preventing future problems and making what the treaties say a reality .
As we have a new treaty , the Treaty of Lisbon , it makes sense to implement it .
I would like to congratulate Mr Rangel and the team that he led , and the European Commission , because I believe that they have reached a very reasonable agreement .
When reading the content of the agreement , one cannot fail to be surprised at the voices being heard in some national parliaments questioning whether it poses a threat to the Council 's powers .
For goodness ' sake !
The Council is indeed the other colegislator .
We do want to legislate , and we are legislating a great deal and successfully with the Council of Ministers .
We are colegislators on an equal footing .
We do not need to gain any sort of small advantage .
What we want is for this to be effective , and I believe that the agreement is going to help to achieve this .
Allow me to say , Mr Šefčovič , that you took the bull by the horns - a very bullfighting-related expression in my country - when you said that the interpretation of Articles 6 and 7 of the resolution is Parliament 's interpretation in relation to international agreements and international conferences .
I do not believe there is anything strange here .
What we are talking about here is Parliament being informed and participating through the Commission and through negotiation , nothing more .
What is the purpose ?
The purpose is for us to know what the Commission has done when we have to adopt it here .
Therefore - and I will finish here Madam President - congratulations to both of you .
I believe that this is a good omen : as they would say in Casablanca , ' the beginning of a beautiful friendship ' .
Madam President , I would like to echo what has been said by all the speakers so far in this debate .
More importantly than the technical difficulties that this agreement might involve , I believe that we are talking about something important , something that we have to consider alongside the reform of the Rules of Procedure that we conducted a few months ago , following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
This framework agreement and the new Rules of Procedure are two essential elements of the new European democratic structure .
I am convinced that , with the reform of the Rules of Procedure and the framework agreement , this new role that Parliament is taking on through the Treaty of Lisbon of being a legislative House is acquiring a basis , a foundation for operating in a reasonable way .
This is because - as has already been said - what is important is that this House now has the major role of discussing and agreeing on the new laws for the European Union with the Commission .
In order to do this , we have new Rules of Procedure and a framework agreement that also establishes all the elements that make up our relationship .
In this respect , I would like to highlight the importance , for example , of the control functions that this House exercises over the Commission .
Mr Šefčovič , I believe that we should ultimately consider a mechanism involving the Commission being present in this House , as provided for in this agreement .
For example , it could involve all the Commissioners being present together to answer direct questions .
That is what we should do in order to respond immediately and directly to the political relationship that we have .
In relation to your interpretation of paragraphs 7 and 8 , I would like to say that I understand it .
I understand it because it is true that this House does not strictly need to be a party to the negotiations , but you also need to understand that we as Parliament have expressed a wish , an initial position and a future position regarding how this House should relate to international negotiations .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , we listened with great interest to Commissioner Šefčovič who seemed more interested in placating the Council than in seriously attacking the position of the Parliament .
I think that is quite correct because if the Council - which I see is not yet here this evening - had been seriously interested in playing a part in becoming a party to this framework agreement , it could have done so .
As a Parliament , we know that as we put Lisbon into effect , we have to exercise our new powers with discretion and responsibility .
We are also committed to bolstering the Union 's power in international negotiations through an effective performance by the Commission .
Can I stress especially the need for President Barroso to revise the Code of conduct of Commissioners , especially the financial declarations .
We were aware of certain frailties that were exposed in the course of Parliament 's approval of the Barroso II Commission .

on behalf of the ECR Group . - ( PL ) Our Spanish fellow Member , Mr Méndez de Vigo , said that he was having great problems trying to explain to his family the very specific legal and procedural relations between the organs of the European Union .
He has more patience than me .
I do not even try to discuss this with my wife , as it is too complicated .
I think that the Treaty of Lisbon has turned out to be a sort of blind date , which means that it is not a good or proper thing that we are only just now beginning to define the competences of the individual organs of the Union .
It is late , but as the American film has it , ' better late than never ' .
Let us not talk about friendship as proposed by Mr Méndez de Vigo .
Let us rather talk about more practical relations and clearer contacts between the Commission , Council and European Parliament .
That is better than talking about friendship .
Thank you very much .
Madam President , I , too , would like to take this opportunity to acknowledge the fine work done by Mr Rangel with regard to a number of the sections in the report .
The fact that we are obtaining more information from the Commission is certainly progress .
The fact that the need for parliamentary control is being emphasised , as well as the need for better mutual cooperation , is also clearly progress .
However , in one area - the one that has been the most important both today and in the previous debate - there is reason to express disappointment .
This is , of course , the common foreign policy , with regard to which there is nothing to reproach Mr Rangel for , but there is reason to criticise the whole direction that this area has taken since the Treaty of Lisbon entered into force .
I was a member of the Folketing , the Danish Parliament , when Denmark was lured into saying ' yes ' to the Treaty of Lisbon on condition that it did not lead to the surrender of sovereignty .
We were given the word of all the official EU authorities that there would be no such surrendering of power , and now we can see that the European Parliament is quite clearly taking on a power that was not originally intended in the area of foreign policy .
This is deeply regrettable , because very many Europeans , including , surely , the French , the Dutch and the Irish , who had the opportunity to say ' no ' at one time , entered into this cooperation with the expectation that foreign policy was an area where they would still retain their sovereignty .
Now we can see that everything will be dealt with in an interplay between the Commission and the European Parliament , and the Council will be completely cut off .
That is extremely regrettable .
Madam President , I shall resist the temptation to reject automatically as insidious or worthless any agreement between two sets of supporters of ' the project ' , as it is called .
I shall try to judge it on its merits and demerits .
The Parliament 's team have a mission to increase Parliament 's power and influence , and they have had a measure of success .
It would be wrong to deny that .
They have succeeded in winning equal treatment of the Parliament with the Council , a greater duty for the Commission to consider legislative initiatives from the Parliament , Question Hours with the High Representative , involvement in international negotiations , and much else .
However , there is another side to this .
The Parliament 's equality with the Council must involve a relative reduction in the power of that body , which represents - however badly in the case of my own country - the interests of nation states .
Furthermore , the power exercised by Parliament is exercised disproportionately by the leaders of the large political groups and the committee chairmen .
The ordinary members of these groups have no more independent power than those of us who are Non-attached Members .
The promise of involvement in international negotiations was also in the 2005 agreement , and Parliament has been treated with disdain .
We were not told the identity of the overseer in the agreement on the transfer of financial data with the United States , and when members of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs asked why there was a perceived need for secrecy , the Member of the Commission refused to answer and either misunderstood or pretended to misunderstand the question .
( IT ) Madam President , I also would like to congratulate the negotiators on the positive result which has been achieved , moreover , in a reasonably short time .
The proof and tangible confirmation of the constructive interinstitutional dialogue are provided by this agreement which , we trust , will be adopted on Wednesday and ratified immediately afterwards .
This agreement certainly gives a boost to the centrality of the role of the European Parliament which was clearly intended by the Treaty of Lisbon , and establishes close cooperation between the institutions ; the intense work of the negotiators is certainly heading in this direction .
There is no doubt that Parliament puts its faith in the Commission and it must certainly assess , through constant scrutiny , the activities which are introduced for approved programmes and the tangible results which are achieved .
The Code of conduct for Commissioners , as well as the requirement to provide information , including confidential information , are welcomed .
I do not agree with some amendments which , in my opinion , are not going in the opposite direction , even if , overall , they are consistent to a certain degree with the intended design of the agreed text .
I am likewise convinced that , through this report , it is possible to legislate better and make better impact assessments with regard to individual legislative proposals .
At the same time , relations should be strengthened with national parliaments , who are the mirror image of these activities .
The work carried out with regard to the agencies is welcomed and I am convinced that the primacy of politics also depends on a greater willingness on the part of the Directorates-General of the Commission to cooperate with Parliament .
In conclusion , I hope that the Commission will implement the agreement , once it has been finalised , without applying red tape .
Madam President , I am glad to see that the new framework agreement represents a significant improvement in , and deepening of , relations with the Commission , and the special partnership reflects the new power of the European Parliament under the Lisbon Treaty .
As a result of excellent work within the Commission and the working party , the practical solutions included in the proposed revised agreement bring major improvements in legislative procedure and planning , parliamentary scrutiny , obligations to provide information , and the Commission 's presence in Parliament .
Welcome Commissioner Šefčovič !
Let me draw your attention to two points in particular .
I consider the involvement of Parliament in international negotiations a major step forward , facilitating Parliament 's consent and giving more predictability to the procedure .
In my view , one of the most important elements is the follow-up of legislative initiative requests from Parliament .
I welcome the development that the Commission undertakes to report on the concrete follow-up given to any legislative initiative requests within three months of its adoption ; the Commission shall come forward with a legislative proposal after one year at the latest or include the proposal in the next year 's work programme .
If the Commission does not submit a proposal , it shall give Parliament a detailed explanation of the reasons .
As the rapporteur on the European citizens ' initiative , I hope that the follow-up of citizens ' requests will also be handled with equally proper respect .
I was glad to see the major backing of the report in committee .
I trust the plenary session will follow the line agreed between the Commission and the European Parliament working party .
Well done and thank you very much .
Madam President , this framework agreement on the relationship between the Commission and this House introduced by the Lisbon Treaty - in reality , the EU Constitution - is said to bring about a more democratic governmental process .
In truth , it is nothing but an illusion of democracy where none exists .
The following points are important .
Lisbon has no democratic or moral authority in the UK , where the British people have been cheated by the ruling political class from giving their verdict on the treaty .
The so-called changes in this agreement will in no way diminish the power and activity of the unelected and unaccountable Commission supported by this compliant House .
In practice , the business of the EU will continue , as it always has done , in back rooms and behind closed doors .
In due course , the recommendation will be to vote resolutely against these proposals since we do not , and will not , recognise Lisbon unless and until it has been submitted to the British people for their decision .
That is real democracy .
( SK ) I am very pleased that we are able to discuss the revised framework agreement on relations between the European Parliament and the European Commission at today 's meeting .
This revision corroborates and gives tangible form to the stronger position of the European Parliament after the adoption of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Today , I would personally like to highlight the agreement concluded between the Commission and the working party of the European Parliament on the framework agreement , and thank you , Mr Vice-President , for your personal involvement .
Allow me to make a few comments with regard to the framework agreement .
The stronger position of the European Parliament makes for a more democratic European Union .
As the elected representatives of the citizens of the Member States , we will participate in the adoption of European legislation and will have greater control over the Commission .
The Commission will , for example , be obliged to submit reports to us on the concrete follow-up provisions adopted for any legislative initiative request .
The Commission will be equally obliged to ask us for approval in the event that it intends to change the Code of conduct for Commissioners .
We also definitely welcome the fact that on the basis of the treaty , the European Parliament will be better and more transparently informed about the conclusion of international agreements .
The aforementioned provisions are not the only ones ; the revised framework agreement contains many more similar provisions and I firmly believe that they will all lead towards more effective and closer cooperation between both institutions , and that they will represent a coherent implementation of the Treaty of Lisbon .
In conclusion , I would like to highlight a key area : the timely cooperation of Parliament on requests ensuing from the European citizens ' initiative is a significant provision which , pursuant to the agreement , will guarantee close contact between the European Parliament and citizens .

( DE ) Madam President , I would first like to thank Mr Rangel for his report and also , of course , Mr Šefčovič for the negotiations that we have had .
He was not an easy negotiating partner , but he was a fair one .
I believe we have achieved a good result .
The specific result naturally forms the basis of our cooperation , and while the interpretation given by Mr Rangel is perhaps somewhat extensive , it allows us to remain focused on our goals .
What remains now is not just the openness and transparency between our two bodies , but also the need to convince the Council - which is not present - that if we work well together , it does not necessarily have to be at the expense of the Council .
Unfortunately , the Council sometimes behaves like a child who has had a toy taken away and is now upset and affronted .
Instead of feeling affronted and threatening complaints , the Council should work with us to achieve what is best for the citizens of our continent .
If we want to appear strong to the outside world - and the common foreign policy , common trade agreements , etc. are an important aspect of all this - then it would be best for us to work together .
( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , as we all know , and as has just been pointed out , the Treaty of Lisbon strengthens Parliament 's powers .
However , few of us are aware of the radical change that it brings about , particularly in the field of trade policy , which I follow closely .
Under the Treaty of Lisbon , Parliament will ratify all international trade agreements .
This is already causing quite a stir , and the discussions on the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement ( ACTA ) and on the free trade agreement with Korea are merely a first sign of this .
However , the socialists and democrats in the Committee on Trade wanted to go further than the treaty allows .
I am their spokesperson , and despite the scepticism of some and the opposition shown by certain others , I conveyed a clear message : if Parliament is to ratify any trade agreement , it must be involved from the start of the process .
What used to seem idealistic is now a core element of our relations with the Commission , since we will be fully consulted on the negotiating mandates .
I welcome this .
I therefore call on the Commission and the Council to continue to respect the Community spirit and the democratic will that are at the heart of the treaty .
I also call on my fellow Members - since we suffer from a kind of Stockholm syndrome where the Commission and the Council are concerned - to use all our rights , because they are the rights of our fellow citizens .
( IT ) Madam President , the revision of the agreement between Parliament and the Commission establishes the basis for improved collaboration between the two institutions .
Much progress has been made with regard to procedure , legislative planning , parliamentary scrutiny , requirements to provide information and the Commission 's presence in Parliament .
However , the point which I am most eager to highlight is the progress made with respect to the interinstitutional aspect of international relations .
The role given to Parliament should not be considered as strengthened : it is a requirement .
We hope that no one casts doubt on allowing the presence of European Parliament observers at multilateral and bilateral international conferences as anything but an act of responsibility .
Indeed , denying the status of observer to Members of the European Parliament in bilateral agreements , such as , for example , fisheries agreements , prevents , de facto , full knowledge of the area being negotiated , upon which Parliament will subsequently be required to express its opinion .
I believe that it is not possible to do without these preconditions , as otherwise we would end up with Parliament rejecting bilateral agreements which , by definition , cannot be amended and which , in the absence of a partnership , would make the vote a mere formality .
( CS ) I am very pleased that the European Commission recognises that , in order for the future of the Union to be successful , it is very important for decision making to be more democratic .
This is therefore about strengthening the role of the European Parliament .
I appreciate the fact that the new cooperation agreement with the European Commission strengthens the importance of Parliament beyond what was prescribed in the Treaty of Lisbon .
I welcome the fact that the agreement allows for more detailed impact studies and a better response by the Commission to the political requirements of the European Parliament .
It is particularly important for the Commission to actually improve Members ' access to documents , including proposals for international agreements .
This has already been said here .
Their ratification cannot merely be a formality , as is often the practice in the national parliaments .
We need the relevant information in advance so that we can influence their content as we go along .
The Council , which feels aggrieved , must get used to the fact that in future , it must cooperate much better with the European Parliament .
( SK ) The Treaty of Lisbon entails new tasks and obligations for both the European Parliament and the European Commission .
It is commendable that less than a year after the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , we have on our desks the revision of the framework agreement on improved cooperation on joint tasks of the European Commission and the European Parliament .
The mutual agreement on joint procedures will certainly help prevent possible misunderstandings when making joint decisions .
However , the European Union is constituted on the basis of agreement by nation states which passed on to us - the European Parliament as well as the European Union - part of their competences .
Therefore , the Treaty of Lisbon has , in certain matters , brought with it the obligation to cooperate with national parliaments .
The correct form of this cooperation ought to be the next step when defining cooperation within the European Union .
This is what I would like to ask for , Commissioner .
( DE ) Madam President , in the EU , Parliament and the Council act as legislators and have a democratic mandate , directly in the case of the European Parliament and at least indirectly in the case of the Council .
Yet the Commission , which has no democratic mandate whatsoever , remains the only body that is able to propose EU regulations - and that despite the Treaty of Lisbon .
I therefore feel that huge shortcomings still remain in this respect .
If the European Parliament is to be able to exercise its right of initiative efficiently , the obligation to provide information also needs to be expanded accordingly .
The new instrument of the citizens ' initiative should involve Parliament , as the body representing the citizens , in the legislative process at the earliest possible juncture .
The flow of information between the Commission , on the one hand , and Parliament , on the other , also needs to be strengthened in the area of international relations .
The EU 's foreign policy must not be allowed to be the sole responsibility of a bureaucratic European External Action Service that is relatively remote from citizens .
( RO ) I believe that the new agreement will significantly improve relations between Parliament and the European Commission between 2010 and 2015 .
The timing of the review of the legal basis for this cooperation is apt , just a short while after the Treaty of Lisbon came into force .
The new rules clearly define the political responsibility of both institutions and strengthen the powers which the European Parliament has recently acquired in the decision-making process .
Based on the principle of equal treatment , Parliament will exercise the same rights as the Council in terms of access to legislative or budgetary documents .
In addition , the high-profile role which Parliament will have in drafting the EU 's annual work programme strengthens citizens ' involvement in setting the priorities for European policies .
( HU ) According to biblical wisdom , good trees yield good fruit and bad trees yield bad fruit .
The Treaty of Lisbon was signed under dictatorial circumstances , which means that it cannot have any democratic consequences .
It has been forced upon nation states , at least upon Hungary , my native land , under expressly dictatorial and anti-democratic circumstances , as it is a treaty that took away from people several decision-making powers concerning their own destiny , behind their back and over their head , and handed them over to Brussels .
By virtue of natural law , the Treaty of Lisbon is obviously invalid , at least in relation to Hungary , firstly , because of a failure to discuss and reconcile this greatly significant treaty with the people , the public and various civil organisations , and secondly , because it was passed without having any idea about the content of the text .
So much for the democratic consequence of this dictatorial treaty .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , first I would like to thank all the speakers , especially those who voiced support for the framework agreement , because I think it is really a very important manual on how we could cooperate and work together better in the future .
I would like once again to underline my gratitude to the working party and the European Parliament team because we spent a lot of time together .
We had 11 rounds of very intense negotiations , but this hard work paid off and I think today we can really celebrate an excellent agreement .
Of course , I have listened with great attention to the comments of the honourable Members and to their questions , some of which reflect concerns about the agreement reached .
I should therefore first underline that it is an important principle for the Commission that established and successful practices of cooperation between our institutions should be preserved .
This means that the revised framework agreement should not lead to any rollback of successful practices .
In fact , I expect that applying the framework agreement will , in all cases , lead to clear improvements .
That said , both parties acknowledged during the negotiations that they will face difficulties with interpretation , but they also expressed a readiness to implement the revised framework agreement in the most constructive way , and I can assure you that the Commission is committed to doing so .
I am convinced that practice will show that many of the concerns expressed today will not materialise .
Also , some expectations which go beyond the competences that the treaties attribute to each of the institutions will have been corrected .
In response to the request from the floor concerning my statement on the Code of conduct , allow me also to confirm that the Commission will soon come forward with a proposal for a revised Code of conduct and , according to the terms of the framework agreement , it will seek Parliament 's opinion in a timely manner , as was promised during the negotiations .
To conclude , let me underline that should we discover any problems , we will sit down together again and seek solutions .
In fact , we have already foreseen a review of the framework agreement for the end of 2011 , which will give us plenty of opportunities to correct any mistakes which may have been made .
In this sense , I am really looking forward to collaborating with you on the basis of this revised framework agreement and I hope and expect that you will support this agreement on Wednesday .
I believe and I hope that this positive spirit will also prevail in the overall relations between all the institutions of the European Union , because this is what the citizens expect from us and this is what we should deliver .
I would like to make my closing speech based on what has been discussed here during this debate .
I would like to conclude by pointing out the following .
One of the major objectives of this framework agreement was that in ordinary legislative and budgetary matters , the Council and Parliament would be placed on an equal footing , that is , a parallel position .
In relation to other matters , the aim was also to respect the balance of power arising from the Treaty of Lisbon and to respect the principle of separation of powers so as to allow Parliament to better exert its political control outside budgetary and ordinary legislative matters .
I believe that the clarification offered by this framework agreement is good for both institutions .
It makes their relationships clearer and more transparent .
Yet it is also good for the other institutions , particularly the Council , because the Council now has a clear basis , with a clear understanding and vision of how it will handle relations between Parliament and the Commission following the improvements made by the Treaty of Lisbon .
Therefore , however much the Council might react emotionally or direct criticism towards the framework agreement , the truth is that there will come a time when it will remember that it was a positive step for all the institutions , and a time when we will have a framework agreement made not for two , but ultimately , as the European public wishes , three institutions , all of which represent their view on the letter and spirit of the Treaty of Lisbon .
I welcome the openness shown by the Commission throughout this process .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 20 October .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
When we began discussions on the new interinstitutional agreement a year ago , we stressed the point that in view of the strengthening of Parliament by the Treaty of Lisbon , the time had come for a new quality in our cooperation with the Commission .
I myself said at the time that , of course , Parliament has gained from Lisbon at the expense of the Commission , but that the devil would be in the detail , and how advantageously our negotiators manage to turn the letter of the treaty into specific provisions in the framework agreement would depend on these details .
Today , we have these provisions , and we have managed to include the stipulations which we made in the resolution at the February plenary sitting , and for this , congratulations are due to our negotiators and the rapporteur for the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , Mr Rangel .
Let us hope that despite the initial friction between us and the Commission over the interpretation of the provisions which had been negotiated , the agreement will contribute to a more efficient and effective cooperation between our institutions .
Data transfer to the US by Member States on the basis of Memoranda of Understanding ( debate )
The next item is the debate on :
the oral question to the Commission by Sophia in ' t Veld and Alexander Alvaro , on behalf of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , and Birgit Sippel , on behalf of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , on data transfer to the US by Member States on the basis of Memoranda of Understanding - B7-0555 / 2010 ) ,
the oral question to the Commission by Rui Tavares and Marie-Christine Vergiat , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on data transfer to the US by Member States on the basis of Memoranda of Understanding - B7-0558 / 2010 ) , and
the oral question to the Commission by Jan Philipp Albrecht , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , on data transfer to the US by Member States on the basis of Memoranda of Understanding - B7-0561 / 2010 ) .
author . - Madam President , I shall be fairly brief .
I think the oral question is very clear .
We are currently working on a PNR package .
The Commission has prepared three draft mandates for negotiations with the United States , Canada and Australia .
In the meantime , however , the Member States are negotiating bilaterally with the United States about the transfer of personal data , or rather , giving the United States access to European databases , including passenger data .
Before this House can take a position on any PNR proposal or any PNR agreement , we need to know what the situation is .
If the Member States are agreeing bilaterally with the United States to transfer PNR data , then I wonder what we are doing in this House .
I have also been told - but there is no way of verifying this because the bilateral agreements and the bilateral negotiations are secret - that it may concern PNR data of non-EU citizens or EU citizens on flights with destinations other than the United States , and therefore , they are not covered by a possible EU-US agreement .
We need clarification on that before we continue the talks on PNR .
Finally , Commissioner , last weekend , I stumbled over another item that we have not been informed about and that might be relevant for this debate .
It is a programme called ' One-Stop Security ' which the Commission is apparently currently negotiating with the United States Transport Security Authority . This would involve the lifting of security checks for US travellers coming to Europe and vice versa .
I find it rather strange that the security checks for European citizens travelling to the United States are becoming stricter and stricter - we even have to pay for our ESTA ( Electronic System for Travel Authorisation ) submission - and , at the same time , the European Commission is negotiating the lifting of security checks for Americans coming this way .
It is about time that the European Commission informs us fully about this programme and about the state of the negotiations , and I would like to know - and I will conclude on that - if it is indeed the case that the United States imposed the security standards which would make this programme possible .
author . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Treaty of Lisbon has been mentioned many times today .
I should like to say something positive about it for once .
Most of our citizens think it is a good thing that we can travel in Europe without borders , that we can move freely about Europe for the purposes of education , work and leisure .
However , in so doing , we naturally leave a data trail behind us .
For a long time now , our data has not just been stored in one Member State , but is spread throughout the European Union .
That is precisely why it is a good thing that we have greater powers at European level in this area - which concerns the protection of data relating to European citizens - because our citizens quite rightly expect their data to be well protected everywhere in Europe and they do not expect large amounts of data to be passed on unnecessarily , possibly even to third countries .
How are we , as the European Union - and I will make myself absolutely clear : as the European Parliament and Council ; in other words , together with the Member States - supposed to ensure this protection if it is the case that while we , as the European Union , are negotiating with third countries on the forwarding of data - over what data is actually required , the purpose for which it is to be used and the safeguards that are necessary in order to protect this data - at the same time , individual Member States are negotiating with third countries on data ?
Especially since we do not even know what data they are talking about , what security standards are being maintained , whether duplicate data is possibly being forwarded , or even whether data is being forwarded that we would not allow to be forwarded at European level .
There is also another aspect that the Member States are perhaps not taking into sufficient consideration .
If a Member State negotiates with a third country , how then can I ensure - how can and will the individual Member State ensure - that only the data of its own citizens is , in fact , forwarded , if any data is forwarded at all ?
We now have databases within the European Union that collect data on all kinds of citizens at a central point and to which many authorities in European countries have access .
In other words , if my data is stored somewhere in country A and country A decides to forward data , will my data also be forwarded to a third country ?
This cannot be the added value in the European Union that was intended when , for good reason , we negotiated the Treaty of Lisbon .
The Member States , too , need to take note of the new balance of power between the institutions , must act accordingly , and must stick to the rules , which state that data protection is a European matter .
We need to ensure at European level that as little data as possible is forwarded and only for narrowly defined purposes , and that this is not all undermined by bilateral initiatives .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on many occasions over the last year , we have discussed various matters relating to data protection and the privacy of European citizens , and we have said that in order to ensure the physical safety of people who travel , for example , by aeroplane , we should protect the personal data of European citizens .
This is an exchange that has both legal and political implications that Parliament should carefully consider .
We know that this is like building a house from the roof down : every time we have a problem , we try to solve that problem .
First , we had Secure Widespread Identities for Federated Telecommunications ( SWIFT ) , and now Passenger Name Record ( PNR ) .
Yet we are failing to build the house from the foundations upwards .
In other words , we are not first determining what the general thinking in Europe is on data protection , and then applying it across the board to every matter and every international partner , whether it be the US today , or China , South Korea , or Saudi Arabia in the future : any of the international partners who request this type of data .
Obviously , while working in this fragmented and piecemeal way , we are already dealing with an extremely difficult framework , and Parliament has tried to make sense of this .
We all know , however , that things should be quite different .
If the situation is already bad , however , it is becoming even worse if reports are confirmed that certain Member States have been negotiating Memoranda of Understanding with the US which allow the direct transfer of data regarding passengers who are travelling from those Member States to the US .
I would like to make clear here that my main complaint is not with the US .
The US is one of our international partners ; it is a country that has many things to admire and with whom we have common interests .
I am , however , complaining about the Member States that are breaking with the negotiations that we should be having at European level .
This shows disloyalty on the part of those Member States , and it undermines not only the negotiations which are under way with the US , but also interinstitutional understanding within the EU itself .
It also undermines the possibility that we might later reach an agreement with the US - a framework agreement on data protection , for which Mr Albrecht is the rapporteur .
This is also the kind of attitude that can have unpredictable effects , because if the US is now negotiating with individual Member States , what is to stop it from later exchanging citizens ' data with individual airlines , or even via a direct approach , dealing with them individually at the time of buying a ticket ?
Someone has to stand up and defend the rights of the 500 million European citizens .
Parliament has been doing it at this level .
It is important that the Commission , the Member States and the US are aware that , in the case of PNR , Parliament has its finger on the button .
Moreover , as it has already shown in the case of SWIFT , Parliament is not afraid to use its prerogatives , whether in order to interrupt an interim agreement or to reject a permanent agreement which does not meet the guarantees on data privacy and security concerning European citizens .
author . - ( DE ) Mr President , representatives of the Commission , I urge you to take this question that we have asked extremely seriously , because what we are concerned with here is the fundamental matter - as has just been said - of whether there is any point in working on data protection provisions if , at the same time , agreements are being negotiated behind the back of the European Parliament , and perhaps even behind the backs of the national parliaments , that undermine these standards .
Close transatlantic cooperation on security - all transatlantic cooperation - is very important , particularly when it comes to creating an area of freedom and justice .
However , we must not allow this to result in collective security interests being asserted while individual freedoms and basic rights are left behind .
This applies particularly to data protection in international cooperation .
As Parliament , we have repeatedly made clear over many years that we consider it important in all these measures - whether it is the forwarding of PNR data or access to SWIFT banking data - that there are generally applicable data protection principles that can also be implemented at an individual level .
This is something that is constantly being neglected .
For this reason , as Parliament , we have also made it clear that we want to have general standards that are applicable throughout the EU and which are then agreed with the US .
I was rapporteur for the EU 's framework agreement with the US and I feel obliged to say that it is highly important that this applies not just to EU agreements by the Member States , but also to Member States ' agreements .
It is obvious that this is an area in which powers are shared ; in other words , bilateral agreements by Member States with the US will always exist in parallel .
There is nothing wrong with that , provided firstly , that these do not result in a lowering or undermining of the standards agreed jointly at European level - which is what this debate is about - and secondly , that they remain within the legal framework in force .
Now , following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , we not only have the situation that the European Parliament has quite rightly been involved in these matters , but we also have a legal framework that states that where powers are shared , then it is the case that if regulations have been passed at EU level - such as for PNR data - then this area is out of bounds to the Member States .
In my opinion , the Member States cannot then be allowed to start their own negotiations with the US in this area , because this quite simply undermines our negotiating position on data protection .
I therefore urge you , as the European Commission , to intervene in this matter where the Member States are concerned and to make it clear to the Council Presidency that these negotiations must be halted and that , above all , the legal basis that applies post Treaty of Lisbon must be clarified .
It is clear to us , as Parliament , that the EU needs to speak with one voice in the negotiations , and the Commission - whose proposals I consider correct in many cases - should also be told that the following clear principle must apply at all accounts : we must negotiate with one voice only , and not constantly conduct new negotiations on a bilateral basis .
Member of the Commission . - I very much welcome questions from Members of Parliament .
I would like to declare from the very beginning that the Commission shares their sensitivities on the protection of the data of our citizens .
Let me refer to the issue from the very beginning .
You perhaps know that this is not a new issue .
In August 2007 , the United States modernised the Visa Waiver Programme by adding certain conditions to further enhance security .
We have to admit that these conditions affect all EU Member States , whether they are in the US Visa Waiver Programme or not .
They provide that , in order for a country to enter or to continue to be in the Visa Waiver Programme , it would need to agree to cooperate with the United States on law enforcement issues .
In particular , it would need to exchange law enforcement information .
This new law led the EU to follow a twin-track approach , as you have already mentioned .
Under the EU track , negotiations started between the EU and the United States regarding certain conditions for access to the US Visa Waiver Programme which fall under EU competence .
The EU track dealt with the return policy of all nationals , security of travel documents and airport security .
These issues fall under our competence .
The bilateral track , which still exists between the US and individual Member States , was used to satisfy the United States ' requirement for cooperation on counter-terrorism initiatives and information sharing .
For Member States not yet in the Visa Waiver Programme , concluding agreements on these issues is a pre-condition to be designated as a Visa Waiver Programme country .
We have to take care of this .
For Member States already in the Visa Waiver Programme , such negotiations would take place at a later stage , so it is much easier for them .
According to information the Commission gathered from the Member States , this is the only way to deal with the issue .
Eight Member States signed Memoranda of Understanding with the United States stating that they agreed to cooperate with the United States on such matters .
These are the Czech Republic , Estonia , Greece , Latvia , Lithuania , Hungary , Malta and Slovakia .
This was the problem they were trying to solve .
In this way , these eight Member States were able to join the Visa Waiver Programme , which is why they did it .
The Commission understands that the Memoranda of Understanding were not intended to be , in themselves , the legal basis for the exchange of data between the United States and the relevant Member States .
They merely express the intention of the two parties to have specific arrangements and agreements to govern the exchange of data .
This is what they are about .
I have to underline that information about the precise content of the Memorandum of Understanding is held by the Member States themselves .
This includes the categories of data that are covered by them .
Therefore , if the European Parliament wants to seek additional information , you have to seek it from the Member States concerned .
However , the Commission - and I am coming to our responsibility now - has ensured that the United States would not request bilateral arrangements with the Member States on the exchange of PNR data since this was a matter falling within EU competence under the relevant EU-United States PNR agreement .
This is what we have done .
Finally , in the negotiations on the EU-US Agreement , there was an exchange of letters to record that the US legal requirements for continued participation in the VWP were satisfied for matters which fall under EU competence .
In this context , the Commission made clear that this exchange of letters , which is part of ongoing negotiations , could not provide access to the EU database .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I have listened to your responses and I must confess that I am perplexed , because on the one hand , the Commission says that if we want more information , we must go and knock on the door of the Member States .
This can only be interpreted one way : the Commission says that it has no ability to put pressure on the Member States or to intervene in this matter .
On the other hand , however , it then says that the Commission asked the US Government not to request data which undermine access to European databases .
I do not understand why the Commission thinks that it is easier to go and ask the US Government instead of establishing contacts with the Member States and the governments of the EU Member States .
I must confess that there seems to me to be only one explanation for this : it shows that the Commission is in a weak position and means that the concerns that Parliament has expressed on this matter make complete sense .
We are primarily concerned with the fact that the US has used a ' divide and conquer ' strategy , apparently with impunity .
Secondly , we are concerned with the fact that several Member States have decided to pursue bilateral relations and negotiations , showing a certain lack of European solidarity .
Yet we are also worried about the attitude of resignation and shirking of responsibility on the part of the European institutions , which does not give us any greater power in negotiation .
Europe must have a voice on this issue .
We must ensure that there is no access to databases through bilateral agreements .
Moreover , the cloak of secrecy that surrounds these negotiations , the fact that certain representatives from the Member States or national parliaments have revealed the contents of Memoranda of Understanding , and the fact that this Parliament continues to lack information on this issue , are fundamental reasons to back up our concern , and this has not been resolved by the answers that the Commission has just given .
Mr President , I would like to express my great thanks to the Commissioner , who is answering this question on behalf of her colleague , Mrs Malmström .
We very much appreciate your doing so .
To be honest , however , I think we are not working from the same facts .
The essence of this is not just about the use of DNA databases .
My fellow Members have avoided mentioning that explicitly : the requesting of DNA data , the requesting of fingerprints , the requesting of data on criminal convictions - and all via the system that we created with the Prüm Convention .
Where that is concerned , we are talking about an elementary part of European policy .
Quite honestly , that is not really what concerns me here .
That is something we can talk about , we can have an exchange on it , we can find and debate ways and means if we consider it right to do so .
What annoys me is that neither the Council nor the Commission has the backbone to tell the US that its behaviour is not acceptable .
You cannot use the Visa Waiver Programme to blackmail Member States - in this case Austria , hardly a new Member State - by saying : we will take away your visa waiver if you are not prepared to give us this data .
What is interesting to note is that a Member State of the European Union cannot unilaterally withdraw its visa waiver from the US - in response , so to speak - because our agreement states that it is the EU as a whole that grants the visa waiver .
What annoys me is the tone , and that nobody has the backbone to stand up and say that while we want to work with you and have a transatlantic partnership , in any good relationship - just as in any good marriage - good manners and respect are an important part of making it work .
That is precisely what we expect from our relationship with the people of the US and with US policy , and we would like the Commission and the Council to place greater emphasis on this .
( DE ) Mr President , as soon as the SWIFT agreement had been negotiated , it became clear that what had been sold to us as data protection was , in fact , an embarrassing case of Europeans having pulled the wool over their own eyes .
Now my opinion has become official : the EU 's own monitoring system has not - as I suspected - turned out to be a placebo , a sedative for critics , within the space of a few years , but rather after just a few months .
It is clear that the US does not give a fig about agreements .
Once again , the US has shown that it is not interested in partners , but at best only in states that say yes and amen to every omnipotent act of the almighty US .
We have had to grit our teeth and acknowledge that for years , the US has been eagerly helping itself to European banking data , and that when we then insisted on European standards of data protection in an agreement and appointed an EU monitoring system , the US was happy to agree to this because it could still have untrammelled access to data via the bilateral back door .
In my opinion , we should not wait for the next transatlantic talks , but should bring this nightmare to an end right now .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to endorse what one of the previous speakers said .
We greatly appreciate your coming here personally and making a statement .
I realise that this is not your specialist area .
However , I feel bound to state that the Commission 's statement is extremely unsatisfactory .
Something has happened here to which I really must draw your attention .
All the main groups in this House want to discuss the principle .
We are appalled , to put it mildly , that the Commission is not taking action .
It was the same with SWIFT .
At the last plenary session , we had to make the Commission aware of the USD 14 entry fee .
Today , a fellow Member has quite rightly asked : What is the Commission doing ?
What are the Member States doing ?
Now I hear that there are even discussions on giving Americans preferential treatment over Europeans !
We need to state quite clearly that we want to have a very serious discussion with the Commission on the fundamentals .
The fundamentals include reciprocity at least .
It means that rather than allowing access to European data , such data must be retrieved under a push procedure .
These are principles that are now even more warranted ; likewise , citizens ' rights - namely that the citizen has a right to know what data about him is being used where , and how it is being used , and naturally , this should be based on a European concept .
What we are hearing today is that the Commission is actually weakening our negotiating position with the US by not going to the Member States and coordinating this , and secondly , by not taking action itself .
When will the negotiations start ?
When is action going to be taken ?
In the case of SWIFT , pressure from Parliament resulted in this suddenly being done within a month .
We need to see the same kind of action in respect of PNR and data in general .
( CS ) Although it is necessary to fight terrorism vigorously and with all means available , it is not possible , in the context of international cooperation in this area , to circumvent the democratic standards which operate in the nations of the transatlantic area .
I am therefore very disappointed that in the latest case of bilateral contractual relations between the Union and the US , the Commission and the Member States have not learned the lessons from past mistakes , and are making deals behind the backs of the European Parliament and the national parliaments .
Because of the rapid agreement , which seems to be more tailored to the needs of the American pre-election campaign , they call legitimacy , transparency and democratic control into question .
Furthermore , all of this comes at a time when the US has imposed a fee on the visa waiver scheme for the Union , which was signed on the basis of European public opinion .
Personally , I do not have a problem with transferring selected personal data on European citizens , such as air passengers , to developed democratic countries , but it must take place in accordance with all legal provisions in a way that can be examined by an independent body , such as Members of Parliament or judges .
( SK ) Transfer of citizens ' personal data is always a sensitive issue , be it from the civil perspective or the human rights perspective .
Transfer of data about the citizens of the Member States of the European Union as regards the United States is justified particularly by our counter-terrorism efforts and our joint interest in the safety of our citizens .
This is certainly a noble cause , but at times , I have the feeling that in the name of the war on terror , we are increasingly depriving our citizens of their privacy .
I have no wish to devalue the negotiations between the European Union and the US , and I remain convinced that the US is our closest ally .
On the other hand , the mere fact that the US negotiates both individually and bilaterally with the Member States and not solely with the European Union as a whole already speaks for itself .
In conclusion , I would like to support those Member States that have already concluded a memorandum .
This happened because these particular countries had had visa-based relationships with the United States , and because the European Union was not acting as one , those countries had no other choice but to sign the bilateral memoranda .
However , I believe that in future , the European Union will take a more prominent role as opposed to the individual Member States .
( SK ) I firmly believe that we must continue our efforts to counter terrorism which continues to represent a great danger to the civilised world .
However , the handling of the personal data of travelling Europeans under the pretext of counter-terrorism prevention appears to be uncoordinated and unorganised .
It is the United States that is the main collector of personal data , collecting data relating to European Union citizens both on the basis of agreements with the European Union and on the basis of bilateral agreements made with individual countries .
I believe that this twin-track approach should no longer be tolerated .
We should amend the handling of personal data relating to EU citizens in such a way as to prevent the right to personal data protection being violated by some semi-legal procedures of the Member States .
In our relationship with the US , we must therefore apply reciprocity and painstakingly ensure that the rules are acceptable to us Europeans too , and that European data or the data of EU citizens are shared in accordance with the rules that are in force in Europe .
Mrs Morvai , I am taking this intervention as an exception .
Colleagues , the one minute intervention does not work at the last minute .
If you want to participate in this process , I kindly ask you to raise your hand way in advance .
I am making an exception because there are not many people on the list this time .
Thank you very much Mr President .
Take it as a mitigating circumstance that there is apparently not a great deal of excitement and interest in this important subject , so I am not wasting many people 's time .
Any data protection process or any procedure violating fundamental data protection interests must be related to a clearly identifiable aim and should have the ability to achieve that justifiable aim .
What exactly , according to the US , is the justifiable aim , and how will the transfer of personal data be able to achieve that aim ?
In other words , how are they going to use these data ?
That is my first question to the Commission .
I would also like to ask why they use two different levels of scrutiny - one for the ' old ' Member States and one for the ' newer ' Member States , including my own country , Hungary .
Why would a Hungarian citizen be more dangerous from the point of view of terrorism than any citizen from the ' older ' Member States ?
Did this issue arise during the negotiations , or is it going to be an issue ?
author . - Mr President , thank you for allowing me to ask for clarification on two points .
I was rather surprised to hear the Commission say that the issue of the Visa Waiver Programme affects the Member States only - at least I think that is what you said , Commissioner .
Back in 2007 , the European Commission initially said that it had exclusive competence in that area , and it eventually had to cede competence to the Member States .
Am I correct in thinking that the European Commission has now changed its views on its own competences ?
Secondly , Commissioner , you say that there is no reference in any of the MOUs to the transfer of PNR data .
Well , I can give you a copy of one of the MOUs that mentions PNR .
Does that indicate that the Commission itself does not even know what is going on ?
Now I will clarify something for you , Madam Commissioner .
This Parliament has decided to postpone the vote on two PNR agreements because we felt that we could trust the Commission to be equally responsible as an EU institution as we are at the European Parliament .
I am beginning to wonder whether the Commission deserves that trust .
I hope you will not disappoint us .
( Applause )
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all , I would like to say that I find this discussion very interesting and that I am here to give explanations to you , but I cannot accept the claims that the Commission is not sensitive about protecting the data of EU citizens , nor can I accept the claim that I am here just to replace my colleague , without knowledge of the issue or of what is happening .
We all know very well in the Commission - very well indeed - what is happening and I can tell you that we really are sensitive about protecting the data of our citizens .
Let us come to facts now : do we have to respect the Lisbon Treaty or not ?
What is your proposal ?
To ignore the Council ?
I have heard you say , in a very easy way , that you would like the European voice to be unique on this issue .
I agree with you : I would also like that .
So what do you prefer ?
To tell the Commission to ignore the Council completely ?
I would like to inform you - and I am talking about facts here , not dreams - that we have already asked the Council , as you are well aware , for this is not something new .
We proposed to the Council last May that if the future EU-US framework has any reference to personal data , this should also apply to the data of Member States .
We proposed what you have all talked about here .
If it is agreed , then we will go for it .
This is the case .
But if it is not agreed with the Council , what do you propose we do ?
Do we go to the Member States and say that we cannot go any further ?
I understood that such is your proposal and my reply is very simple : we have to respect the Lisbon Treaty .
So , moving on to some other very interesting issues : I have heard a lot about the European database and about the Prüm database .
My answer is that if the Member States have Memoranda of Understanding and bilateral agreements , they may be able to give data on their own nationals .
They cannot give data from the EU database or the Prüm database and I was very clear on that point .
I was also very clear that we have asked the United States - and we have sent letters and are still negotiating on this - to agree that the bilateral agreements cannot refer to PNR data .
This is not to say that Member States may not have tried to negotiate with the United States , but this is the position of the Commission .
I understand your concerns very well , but we have to move forward to negotiate in a better way - the best way - with the United States and try to have some binding rules for the Member States within this agreement , because that is the only way to achieve exactly what you want to achieve .
That is the way we can do things , so the Commission is going in that direction : we are now negotiating with the United States and we are trying to have an agreement that is binding on the Member States .
That is why we have gone to the Council and said : please be sure that , if this is agreed and if we can protect the data in our track - the track between the EU and the United States - then you have to do the same .
Do you have any other proposal based on the legal framework that we have to respect ?
If so , I am very willing to hear of it .
If there is no such proposal , however , please understand that we , too , are very sensitive about citizens ' data and are trying to protect them , but we also try to respect the Member States and to respect the Council .
This issue is ongoing .
I hear all your concerns and I will try to take them all on board .
What the Commission can do is go to the Council and say stop talking with any other country .
What we can say is that we are going to negotiate and afterwards try to bind them to our track .
This is the way we can do things .
Madam Commissioner , allow me simply , because I have knowledge of the issue , to underline that virtually every political group in this Chamber has expressed major concerns , as you have heard .
We do have a PNR agreement being re-negotiated and coming through .
It is extremely important to this Parliament that the Commission takes these concerns very seriously and that we do not have the sense of disconnect that we had , for example , with the SWIFT agreement .
We have also pointed out in the recent past in these discussions the grey areas that are very dangerous .
For example , if every Member State were to give to a third country the data that it places in European databases - let us say Schengen - you might end up having the third country collecting all the data in the Schengen database .
Although it does not get it from Schengen , it gets it individually from each Member State .
In that sense , as you very correctly mentioned , we are grateful for the forcefulness with which the Commission is protecting the Community pillar of this situation .
Allow me as well to ask you to make sure that this gets done in the best possible way .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I agree with you that we have to take all the concerns on board and I agree with you that there is an area of concern .
This is something I have made clear from the very outset and I would like you to understand that .
In the Commission , we are trying to find legal ways that respect the treaties to solve this problem , to protect data , and to try and enhance the Community pillar of this situation .
However , it is not the only pillar we have .
I would like you to remember that I have understood all the concerns .
I would like you to understand that we have asked for a commitment from the Council .
If we are successful and really have protection of personal data in our agreement , then we have asked the Council to commit to this .
This is the only legal way to move forward .
The debate is closed .
Convention on Future Multilateral Cooperation in the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries - Scheme of control and enforcement applicable in the area covered by the Convention on future multilateral cooperation in the North-East Atlantic fisheries ( debate )
Τhe next item is the joint debate on the following :
the recommendation by Jarosław Leszek Wałęsa , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council decision concerning the approval , on behalf of the European Union , of the Amendment to the Convention on Future Multilateral Cooperation in the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries ( 11076 / 2010 - C7-0181 / 2010 - 2010 / 0042 ( NLE ) ) and
the report by Carmen Fraga Estévez , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council laying down a Scheme of control and enforcement applicable in the area covered by the Convention on future multilateral cooperation in the North-East Atlantic Fisheries - C7-0009 / 2009 - .
( The President emphasised that the speakers were required to adhere strictly to their speaking times )
The convention which I have the honour of presenting was signed in Ottawa in 1978 and came into force on 1 January 1979 .
The Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organisation , NAFO for short , was created under the convention in order to support the conservation and optimum utilisation of fish stocks and to support international cooperation .
The contracting parties adopted amendments to it at NAFO annual meetings in 2007 and 2008 .
This document introduces fundamental changes to the convention , the principal aim being to bring its wording into line with other conventions at a regional level and with international instruments , and to incorporate modern concepts of fisheries management .
The organisational structure has been updated , a clear division of responsibilities between the contracting parties , flag states and port states has been introduced , a more coherent decision-making process has been created , the system for contributions to the NAFO budget has been reformed and a mechanism for settling disputes which may arise between contracting parties has been provided .
In the light of the fisheries rights granted to the European Union under the convention , ratification of the proposed changes lies in the interests of the European Union .
As a result , we should agree to ratify the changes to the convention .
Having said this , I would like to emphasise , clearly and precisely , a few problems which have surfaced during ratification at this time .
Firstly , the contracting parties adopted changes at a NAFO annual meeting in 2007 , and an English version was produced .
In 2008 , a French version was produced , but the COM document , being the Commission 's proposal on transposition into Community law , is dated 8 March 2010 .
This means that work on the document has taken over two years .
Such a delay is unacceptable and should not be repeated in the future .
Rapid decision making is a necessary condition for the efficient functioning of the Union .
Three institutions , the Commission , the Council and Parliament , must find an appropriate solution to avoid delaying the procedure and to realise one of the main aims of the Treaty of Lisbon , which is to simplify and accelerate the decision-making process .
The current case which has been presented for ratification is proof that something is still wrong and action needs to be taken urgently to rectify the situation .
Secondly , I would like to remind you that the Treaty of Lisbon came into force in December 2009 .
In the context of these newly acquired rights , the Committee on Fisheries and the European Parliament should be properly represented during any subsequent negotiations on future international conventions .
In 2007 and 2008 , the European Parliament was not represented , for obvious reasons .
Our institution is , however , ready to ratify the agreement within the framework of its competences , but at the same time , the Council and Commission should be reminded of the new procedural requirements and the necessity of complying with the new powers of the European Parliament .
Mr President , allow me to express my gratitude to the Council and the Commission for arriving at this excellent agreement at first reading , and I would particularly like to thank the legal services of all three institutions for their cooperation and help in resolving the problems arising from the new committee procedure following the Treaty of Lisbon .
I believe that we have reached a good compromise , especially as it represents significant progress compared with the current situation , although , as in any compromise , we have all had to make concessions and be flexible , in what has been an especially complex task , as the Commission proposal arrived before the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
This meant that at the same time , it had to be adapted to the new situation , in particular , to Articles 290 and 291 of the treaty , relating to delegated acts and implementing acts .
As this is a transposition into EU legislation of recommendations issued by a regional fisheries organisation , the North-East Atlantic Fisheries Commission ( NEAFC ) in this case , but which will be followed by many others , Parliament 's objective was fundamentally to establish a mechanism which would enable the transpositions to take place as quickly as possible , preventing internal bureaucratic delays from preventing us from responding correctly to our international obligations , as has been the case so far .
Therefore , the new wording of Article 48 , following the compromise reached with the Council on the subsequent amendments to this regulation , will enable the Commission both to comply with the obligations imposed by the NEAFC and to adapt to new recommendations that may arise in the future , through the delegation of powers .
It is true that the Commission wanted it to be possible to revise all the articles in the proposal through delegated acts , and the compromise agrees that this will be the case for the majority of the articles , except in areas such as the recording of catches , tranships , inspections or monitoring of infringements : in other words , fundamentally matters relating to control and supervision , which will remain outside the framework of the ordinary legislative procedure .
In any case , Commissioner , Parliament commits to amending this procedure if it is shown that the inclusion of these aspects within the scope of the ordinary legislative procedure could endanger compliance with the European Union 's obligations and , especially , those of the Commission , as a contracting party to the regional fisheries organisation .
This is why we consider that this compromise represents a significant step forward , not only in relation to this specific proposal , but in order to lay the foundations for future discussions between the Council , the Commission and Parliament on fisheries policy .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission urges Parliament to give its consent to the approval of amendments to the Convention on Future Multilateral Cooperation in the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries , known collectively as the Amendment to the NAFO Convention .
I would like to thank Mr Wałęsa for his helpful work on this report .
This amendment revises the convention to bring it more into line with other regional conventions and international instruments .
It incorporates modern concepts of fisheries management ; it streamlines the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organisation ( NAFO ) structure ; and it introduces a clear definition of the responsibilities of contracting parties , flag states and port states and a more coherent decision-making process .
It modernises the contribution formula for the NAFO budget and provides for a mechanism to settle disputes between contracting parties .
This thorough amendment will help the EU fulfil its international obligations on sustainable fisheries and further the objectives of the treaty .
Speedy ratification of the amendment is in the EU 's interest and I therefore commend it to the House .
I would turn now to the second report , on the scheme of control and enforcement applicable in the area covered by the Convention on Future Multilateral Cooperation in the North-East Atlantic Fisheries .
I would like to thank Ms Fraga Estévez for her work on this report .
I am pleased to see the very strong support from the Committee on Fisheries on the substance of this important proposal .
The implementation of the North-East Atlantic Fisheries Commission ( NEAFC ) scheme of control and enforcement is indeed a key measure to help us manage fishery resources in the Atlantic region and to get rid of illegal , unreported and unregulated ( IUU ) fishing .
However , I must point out that the Commission is not entirely happy with the package deal made between Parliament and the Council during their trialogue with the Commission .
I am , indeed , disappointed by certain results , in particular , on Article 48 , dealing with the procedure for amendments to the regulation .
The Commission has been seeking more sufficient delegated powers for transposing future amendments to the scheme .
Let me explain why - and I would like you to be attentive because we will have the same problems in the future .
As you know , the European Union needs to implement this scheme fully because it is our international obligation under the NEAF Convention to do so .
Under this convention , amendments normally become binding for us 80 days after adoption .
So we have 80 days to implement them .
I am really concerned that the limited powers delegated to the Commission by the colegislators may hinder the timely transposition of the amendments into EU law .
This is the reality and this is an answer to Mr Wałęsa 's concerns about the timetable .
While it will not be my responsibility to endorse the arrangement , I would like you to be aware of the problem .
Ultimately , we need to avoid turning the transposition of NEAFC measures into a modern version of the myth of Sisyphus .
As matters stand , measures adopted by the NEAFC last year will have been transposed by the time the package deal is finally adopted , but next month , NEAFC will most likely adopt new amendments requiring effective transposition into EU law early in 2011 .
We will therefore need more time for this .
The Commission therefore considers this regulation to be without prejudice to any future position of the institution as regards the use of Articles 290 and 291 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union for the transposition of Regional Fisheries Management Organisation measures .
The Commission furthermore reserves the right to propose amendments to the regulation , increasing the number of measures which should be adopted by delegated or implementing acts .
We will do this if transposition through the ordinary legislative procedure leads to delays which would compromise our duty to comply with international obligations .
In the meantime , I would like once again to thank Ms Fraga Estévez and Mr Wałęsa for their reports and the Committee on Fisheries for its work on these important issues .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am going to speak primarily about the report by Mrs Fraga Estévez .
It is a report on which we are voicing our opinion today and which is of paramount importance for the strengthening of controls in the North-East Atlantic and for the European Parliament 's role as colegislator on matters relating to the common fisheries policy .
Indeed , one of the priorities of Parliament 's Committee on Fisheries is to combat illegal , unreported and unregulated fishing , which directly affects our fishermen and our European fishing industries .
They are , in fact , victims of the unfair competition of an underground fishing industry .
Illegal ship-owners exploit underpaid crews and sell fishery products at very low prices .
Their failure to comply with the law of the sea , the International Labour Organisation conventions and the IUU Regulation of 1 January 2010 means that European ship-owners are now uncompetitive due to the labour costs they have to bear .
We want upwards harmonisation of the rules and working conditions applicable to fishing carried out in the European Union by third countries .
European fishermen also respect strict management and control rules that allow for the preservation of resources and the sustainable development of European fisheries , but these rules must not penalise our fishermen in relation to those who fail to respect them .
I therefore call for the controls to be strengthened and the penalties against this illegal fishing to be properly applied .
In this connection , I congratulate our Chair on her report , which points out that the control scheme adopted by the North-East Atlantic Fisheries Commission ( NEAFC ) must be transposed into European law without delay ; more specifically , I welcome the introduction of the programme promoting compliance by non-contracting party vessels .
This report also clarifies the scope of Article 290 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union with regard to delegated acts .
I welcome the addition in an annex of three statements laying down the conditions for implementing delegated acts , which enable the Commission 's implementing powers to be monitored and the institutional balance to be maintained .
I would point out that Parliament as legislator must be entirely free to act on matters pertaining to delegation .
Mr President , Commissioner Damanaki , ladies and gentlemen , I am pleased that we are able to adopt a regulation that represents one more small step towards our shared goal of sustainable fisheries .
The regional fisheries organisations are extraordinarily important institutions for good management worldwide .
Unfortunately , the negotiations are often difficult and progress much too slow for impatient people such as me .
We must therefore do all we can to strengthen the regional fisheries organisations .
I will now comment on the specific outcome of the NEAFC report .
I believe that the new port state control ruling in the NEAFC and the new measures to prevent illegal fisheries are very much to be welcomed .
Nonetheless , we had to conduct intensive negotiations with the Council and Commission on matters that seem extremely technical at first glance , but which are important for our future work .
I think we have found a compromise that is acceptable to all parties in the matter of delegated acts .
We also succeeded in reaching agreement on how future NEAFC decisions are to be transposed into EU law .
It is no secret , however , that the Commission is not very happy with the result achieved here .
I can understand that .
We cannot allow it to take years for the European Union to implement NEAFC decisions .
In this respect , Council and Parliament must together prove that we are able to conclude a codecision procedure quickly where necessary .
Finally , I would like to say something about a matter that is very current : the dispute with Iceland over mackerel fishing .
We already have the NEAFC , which governs the international waters of the North-East Atlantic .
In the case of migratory species such as mackerel , however , we also need an agreement that applies in territorial waters .
As you know , that is still a sticking point .
I feel it is extremely regrettable that , despite the cooperation working in the main , there is so much dispute over this .
How about giving the regional fisheries organisations authority for coastal waters - at least for migratory species ?
It would be a radical step , of course , but undoubtedly one worth considering .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Convention on Future Multilateral Cooperation in the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries established a very important organisation : the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organisation , or NAFO .
Its aim is the conservation and optimum utilisation of the fishery resources in the Northwest Atlantic .
The convention has since been amended and brought more into line with other regional conventions .
Modern concepts such as stock management have been incorporated .
I feel it is important that the structure of the organisation is streamlined and that the obligations of the contracting parties are clearly defined .
It is also good that the possibility of resolving conflicts through a dispute settlement procedure is provided .
The fishing possibilities accruing to the European Union under the convention are of great interest to the EU .
Parliament should give its approval under the new powers granted to it by the Treaty of Lisbon .
As shadow rapporteur for the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , I commend Mr Wałesa 's report to the House .

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I wish to thank the rapporteurs , Mrs Fraga Estévez and Mr Wałęsa , for the reports we have discussed today .
The North-East Atlantic Fisheries Commission ( NEAFC ) is a very important regional fisheries organisation - or RFMO - for Europe and for ecosystems in the North Atlantic .
An independent review of the NEAFC 's performance was positive overall , something which is not always the case for RFMOs .
Even though the NEAFC is performing better than other RFMOs , the status of the main fish stocks in the convention area is at a critical point .
For economic and social aspects , the performance cannot be evaluated , which leads to huge uncertainties as to whether or not the Convention 's objective of optimal utilisation is met .
However , improvements in monitoring control and surveillance establishments and enforcement of blacklists for IUU vessels and port state measures are important accomplishments .
Another result of the evaluation was the establishment of a dispute resolution mechanism , but it has taken far too long for the EU to transpose this into legislation .
These measures were adopted by the NEAFC as early as 2006 and have only now entered into force .
The EU must be better prepared to respond to new developments and to live up to international responsibilities .
Combating illegal fisheries is of increasing importance .
In some fisheries , 30 % of the catch is illegal .
On a global scale , 11 to 26 million tonnes of fish , worth an estimated USD 23 billion , are landed illegally each year .
This is equivalent to about one-fifth of the global reported catch .
Illegal fisheries undermine sustainable fisheries management particularly , but not only , on the high seas and in coastal waters of developing countries .
They also have substantial environmental , social and economic consequences .
The entry into force of the control regulation and the IUU regulations are important tools for the EU .
In the CCAMLR ( Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources ) area , IUU operators have been shown to respond to management measures aimed at reducing IUU by changing fishing grounds , ports , landings and flag states .
This adaptive capacity has resulted in an arms race between IUU operators and fisheries management bodies at national and international level .
Compliance mechanisms in an RFMO can lead to IUU vessels changing fishing grounds .
IUU vessel operators now routinely keep changing flag states - or ' flag hopping ' .
This is something that the EU has to address .
The EU needs to go further .
Cooperation between RFMOs is essential , but we should also take the initiative of drawing up a global register of fishing vessels , including all support vessels , which clearly shows the beneficial owner of a vessel .
The EU must take greater responsibility in addressing IUU fishing globally .
To begin , I would like to congratulate the rapporteurs on their extremely significant and important reports , and particularly on the reports regulating inspections .
In view of the situation where there are areas in waters belonging to the European Union which are not inspected or completely disregarded by checks , action should be taken to inspect all fishing waters throughout the European Union .
In the context of inspections , it should , however , be pointed out that there is no uniform system of distributing quotas or reporting catches by individual Member States .
The analyses which have been presented prove that the Commission itself does not have the know-how in this field , and on more than one occasion , the opinions presented by representatives of the Commission have been contradictory .
At the same time , regional advisory agencies do not have the know-how either .
It is worth reminding everyone of the tragic situation of the herring population in the Western Baltic .
There have been investigations into the reasons for the crisis since 2004 .
No reasonable explanation has been found as yet .
It is incomprehensible that the problem of overproduction of fish meal and fish oil has been omitted .
The issue of the Fisheries Control Agency in Vigo which , in certain cases , has presented inspection reports subjectively , as in the case of the Eastern Baltic , should be considered .
The inspection of industrial fishing units is also mired in controversy .
However , a fundamental issue now is the construction of the northern pipeline , in the case of which fishermen have to stand up for their due rights and reclaim lost benefits on their own .
All this forces us to carry out a more thorough analysis which should be incorporated in a future common fisheries policy , and every report should fulfil this policy .
Mr President , Commissioner Damanaki , you are indeed having a busy evening since we have already met in the Fisheries Committee .
Firstly , I want to offer my thanks to the rapporteurs for these reports and to reiterate the comments of many colleagues here tonight about their concern over the delay in progressing these matters .
However , I really want to use this opportunity in the House to turn to fisheries agreements in a more general way and to stress the need for cooperation from all of those parties to these agreements .
This was outlined by the Commissioner when she indicated that agreements require the exercise of responsibility from all those involved .
Now , imagine you have just made a multi-million pound investment in a new state-of-the-art factory which annually produces a high value product from a renewable and sustainable resource to the highest internationally recognised standards .
Then your neighbour decides to tear up that international agreement and unilaterally declare that they are massively extending their share of the natural resource that your business depends upon .
This is exactly what has happened with mackerel and , in particular , one fishing family from Northern Ireland .
Of course , I refer to the Coastal States Agreement between the EU , Norway , Iceland and the Faroe Islands .
Commissioner , we have already heard you and we appreciate the strong stand that you have been taking on this particular issue .
We want to recognise your efforts on behalf of these fishermen , but we also want to urge both Parliament and the Commission to stand strong with you as you continue to negotiate a resolution to what is becoming a very difficult and a very fraught situation .
Mr President , there are three speakers from Ireland here this evening : Mrs Dodds , who has spoken ; Pat the Cope , who is speaking shortly ; and myself .
Between the three of us , we represent almost the entire fishing community of the island of Ireland .
Fishing has been very important to our country for many years .
We have wonderful coastal communities that are dependent on fishing , but , as I have said here before , I have never encountered more disillusionment amongst any group of people than I have among those fishermen .
This is a result of quotas , illegal fishing , lack of traceability from fish to fork and , in particular , over-zealous regulation , draconian penalties and being undercut by fish imports of dubious quality and dubious origin .
Thankfully , the rapporteurs have addressed some of these issues here this evening .
I particularly welcome the North-East Atlantic Fisheries Convention 's proposed ban on frozen fish being landed at European ports without ratification by the flag state of the foreign vessel .
That is a very important matter and I hope it will be implemented with the same zeal with which we implement our own regulations affecting our own fishing communities .
The rapporteurs pointed out that it is important for Parliament to maintain its prerogative to scrutinise future amendments to the convention , but it is equally important that the Commission and Parliament work closely together to get the best possible benefits for our coastal communities , which are largely our fishing communities .
Finally , we should not miss this opportunity to look at all the possibilities open to us for developing aquaculture .
There are far too many fish being imported into the European Union which we could actually be producing ourselves .
There is certainly a great opportunity to develop aquaculture in these times of economic crisis .

( ES ) Mr President , I would like to thank Mrs Damanaki for being here and to congratulate the rapporteurs , Mr Wałesa and Mrs Fraga .
Mrs Fraga 's report is the result of the recommendations on the control scheme adopted by the North-East Atlantic Fisheries Commission ( NEAFC ) in 2006 , although the Convention was drawn up in 1982 , and it redefines the rules for control and enforcement for vessels in the Convention areas .
Mrs Fraga 's report is the legal framework included in the proposal for a regulation to apply the measures at European level .
The main changes are : promoting compliance with the rules by vessels in the non-contracting area , a new control system , banning landings of frozen fish whose legality cannot be proven , realigning with other conventions , fisheries management measures and new measures to combat illegal fishing .
I would like to highlight something that other fellow Members have already pointed out .
Mrs Fraga 's report mentions that the recommendation on the control scheme was adopted in 2006 , although the convention was signed in 1982 , 28 years ago , while the convention referred to in Mr Wałesa 's report was adopted in 1978 , and I think he said it was transposed in 1989 .
In other words , I would like to express my disagreement with the method used by the Commission to transpose the recommendations of regional fisheries organisations .
Not only does illegal fishing need to be monitored through total allowable catches and quotas , but also , we need to tackle the legal vacuum that could be created by failing to transpose the legislation .
It is not sufficient to transpose recommendations from other regulations , because this takes away clarity and credibility .
Moreover , it calls into question the ordinary legislative procedure and the institutional balance .
The measures adopted in regional organisations need to be incorporated efficiently and swiftly .
Parliament has often stressed that regional organisations and their agreements take priority .
Failing to comply with EU law when transposing the decisions made by regional organisations is detrimental to Parliament and , of course , it disparages the nature of the Treaty of Lisbon .
The Commissioner said that there are going to be fresh agreements .
Therefore , in short , we are asking the Commission to be swift and dynamic in legally transposing them .
Let us not allow a legal vacuum to harbour illegality in fisheries .
Mr President , first of all , I would like to compliment both rapporteurs on their reports , and to refer , in particular , to Carmen Fraga Estévez 's report , which has proved to be non-controversial as all parties have agreed to the compromise .
The report aims to ensure the long-term conservation and optimum utilisation of fisheries resources in the North-East Atlantic area , providing sustainable environmental and social benefits .
I would like to take this opportunity to raise the ongoing dispute relating to mackerel , as some of the stock is fished within the North-East Atlantic area .
It is important that this dispute is resolved as quickly as possible , because over-fishing of the mackerel stock will have a devastating impact on future catches .
It is vital that the stock is fished in a sustainable manner , and all parties should sign up to this .
I understand that recent talks in London were inconclusive , but I note that they will resume next week .
I wish these talks well and I hope that good sense will prevail .
Commissioner , I understand that you will assess the situation after the talks on 26 October , and I appreciate the firm stand you have decided to take .
You must ensure that this jointly managed stock remains healthy in the future .
Finally , we cannot afford to repeat the mistakes of the past in relation to blue whiting .
We cannot decimate this healthy mackerel stock .
Mr President , in supporting the reports which are the subject of debate , I must also take the opportunity to make some more general comments on international and multinational agreements in fisheries .
If agreements between fishing nations are to succeed , there must be clear incentives for all parties to comply with such conservation measures as may be required from time to time .
There must also be faith in the scientific advice which is used as a basis for conservation and management plans .
From the point of view of my own fishing nation , Scotland , the common fisheries policy , the EU 's very own international agreement , has not been a great success .
The so-called cod recovery plan is actually causing discards of perfectly good fish and is imposing an almost unworkable combination of quota restrictions and days at sea .
The current dispute over mackerel - Scotland 's most valuable fishery - which we have heard about from other speakers , has implications for all international negotiations .
If there is to be any hope of successful agreements between fishing nations , then we cannot have a situation where stocks are threatened by a race to catch all the available fish on a unilateral basis .
I ask that the Commissioner continue her good work in striving for a solution to this dispute .
I know that she is well aware of the strength of feeling in Scotland about this from her recent visit , but I appeal in broad terms for the Commissioner to keep in mind the need to ensure that we have robust scientific advice in all that we try to do , that we have sensible , workable rules in management plans - which would be a novelty under the CFP - and that we have , above all , incentives for those who are the subject of these plans , i.e. fishing communities , to comply .
( RO ) Illegal , unreported and unregulated fishing destroys communities living in coastal regions , has a devastating impact on marine ecosystems , and poses a threat to food resources .
This is why I welcome this agreement with the Council and I believe that we have taken a step forward in implementing the recommendations of the North-East Atlantic Fisheries Commission .
Tightening the control measures and basing them on sound legislation are vital actions to enable us to meet the obligations assumed by the treaty and to protect the Atlantic 's resources which are currently being heavily overfished .
However , in spite of this progress , this regulation 's scope of application does not enable us to tackle completely the problems relating to illegal , unreported and unregulated fishing .
We are all aware that thousands of vessels fly the flags of states which are unwilling or do not have the capability to apply international legislation .
It is not only fish stocks but also the marine environment which stand to suffer .
Working conditions aboard many of these vessels are nothing short of slave labour .
( PL ) The Conventions on Future Multilateral Cooperation in the Northwest and North-East Atlantic Fisheries require adjustment in response to current challenges , which is why there is a need for amendments to the regulations .
The proposed changes relate to : firstly , the optimum exploitation of fish stocks ; secondly , the correct method for fisheries management and appropriate fishing methods ; and , finally and thirdly , preventing illegal fishing .
These changes will promote the long-lasting and sustainable development of fisheries , but constant monitoring of the process of depletion of fish stocks and the processes of restocking is essential in order to assess the actual situation and to make appropriate decisions in this area .
( FR ) Mr President , during the negotiations on the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organisation ( NAFO ) agreements , the EU head of delegation pledged to retrocede the French cod fishing quota to the fishermen of Saint Pierre and Miquelon .
This retrocession does not appear in the NAFO agreement .
On behalf of the fishermen of Saint Pierre and Miquelon , I request confirmation of this retrocession and the formalisation of this retrocession .
I believe that this can take the form of a simple letter once the NAFO agreements have been definitively ratified .
Can the Commissioner give us some details on this matter ?
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , multilateral cooperation on fisheries in international waters is necessary to ensure their sustainability and the preservation of fish stocks in the medium and long term .
Conservation measures and the management of resources at the level of regional fisheries organisations should , of course , be defined alongside measures to ensure effective compliance .
We are therefore in favour of bridging gaps in the monitoring system , especially in relation to illegal , undeclared and unregulated fishing activity .
Today , monitoring of fishing activities places increased demands on the Member States , whether under the common fisheries policy ( CFP ) or under multilateral cooperation , as the proposed transposition now demonstrates .
This fact should not be ignored by the Commission .
The necessary acquisition , development or modernisation of controls may require considerable financial input .
It will therefore by important for us to consider the financial resources allocated to monitoring activities in the available legislative instruments , particularly in the regulation of the financial measures of the CFP , and especially by reviewing the maximum rate of cofinancing provided in this area , which is currently 50 % .
( DE ) Mr President , the annual conference of NAFO made amendments to the Ottawa Convention of 1 January 1979 .
It is important that we do not lose sight of the fundamental considerations here : the optimum utilisation and sensible management of fishery resources .
This needs to be based on a sustainable and ecological concept if we are to ensure that fishing continues to provide food for future generations .
The agreements are intended , in particular , to preserve the small local fishing enterprises with their family structures , and to protect them from competition that uses illegal methods , as well as from large-scale fleets which plunder the seas using large amounts of electronic equipment and deep fishing nets .
In short , we want a fisheries industry , but not in this form which jeopardises the small-scale structures , the local structures , with its negative actions .
We need to provide sustainability for future generations , and we must protect this and secure it by contractual means .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank the two rapporteurs once again for their excellent work , and I would also like to thank all the Members for their remarks .
I understand that these are very important reports .
These amendments would drastically improve the situation , especially as regards control and our stance on the problem of illegal fisheries .
I agree with everybody that the problem of illegal fisheries is something that we have to tackle , because it destroys the sustainability of stocks .
It is also a grave danger for our coastal communities , because if sustainability of the stocks collapses , our coastal communities will have no future .
It is very important to secure these control schemes .
The reports and the amendments concerning these schemes can help us a lot .
I would also like to underline that I understand we need more resources - and more funding , perhaps - to ensure that these rules are well implemented .
It is not an easy task to deal with this crisis , but we are nevertheless going to do our best .
I would like to focus a little more on the codecision process between Parliament , the Council and the Commission in the context of making amendments to these RFMO decisions and transposing them into our legislation .
I share with you the opinion that these regional fisheries organisations are very important for our policy and we need to boost their activity in order to tackle illegal fisheries worldwide .
I also agree that if we can secure implementation of our principles worldwide , then the sustainability of fisheries would be much more secure .
I also very much welcome the proposals on how we can boost cooperation , and the proposal to establish an international registry of fishing vessels , but we have to take a lot of steps before reaching that stage .
If we really want to boost international cooperation , we have to press ahead and swiftly implement the decisions taken in these organisations .
This is why the Commission is asking for more delegated powers on this issue .
We respect the codecision process , we understand that we are in a new environment now , and we understand that the Council and Parliament will decide on the powers you can give us under the delegation mandate .
I would nevertheless like to underline that it is not just the Commission 's problem : the international reputation of the EU is at stake if we delay the transposition of these regional organisations ' decisions into our legislation .
That is why we are insisting that we have to have a better balance on this .
I agree with you that we need a balance between the three institutions , but we need a better balance , and I am ready to participate in specific discussions with Parliament as regards how these RFMO measures can be more effectively transposed into EU law .
I would like to thank everyone for today 's debate .
I can see that we are in agreement .
The changes which have been introduced by way of revisions to the conventions are absolutely essential .
I would like to thank Mrs Fraga Estévez for chairing our committee but , above all , I would like to thank the Commissioner .
Working with you has been a real pleasure .
Thank you for your words and assurances , as I see that you understand the changing dynamic of the functioning of the European institutions .
In spite of the fact that , as the European Parliament , we can only agree to ratify amendments to the conventions , I have every hope that from now on , cooperation and negotiations will proceed as they should , and they will be quick , transparent and efficient .
Thank you , Commissioner , for your words , and I am counting on further good collaboration in the future .
Mr President , I would like to say to the Commissioner that I believe that the example set by this most recent regulation on the North-East Atlantic Fisheries Commission ( NEAFC ) , which we are going to adopt tomorrow , is not a good one , because what has happened is precisely what we want to avoid .
The Commission put forward the proposal late and the procedure has changed , as we have changed from the consultation procedure to the ordinary legislative procedure , and the proposal as a whole has been changed in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure .
That is exactly what we are avoiding through this compromise .
Through the new wording of Article 48 of the regulation , which is the article that provides for the amendment of the regulation in future in order to transpose the various NEAFC recommendations into EU law , in the majority of the articles , we have delegated powers to the European Commission .
We have only maintained and preserved the ordinary legislative procedure in a few areas , which was the compromise with the Council .
A significant step forward has therefore been taken to ensure that this functions in the future , but even so , Commissioner , I have made a public commitment here that if , in the future , it does not function adequately and we are prevented from fulfilling our obligations , Parliament will be prepared to revise the procedure .
I believe that we have made quite a considerable effort , and I think that this is a significant step forward as a starting point .
We are sure that the Commission will be capable of using the new powers that the Council and Parliament has granted to it .
Thank you , Mr President , Commissioner .
I am sure that this is going to work much better than what we had in the past .
Of course , Commissioner , you are the one who is going to have the tools to ensure that this is the case .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 19 October 2010 , at 12 : 30 .
( The sitting was suspended for a few minutes )
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
As a Portuguese MEP , and given that Portugal is a country with a strong tradition of fishing and specific interests in the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organisation ( NAFO ) , I welcome the amendments to the text of the convention , as it aims to provide better operating conditions for this regional fisheries organisation ( RFO ) .
The restructuring promoted by concentrating the power to make decisions in a single new body , along with the new process of dispute resolution , will speed up internal decision making .
New definitions have introduced clearer guidelines on the obligations and rights of the different parties , bringing greater transparency to fishing activity in this zone .
Along with the NAFO , the EU should be guided by a proactive stance in conjunction with the other contracting parties , and should seek to preserve good relations with Canada while continuing to pursue dialogue and consensus with the other contracting parties of the organisation , and even among the individual Member States that have an interest in this RFO .
Despite the essential role played by scientific partnerships , which form the basis for decisions that allow the sustainable management of marine resources , and which have proved a success for certain species of fish , these decisions should be carefully considered .
Their aim should be to achieve a balance , and this can only be sustainable if it is created with its socio-economic impact in mind .
One-minute speeches ( Rule 150 )
( ES ) Mr President , on 14 February 2008 , as a Valentine 's gift , the Conference of Presidents decided that the intergroups would only meet on Thursdays .
Since then , we have been trying to resolve this issue .
We have not managed to do so .
Now the intergroups have to meet on an unsuitable date .
They almost never have rooms and they never have interpretation .
I am speaking today not only as the Chair of the Intergroup on Poverty and Human Rights , but with a mandate from the majority of the intergroups in this House , and therefore from the Members of this House who are part of those intergroups .
I formally ask the Conference of Presidents to reconsider and to revoke the decision of 14 February 2008 , going back to the previous situation of giving freedom to the intergroups .
If it does not do so , I would like to say respectfully that we will bring the matter to Parliament 's plenary session , which will decide who is sovereign in this House , which is Parliament .
( BG ) Today marks the 85th anniversary of the Treaty of Angora between Bulgaria and Turkey .
This deals with the issue of the property rights of almost 350 000 Thracian Bulgarians , who were forcibly driven out of Turkey at the start of the last century .
Some of them are still alive , while their descendants number almost 800 000 .
The issue of the seized Thracian property has been discussed on numerous occasions by both countries , including at the highest level and in working groups , but without any result .
Turkey regards these people as displaced persons , but numerous historical facts and documents , including the 1926 League of Nations Protocol on the refugee loan for Bulgaria , prove their refugee status .
Prime Minister Erdoğan already made one suggestion - people who have documents of ownership should appeal to the Turkish courts .
Such documents exist , but it is obscene to demand them of people who have died and barely escaped with their lives .
In its resolution of 21 May 2008 , the European Parliament called on Turkey to improve dialogue with Bulgaria on this matter .
I sincerely hope that we will see good will prevail for the sake of good neighbourly relations .
Mr President , as you may know , there is a clear asymmetry in the milk sector in terms of bargaining power between farmers and the milk distribution industry .
This asymmetry and the volatility of milk prices have increased over the last few years , reducing profits and predictability for milk producers .
To tackle this problem I fully support the creation of a European milk supervision agency to achieve better agreements on volumes and prices for milk .
This agency , supervised by the European Commission , would determine the needs of the market and study the development of milk production costs on a regular basis .
This system would provide the milk sector with a higher degree of stability , allowing for the reduction of current public subsidies .
( DE ) Mr President , on Friday , 15 October , the Rheinische Post ran a headline report concerning the Commissioner for Transport , Siim Kallas , who had apparently said that the high-speed rail link between Paris and Bratislava was an extremely important trans-European east-west axis and that the Commission considered it of the greatest importance that it be built .
He further stated that Stuttgart 21 was a key element of this main line .
Is this some kind of hoax ?
The coordinator of the project , Péter Balázs , has repeatedly said that while the track forms part of the TEN projects , the stations are a national matter .
In view of the limited financing for the development of the trans-European transport network , the stations and all the associated infrastructure are to be financed by the municipal , regional and national authorities themselves .
I call on Commissioner Kallas to confirm the Commission 's position hitherto in a statement to the press and to state loud and clear that the underground station in Stuttgart will not be cofinanced by the European Union .
( PT ) Mr President , the current watchword in Brussels is austerity , austerity , austerity .
Unfortunately , the results of this are clear to see .
Plans for stability and growth are nothing but collective theft from workers and pensioners ; that is , from the European public .
For some reason , we have witnessed a wave of unprecedented general strikes all over Europe .
First it was Greece , Spain and France .
Strikes are already planned for November in Italy , and for 24 November in Portugal .
Moreover , this is only the beginning .
I would ask : how many more general strikes , how many more demonstrations , how many more voices need to be heard before there is a climb-down , breaking the Brussels Consensus and respecting the people ?
These measures are not combating the crisis , but have rather worsened it , and I would ask , Mr President , for other , fairer , measures to be taken .
I would ask : what are we actually waiting for ?
( EL ) Mr President , according to reports in the Greek press and official Greek Government sources , neither of which have been contested , there has been a worrying increase in the number of foreigners with no papers entering via Greece 's northern borders .
Thanks to action taken by Frontex , there has been a considerable reduction in the number of foreigners entering via the north-east sea border .
However , it has not achieved the same results on the northern land border , which foreigners are now crossing in their thousands , creating a new problem area .
Apparently , arrests of foreigners in the border town of Orestiada have risen by 640 % over a year , compared with an 80 % drop on the islands .
This being so , I propose that Parliament pass an emergency resolution : firstly , creating a Frontex post on the Turkish side of the River Evros ; secondly , condemning Turkey , which receives very generous funding from the European Union for immigration , but which is not honouring its obligations under the Ankara Protocol ; and , thirdly and lastly , reviewing the problem of illegal immigration , which is a European problem .
( HU ) Ladies and gentlemen , today I would like to talk about the red sludge disaster in Hungary .
First of all , I would like to thank all those who have helped the victims and their relatives in the past period .
What is most tragic in this disaster is that everything that has happened , and which has unfortunately claimed several lives , could have been prevented .
It is the duty of the European Union to prevent disasters like this .
In order to be able to do this , it is essential to review the privatisation contracts concluded in the Central European region , which are nothing more than the equivalent of pillaging , and have given powers to suspicious post-communist financial circles .
Furthermore , where applicable , companies which have been taken away from the people illegally must be nationalised .
These financial circles pay no attention to employees anymore , and their money-grubbing practices are not even halted by an ecological disaster .
This is where I am asking for help from the European Union .
( SV ) Issues concerning the environment and climate affect us all .
As we know , they are global in scope .
It is self-evident that the EU must play a leading role in the fight to safeguard our living conditions .
Environmental experts claim that , after industry , the next most important cause of damage to the climate and the next largest source of emissions is all the primitive hearths and cookers that are found in huts and hovels all around Africa , Asia and South America .
A few nations that are focusing on protecting the environment have at last realised this .
Today , there are solar-powered , simple stoves that , for a small amount of money , remove 95 % of these toxic emissions that black coal , manure and other fuels generate on combustion .
Calculations also show , and this must be the most important thing to point out , that nearly two million people die a premature death because they are forced to breathe in these gases .
I hope that the EU , together with the United States , which has demonstrated an awareness of this problem , will take an active interest in this extremely tangible means of saving people and the environment .
( RO ) Just recently , specific steps have been taken to strengthen the European Union 's energy security through the provision of natural gas from multiple sources in order to avoid any new gas crisis in Europe .
I am referring to the opening of the Arad-Szeged gas pipeline , linking Romania and Hungary , which has also benefited from European funding .
This makes the investment not only a success story , but also a model of cooperation between EU countries .
The interconnections envisaged at European level , together with the general facility for transporting gas in both directions by 2014 , as well as gas deposits , allow all the countries in the region to enjoy greater energy independence .
European states will be able to help each other in the event of any new gas crises .
Another aspect which is just as important is that the price of gas will be set at regional level , rather than by negotiation with a single supplier .
I hope that the completion of the Arad-Szeged pipeline will give some impetus not only to the Nabucco gas pipeline project , but also to the AGRI project , which will be used to transport natural gas to Europe via a route through Azerbaijan , Georgia and Romania .
( LV ) Thank you , Mr President .
I should like to draw attention to an interesting moment in our work .
On Thursday , almost all Members of the European Parliament leave Strasbourg at 13.30 .
As we well know , a special train is chartered for this time .
Please explain , where is the logic here ?
Why do we always vote on human rights at 16.00 in plenary sessions ?
Why do you schedule votes when you know that 95 % of Members have not taken part in the session ?
This is complete nonsense .
I am convinced that my speech will not be heard .
That too is very sad , Mr President .
Thank you .
( RO ) Democracy is being violated in Romania , a European Union Member State , by the actual party in government , without any fear of repercussions .
The president of the Chamber of Deputies , one of the Romanian parliament 's two chambers , counted the 80 MPs who were in the chamber and announced that the result of the count was 170 .
At that moment , a law which is vital to a large number of Romanian citizens was put to the vote .
This was the draft of the new pensions law , which envisaged increasing the retirement age excessively , setting the same retirement age for women and men , and performing a recalculation , amounting to a reduction in real terms of the pension amount for a large number of pensioners .
Although the opposition was strongly against these amendments and was not present in the chamber at the time of the vote , the cameras were able to expose the fraud taking place .
However , if the opposition and press had not protested against this action every day since then , the law would have been officially announced today by the Romanian president .
Mr President , today the Swedish Government received a legal opinion on the case of Dawit Isaak who has been imprisoned for nine years in Eritrea .
Dawit Isaak is a Swedish journalist who has been imprisoned for freedom of expression .
According to legal opinion based on the European Convention of Human Rights and the case-law from the European Court of Human Rights , Sweden , the EU Member States and the EU have a duty to use all available diplomatic and legal means to ensure Dawit Isaak his basic rights .
Eritrea is one of the world 's poorest countries and dependent on aid from the European Union .
We have to demand Dawit Isaak 's immediate release in exchange for financial aid .
Tomorrow , Dawit Isaak 's brother will come to the European Parliament to meet the President of Parliament and Commissioner Piebalgs and to hand over the legal opinion to the European institutions .
I hope this will oblige the European institutions to put greater pressure on Eritrea 's President to release Dawit Isaak , thus saving his life .
Mr President , in September , I spent a week in Kazakhstan on a delegation from the European United Left Group of the European Parliament .
Kazakhstan , under President Nazarbayev , is a totalitarian dictatorship with the systematic repression of human rights .
We met many groups who are fighting for human , political and workers ' rights .
We received chilling testimony of a monstrous regime of extreme brutality in many Kazakh prisons , with recently released prisoners describing grotesque degradation of prisoners and systematic savage beatings , brutal rape and other tortures .
In view of this , it is shameful that Kazakhstan was awarded the chairmanship of the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe for 2010 , with a major summit of the Heads of State of the OSCE to be held in December in the capital , Astana .
Shamefully , President Nazarbayev , who is responsible for this nightmare , is on an official visit to the European Union next week and will be received by the President of Parliament , Mr Buzek , Commission President Barroso and others .
He is being received , of course , because of the massive oil and gas deals that EU companies are doing in Kazakhstan , but I am demanding that those leaders raise this issue of the grotesque degradation of human rights and demand verifiable action from Nazarbayev that it ends .
( IT ) Mr President , in the last few weeks , more than 30 Mapuche went on hunger strike to protest against the militarisation of their land , being subjected to a dual civil and military jurisdiction and the application of anti-terrorism legislation , in effect since the period of military dictatorship .
Despite all this , the two majority groups of this Parliament have not agreed to an urgent humanitarian motion .
Currently , the hunger strike has ended , but the fundamental reasons which prompted it still exist , as the Rapporteur for the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples recognised last April .
Chile must respect the International Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples and International Labour Organisation Convention 169 on the right to prior consultation and free and informed consent by these peoples regarding all legislation which interferes with their rights and interests .
The European Parliament must avail itself of all political instruments possible to ensure that the Chilean Government respects international law and agreements with the European Union itself .
( BG ) I was intending to express my view on the forthcoming debate in Bulgaria 's National Assembly on the referendum to be held on Turkey 's membership of the European Union .
However , I have been annoyed by the statement made by my fellow Member on the other side of the House , Mr Kirilov , who has virtually repeated word for word the speech made by the president of my party , Volen Siderov , in Bulgaria 's National Assembly just a few days ago .
However , I would like to add to what Mr Kirilov said .
Fellow Members , these people who were driven out of eastern Thrace do not have documents for their property .
They abandoned their children to their death because when the infants cried , they gave these people away to the Turks who came to hunt them down and kill them .
Turkey is a country which is proud of its history of genocide , as the act of genocide committed in 1913 , where 50 000 Bulgarians were massacred and 300 000 were driven out of eastern Thrace , was the dress rehearsal for the Armenian genocide unacknowledged by the Ottomans .
This is why the message from Attack is : ' Yes ' to a referendum on Turkey 's membership of the European Union and ' No ' to Turkey 's membership of the European Union .
( EL ) Mr President , Jean-Claude Juncker said yesterday that we have been putting pressure on the Greek Government to take appropriate action since 2008 , but that we have not gone public with the problems , because Eurogroup is an unofficial body .
The Commission has intimated that the Greek deficit for 2009 will be over 15 % , compared with the forecast of 5 % in May 2009 .
What I ask myself is this : how can 10 percentage points of GDP be overlooked ?
Surely the Ministers for Finance were aware of this when they met in Ecofin , which was institutionally competent , instead of Eurogroup ?
The problem , therefore , was not so much the inability to make a forecast as compliance with political criteria .
However , surely Greek citizens , as European taxpayers , were entitled to know ?
What we ultimately need is more independent authorities monitoring financial criteria and , above all , fair and automatic application of the rules to everyone .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the EU-China Summit , held on 6 October in Brussels , ended in tension when the scheduled final press conference was cancelled for laconic logistical reasons .
In the background , there was disagreement on the question of the exchange rate of the yuan , deemed by the euro area to be excessively low .
The European Union has asked the Chinese Premier to appreciate their currency and put an end to unfair commercial practices which have , for years , fuelled tariff wars , highlighting this as a basic condition before addressing the issue of recognising China as a market economy .
Since June , the Chinese currency has risen by 2.15 % against the dollar , but is down 9.4 % against the euro .
This is terrible news for exports from the euro area , not least because Europe seems to be the only power without the mechanisms to devalue its own currency .
In EU-China relations , we are disadvantaged as a result of contractual differences between employees , the cost of raw materials and their protectionist and reckless commercial policies .
It is therefore impossible to compete if the euro is overvalued too .
In two weeks ' time , we will attempt to deal with these points with the European delegation .
( RO ) At a time when the issue of reducing the transport of food products over long distances is become increasingly urgent , with local production being encouraged and an adjustment to market demands , it is vital that a boost is given to the production of sheep meat in the EU .
It is unacceptable for the EU market to be supplied with sheep meat from thousands of kilometres away at exorbitant prices , while our own producers are being forced to sell their products at ridiculous prices and leave this sector .
Romania has the fifth largest number of head of sheep among European Union Member States , but sheep livestock numbers have fallen by more than 40 % .
Nevertheless , the export of sheep meat is an important part of our economy .
Given these factors and bearing in mind that serious social , economic and environmental repercussions could arise in the long term , resulting in an age-old tradition becoming lost , Romania supports Ireland 's action and is eagerly awaiting proper support measures from the Commission and Council , which will halt the increasing decline in the sheep meat sector in the European Union .
( EL ) Mr President , we had the worst food crisis in 2008 .
The price of cereals rocketed and , as a result , massive populations went hungry , especially in Africa .
At the same time , we had the highest levels of cereal production .
Biofuels were blamed for this paradox .
It ultimately transpired that the blame lay with credit companies which , once they had finished playing games on Nasdaq and the bubbles on the property market had burst , turned their attention to government debt and prices for basic foodstuffs , for the purpose of speculation .
These games impoverished millions of our fellow citizens the world over .
We can no longer allow these companies to act with impunity and we now need to define a clear operating framework for these companies at European and global level .
( PT ) Today is European Day against Human Trafficking .
This merits our full attention , and we should demand that more is done than uttering mere platitudes about this tragedy , which currently affects hundreds of thousands of people every year in the EU alone .
These are victims of modern slavery , due to hunger and extreme poverty , which affects over 1 billion people worldwide .
This is the darker side of capitalist exploitation and the consequences of colonialism and neo-colonialism , for which several European powers have great responsibility .
Thus , there is a symbolic link between yesterday 's commemoration of the International Day for the Eradication of Poverty and , today , the European Day against Human Trafficking .
Combating poverty and human trafficking requires global measures which include a break with neoliberal policies and a firm commitment to the social dimension of macro-economic policies in order to ensure a policy based on development and social progress , as the public and the workers have demanded in the demonstrations we have witnessed in Europe .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today - 67 years after the removal of the dictator Benito Mussolini - fascist monuments are still being preserved , maintained and extensively renovated in South Tyrol .
For the South Tyroleans , this is a daily reminder of an injustice suffered .
This is not worthy of a united Europe of the 21st century .
Years ago , the then European Commissioner , Franco Frattini , suggested a Europe-wide law banning all Nazi symbols .
The logical consequence of this would have been that , as part of the drive against Nazi symbols , fascist monuments in South Tyrol would also have been banned and would have had to be removed .
Mr Frattini 's proposal came to nought ; it is now time to venture a new attempt .
The Commission should make it unmistakably clear that infringing minority rights represents an infringement against the values of the EU .
Article 2 of the Treaty of Lisbon requires further clarification .
In addition , we need to examine how well minorities are protected and binding sanctions need to be officially laid down .
( PL ) The European Union has declared the year 2010 to be the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion .
On 17 October 2010 , there were 23 commemorations of the International Day for the Eradication of Poverty which had been announced by the UN .
On this day , all over the world , special events were organised to show solidarity and sympathy with the needs of the socially excluded .
The International Day for the Eradication of Poverty above all aims to make the public aware of the need to eliminate worldwide poverty , particularly in developing countries , and to stress the fact that combating poverty is our priority .
It is also important to pay greater attention to the causes and consequences of poverty in Europe .
I repeat , in Europe .
This is why the implementation of the European Union programme for free distribution of food to the poorest among us , at a cost of EUR 500 million annually , is so important .
The initiative to commemorate the International Day for the Eradication of Poverty is very useful in that it helps us to be aware of the scale of poverty worldwide and to find causes and solutions to the problem .
Thank you .
( ES ) Mr President , on the International Day against Human Trafficking for social exploitation , some figures were revealed that should make us act as political leaders .
More than 90 % of the prostitution in Europe arises from blackmail and extortion .
In response to these figures , we should ask ourselves if we are doing everything necessary to protect the dignity and integrity of thousands of women whose rights are also protected by the Charter of Fundamental Rights that we adopted with the Treaty of Lisbon .
We are not talking about the ' oldest profession in the world ' , but about the only form of slavery that we have not succeeded in eradicating from the old Europe .
Countries such as Spain are making significant efforts in this respect , prosecuting traffickers , raising public awareness and promoting reintegration plans for the women who are the victims .
This is not enough .
Europe needs to be a single area of action and commitment .
The next directive on trafficking is an opportunity to act on the demand for the industry through education and , in terms of supply , for example , to make advertising difficult in all types of media , as well as increasing bilateral cooperation with third countries to fight this scourge from its source .
We have an opportunity .
I would like to draw Parliament 's attention to this so that it continues to be in the vanguard in terms of citizens ' rights .
( FR ) Mr President , according to its statute , the European Food Safety Authority ( EFSA ) is an independent source of scientific advice on risks associated with the food chain .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , may I say that I have my doubts about this , and I am not the only one .
Let us take one particular example : many States such as Denmark and France have prohibited the use of bisphenol A in feeding bottles following a large number of studies demonstrating its harmfulness .
However , EFSA continues to permit its use in products intended for consumption , in flagrant breach of the precautionary principle .
EFSA has also accepted every single application to use GMOs that has been submitted to it .
There have been 125 such applications in total , though .
Do you not find this strange ?
The Commissioner responsible for this matter , Mr Dalli , last week distanced himself from EFSA on the subject of bisphenol A , and the Council has been requesting details on the way in which the agency operates since 2008 .
I therefore request , as a minimum and as quickly as possible , a joint hearing of EFSA by Parliament 's Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety and the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection .
We must dispel the doubts hanging over EFSA so as to ensure better protection of the public , and of their health , which is at stake .
( RO ) My message is for the President of the European Parliament , Jerzy Buzek .
As he was in Romania a few months ago , attended the plenary session of the Romanian Parliament and supported the Liberal Party ( PDL ) government and the austerity measures it is promoting , I want to tell President Buzek that , since more than a month ago , Romania no longer has a parliament .
It is well over a month ago since meetings stopped being held in the Romanian Parliament and decisions stopped being taken , due to the fraudulent approval of the pensions law , as mentioned by my colleague , Daciana Sârbu .
Given that the Romania president , Traian Băsescu , is not adopting a stance on the matter , never mind denying such practices , because the PDL routinely supports them , with fraud becoming a practice used in the Romanian Parliament , I am very interested to know whether Mr Buzek still continues to support the PDL and the authorities in Romania and if he would still go to the Romanian Parliament today to support the Boc government .
( BG ) I believe that the European Union and all of us are making efforts to bring Europe out of recession .
Some countries are emerging from the recession but , unfortunately , it is growing deeper in other countries for some reason .
I believe that the restoration and consolidation of the European market feature among the priorities of all Member States .
For this reason , I am deeply concerned by the European Union 's intention to provide Pakistan with a duty-free trade regime .
I realise that Pakistan has suffered damage as a result of natural disasters , but I do not consider it proper justification for threatening European trade , especially in the textiles industry .
I appeal to you on behalf of the Bulgarian Association of Apparel and Textile Producers and Exporters , whose members appealed to me with a request for assistance to save this sector in Bulgaria .
Bulgaria is a small country and the recession is at its height there .
Allowing Pakistan access to the European market will jeopardise Bulgaria 's textile and clothing production .
Mr President and fellow Members , during a recession , in my view , protecting the European market must be twice as much a priority , whereas duty-free trade with Pakistan is not the path we need to be going down to emerge from the recession in Europe .
( RO ) I would like to highlight the particularly serious economic and social situation which Romania is in .
The recovery measures adopted by the Romanian Government are ineffective and distinctly antisocial in nature .
They are an attack on fundamental human rights , especially in the health and education sectors , and on the right to a decent living .
What are the effects of these measures ?
An 8 % inflation rate , the biggest fall in GDP in the whole European Union , paralysis of the national economy , as well as unprecedented protests involving police officers , teachers , pensioners , officials from the Ministry of Finance and every trade union confederation .
This government is acting against the interests of the Romanian people and is undermining the Romanian population 's status as European citizens .
The European Commission has suitable instruments and mechanisms available for monitoring and adjusting Member States ' finance policies .
The Commission must take a stance on the austerity measures implemented by the Romanian Government , which are infringing fundamental human rights .
( LT ) On 10 October of this year , a fire broke out on the ' Lisco Gloria ' as it sailed from Kiel to Klaipėda .
Although no lives were lost , the accident highlighted the huge problems of ensuring the safety of people travelling by ferry .
Information provided by those involved shows that the ferry 's crew were not prepared for a rescue and passengers had to look after each other .
Furthermore , the number of passengers rescued was higher than that recorded in the official passenger list , which raises serious concerns about ensuring general passenger safety and the possible threat of terrorism .
Following 11 September , great attention in the European Union was paid to the safety of passengers travelling by plane .
This accident has highlighted the fact that a similar system of control needs to apply to ships as that which applies to aircraft and that there must be continual independent proficiency testing , both of vessels ' technical condition and the staff responsible for passenger safety .
( SK ) Last week , I led a delegation of observers of the European Parliament to the parliamentary elections in Kyrgyzstan .
We held many meetings with representatives of political parties and citizen organisations and we also met with the interim president , Roza Otumbayeva .
Despite the fact that during our mission , we were assured that the country was clearly on the path of regime change to parliamentary democracy , and that the security situation had calmed down , only shortly after our departure from Bishkek , unrest started again , and the political parties began to challenge the election results .
This was in spite of statements made by international organisations that the elections in Kyrgyzstan had been conducted relatively correctly .
In a country where levels of social standards are truly deplorable and tens of thousands of people have had to abandon their homes , the fight for the position of sole leader has started again , and the country is beginning to reverse its course .
I consider it necessary to call on the European Union and the European Parliament to increase their interest in the region of Central Asia which is extremely turbulent at the moment .
This does not only apply to Kyrgyzstan but also the recent unrest in Tajikistan , and there is hardly any need to mention the proximity of Afghanistan .
It is important to increase our interest and presence in the region for a better future for all of us .
( BG ) I would like to draw your attention to important cyber security-related issues .
Preventing the risks associated with the Internet 's rapid expansion is much more effective than repairing the damage caused by its abusive use .
A number of actions at least are required to do this .
Firstly , cyberspace requires protection which is dynamic and does not build static walls , but relies on flexibility and proactive innovation .
Secondly , the legislation governing the Internet must utilise and not restrict the opportunities offered by information technologies .
Thirdly , very active horizontal coordination is required of the various institutions involved with cyber security .
Fourthly , cyber security requires highly active and efficient mechanisms for international cooperation and coordination .
I would like to encourage the European Commission to demonstrate particular determination and resolve and to insist in future legislative initiatives on devising and implementing a European cyber security strategy and creating positions or a mechanism to facilitate the horizontal coordination of all communities and national policies relating to this issue .
That concludes the debate on this item .
Future of European standardisation ( short presentation )
The next item is the report by Edvard Kožušník , on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , on the future of European standardisation .
The report that we are dealing with today is submitted as a precursor to a standardisation package which the Commission is currently working on .
This should provide a legislative revision of the existing legal framework of European standardisation , which we will use to define the development of standardisation in the coming decades .
It is therefore in the interest of Parliament to use this report to convey to the Commission and relevant specialists our concept of the future development of European standardisation .
The form of the system of European standardisation is key to fully exploiting the potential of the internal market , improving the competitiveness of the European economy and fulfilling the Europe 2020 strategy .
We have therefore given our full attention to this subject in the Committee on the Internal Market .
We have conducted intensive discussions with all stakeholders , both at international and European level and at the level of organisations in the individual Member States .
When seeking the best form of European standardisation , we did our best by representatives of small and medium-sized enterprises , as well as consumer representatives , disabled people , environmentalists and other organisations representing community interests .
During discussions on the future form of European standardisation , we concluded that the design review should be based on the strengths of the existing system , which provides a stable base on which to build .
We cannot undertake any radical changes that could weaken the key merits of the current system .
In order to achieve an effectively functioning system of European standardisation , it is necessary for national standardisation organisations that play a less active role in the existing standardisation process to move closer to stronger national organisations .
Strong national standardisation organisations , which can communicate with each other effectively , but also with other interested parties , are the basis for the stability of the European standardisation system .
In future , we must also focus more on the greater involvement of stakeholders in the standardisation process itself .
The aim is to make sure that the standards that emerge are the result of a broad consensus , and are therefore ultimately more representative .
Another subject that was addressed in this long discussion was easier access to standards .
In particular , I would mention the process of establishing standards .
This should correspond to the nature of their beneficiaries and users .
In order that the standards can be enforced more easily , they need to be more comprehensible and easier to use .
With the increasing liberalisation of services , it is necessary to think more about standardisation in the area of services .
We consider this area to be crucial for achieving greater cross-border competition in services .
The establishment of European standards in services is a way to dismantle barriers in services in the internal market and to do so sensitively .
Dismantling these barriers and increasing competition are a way to improve the transparency and quality of European services and to encourage competition , which goes hand in hand with innovation .
It is innovation and new technologies which are the engine of economic growth in the post-crisis period .
For European standardisation , the challenge is to achieve close cooperation between the creators of standards , innovators , academics and researchers .
Without the intensive involvement of all these four groups in the process of establishing standards , Europe will find it difficult to standardise its knowledge in the low carbon economy , electric cars , nanotechnology and ICT .
The ability to convert the findings of research and development into the process of establishing standards will ultimately determine whether the European system of standardisation will continue to play a key role in a globalised world .
At this point , I would like to thank all my colleagues on the committee , but also my colleagues on the partner ITRE committee , who were actively involved in the drafting of this report .
I would particularly point out that we managed to obtain a joint agreement on the final form of this report across all the political groups .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I wish to express my satisfaction with the work that has been undertaken by the rapporteur and shadow rapporteurs , with whom we have been able to strike a good balance between the various political positions .
This report sends a political message , loud and clear , to the European Commission and contains important guidelines in view of its imminent review .
We have determined that the current system works well and does not require radical changes .
The improvements that we have proposed do not prejudice the current principles on which the system is based , or rather , the principle of national delegation and its private and voluntary nature .
That notwithstanding , it is important for the public interest to play a more active role and contribute to the creation of new standards .
I feel that the function of small and medium-sized enterprises is important and relevant within the process of standardisation .
This report is only the beginning : we will continue to work in the coming months to ensure that European standardisation meets the economic and social needs of Europe .
( LT ) I would like to congratulate my colleague on the preparation of this important report .
Standardisation is particularly important for building a common internal market , ensuring the business competitiveness of both the European Union and individual Member States and removing trade obstacles .
I support the Commission 's initiative to prepare a Standardisation Package , which will hopefully be sufficiently comprehensive and will facilitate the removal of existing deficiencies which currently prevent us from ensuring product safety and which create different levels of consumer protection in different Member States .
The laying down of uniform standards at European level is especially important in the field of rapidly developing technologies and innovations .
In order to ensure not just that the European Union is competitive , but also that our people 's health is properly protected and that safe products access the market , it is necessary for uniform standards to be valid and applicable in all Member States .
( SK ) The European system of normalisation is a part of an international system that sets out unified , generally applied regulations and norms used by the production sector worldwide .
As societal progress increases knowledge , changes technologies , organisation and the way of life , normalisation as a specific field of defining generally used regulations must also be an active undertaking open to progress .
If the European Union wishes to have a truly sophisticated , innovative economy , it cannot avoid substantially increased activity in the field of the development of new norms which will facilitate the introduction of new scientific and technological inventions to the market .
From this point of view , I believe it is time the mechanisms of European standardisation and normalisation , currently based mostly on national traditions and national workplaces , were brought up to date .
Today , however , these mechanisms must be simpler and more effective .
( HU ) Ladies and gentlemen , as Jobbik representatives , we are often called EU sceptics , and we actually agree with this .
We are EU sceptics , but this does not mean that we do not support cooperation between EU Member States .
It is clear that we are against the principle of the United States of Europe and we support the Europe of nations , but standardisation is typically a subject that we can agree on , that we can support .
However , it is always said that we are always protesting and saying no , no , no to everything .
Well , standardisation is a topic that we , too , would like to facilitate and support .
I would also like to ask all Member States to support standardisation , and my fellow Members to support this report by Mr Kožušník .
This is where we can agree for the time being .
( RO ) The adoption of European standards can make a vital contribution to facilitating access for SMEs to the single market and consolidating their position in it .
With this in mind , SMEs need simple , standardised loan products , which will facilitate their rapid use , based on a minimum number of documents and a simplified financial analysis .
The European standardisation system must encourage and support innovation and also establish a common basis for a more comprehensive approach to standardisation .
I also feel that it would be useful to apply the principle of subsidiarity and proportionality on a regular basis at European level .
This would help consolidate the basic principle of ' think small first ' as part of public policies for SMEs .
In this context , I would also like to mention that an ordinance was issued recently in Romania on implementing measures supporting the uniform enforcement of EU legislation , which harmonises the conditions for marketing products .
( CS ) This report will further encourage the Commission to pursue carefully the harmonisation of standards in the internal market .
During the progressive liberalisation of global trade , it provides a way for us to protect European citizens from low quality and unsafe products , particularly from the Asian countries .
I thank my colleagues from the Commission for their support for my draft , which gives the green light to the establishment of standards for safe children 's shoes .
It is high time to act , because today 's generation of children has orthopaedic defects due to cheap , but physically harmful Chinese shoes .
It is very striking that we have European quality legislation for safe toys , where a child comes into contact with a toy only for a short time , but we do not have adequate standards for shoes and slippers that children have on their feet all day .
I hope that the Commission reacts to this call , which is not the first , and takes appropriate action .
I think that it is a shame that the industrial lobby from Germany and France has won and that , in the international standards committees , the European Union will not speak with one voice , but in twenty seven languages .
( FI ) Mr President , congratulations on an excellent report .
It is a good basis for further work .
Transparency and democracy are most important in the standardsetting process , as is improved participation on the part of the weaker societal stakeholders , consumers and environmental organisations .
Standardisation must not be allowed simply to become a battlefield for big business .
I am pleased that the report takes account of the principle of appropriate representation , according to which all stakeholder positions must be incorporated in an appropriate manner .
It is also important that societal stakeholders are more strongly represented .
In my opinion , this could be done by giving them the right to vote on technical committees .
It is also important to develop a second production line .
I hope that the Commission will pay serious attention to that .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur for his comprehensive report , which has received general approval .
I would also like to thank the honourable Members who have stayed here so late to help the President with his duties and also to put forward some very constructive contributions and ideas in the debate .
This report is a valuable contribution to the debate launched by the European Commission some time ago .
It draws attention to the future of the standardisation system in Europe : a central element in the implementation of the internal market , in increasing the competitiveness of European business , and an important tool in fostering innovation .
Over the next decade , European standardisation will have to adapt to new energy , environmental and societal challenges , as you have already mentioned .
These include the emergence of new economic powers , the development of technologies , climate change , carbon management and renewable energies .
These are some of the new factors we have to face .
We share the rapporteur 's view that we can build on the existing system .
It forms a solid basis for further development .
There is , nevertheless , room for improvement .
The report presents a number of proposals with a view to improving the system within its current boundaries .
The Commission welcomes the emphasis placed on the importance of the principle of national delegation .
At the same time , the report draws attention to a negative consequence of this principle : existing deficits in participation by societal stakeholders representing health and safety , consumer and environmental interests in the standard-setting process .
The participation of societal stakeholders is extremely important as it lends the system a significant element of legitimacy and accountability and improves the quality of the consensus .
The Commission will explore practical ways of ensuring effective membership of European standardisation organisations for organisations representing societal stakeholders , and of helping to achieve more balanced participation by stakeholders in the standard-setting process .
The Commission shares the view that , with respect to the central role of the national delegation principle for CENELEC , national standards bodies are key players in the European standardisation model .
All national standards bodies must therefore be able to provide a robust platform of consensus-building .
The report notes significant differences among them in terms of resources , technical expertise and stakeholder engagement in the standardisation process .
There is room for improvement here in the Member States .
Though the problem of access to standards should not be limited to the price of standards , the Commission welcomes the call on national standards bodies to reduce costs through special rates , by offering bundles of standards at a reduced price , and by investigating additional ways of improving access , especially for SMEs .
European standardisation has a huge potential to support legislation in public policies .
We appreciate that the report recognises this potential and stresses the need to move into new domains of standards development such as services .
As pointed out in the report , the new European model must contribute to European innovation and sustainable development .
Finally , I would like to thank everyone who has been involved in this very useful and inspiring report .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 21 October 2010 , at 12 : 00 .
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 23 : 00 )
Opening of the sitting
Delegated acts ( Rule 87a ) : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( announcement of motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Financial Regulation applicable to the general budget of the European Communities as regards the European External Action Service - Draft amending budget No 6 / 2010 : Section II - European Council and Council ; Section III - Commission ; Section X - European External Action Service - Amendment of the Staff Regulations of Officials of the European Communities and the Conditions of Employment of Other Servants of those Communities ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on the following :
the report by Mrs Gräßle and Mr Rivellini , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Regulation ( EC , Euratom ) No 1605 / 2002 on the Financial Regulation applicable to the general budget of the European Communities as regards the European External Action Service - C7-0086 / 2010 - ,
the report by Mr Rapkay , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs , on the amendments to the Staff Regulations of Officials of the European Communities and the Conditions of Employment of Other Servants of those Communities - C7-0146 / 2010 - , and
the report by Mr Gualtieri and Mr Surján , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on Council 's position on Draft amending budget No 6 / 2010 of the European Union for the financial year 2010 , Section II - European Council and Council , Section III - Commission , Section X - European External Action Service .
( 13475 / 2010 - C7-0262 / 2010 - .


Mr President , Mr Chastel , Baroness Ashton , Mr Šefčovič , Commissioner Lewandowski , ladies and gentlemen , for my part , I can hardly wait until this service begins its work , and I hope it achieves international success , which is the purpose for which it was established .
The institutions have shown that they can deal with challenges .
Parliament was part of the solution .
We made quick decisions - some perhaps were made too quickly .
This service is uncharted territory - terra incognita - and breaks with some of the previous fundamentals of budgetary law and staffing law .
That will present us with major challenges in the long term .
For me , as a member of the Committee on Budgets and the Committee on Budgetary Control , the hybrid nature of this service remains a constant concern , not only in terms of its efficiency , but also simply in terms of our ability to monitor it .
The joint Rivellini-Gräßle report attempts to address these problems .
We have tried to achieve the best possible solution for the service , for Parliament and for taxpayers .
We have explained processes and assigned responsibility .
We have strengthened Parliament 's influence in respect of tasks in the area of foreign policy , we have increased transparency by means of clear reporting obligations and we have increased accountability .
We have made it clear to the EU ambassadors that they have a key role to play in protecting the financial interests of the European Union , and it is very important that their own service should also make this clear to them .
We have created synergies through the joint use of the accounting system and we are granting the Commission 's internal auditor the power to monitor how the funds that it needs to carry out its work efficiently are managed .
The European Development Fund and its integration into the budget remain on the agenda , as does discharge for the Council .
I would like to thank everyone who made this outcome possible : the co-rapporteurs and shadow rapporteurs who have co-signed the compromise .
I would also like to express my sincere thanks to the negotiating partners from the Belgian Presidency .
They have done a good job .
What remains is the important homework that the service needs to do .
No efficiency savings as a result of the merger are in sight .
The service envisaged savings of 10 % , which is not much , but it is a long way from meeting that when it comes to management positions .
Everyone is whispering about a ' Mexican army ' .
How professional can a service be if it does not even know exactly what its tasks are ?
The opportunities to define the tasks in more detail have not , as yet , been utilised , and it is very important to get back to this very soon .
A great deal of importance should be attached to the coalescence of the staff .
The preferential treatment that has been given up to now to diplomats from the Member States gives us cause for concern .
If some positions are advertised several times and the old colonial map of the world is taken out once again , we will have to have very serious discussions about the service .
We should assure the service of our critical support and the watchful eye of the Committee on Budgetary Control .
I wish it the success that we need for Europe in the world .
Mr President , Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , I think an excellent job has been done on the Financial Regulation applicable to the European External Action Service ( EEAS ) or , to be more specific , on the basic principles and standards governing the Union budget for this new diplomatic service .
The EEAS , created by the Treaty of Lisbon , will include staff members of the Council , the Commission and the national diplomatic services , who will represent the European Union in all matters of foreign policy .
As originally structured , the EEAS still suffered from a number of drawbacks deriving from its complex , decentralised structure , with ramifications throughout the world .
In particular , the accountability of the financial actors called on to manage budgets of hundreds of millions of euros remained unclear , and that was likely to contribute to an increase in fraud and corruption to the detriment of the Union budget .
Although the Treaty of Lisbon greatly expands Parliament 's powers and identifies it as the only institution representing Europe 's citizens , the debate on the establishment of the new EEAS was at first monopolised by the Commission and the Council , which did all they could to structure it along intergovernmental lines , contrary to the Community method .
After long consultations with the Belgian Presidency and the European Commission , an agreement was reached overturning the initial arrangements and enhancing Parliament 's role , so that it could become involved by right at the heart of the European debate .
The following points are fundamental .
The Commission shall present a working document annexed to the draft budget with a comprehensive presentation of , inter alia , all administrative and operational expenditure related to the external actions of the Union , including the common foreign and security policy and the European security and defence policy .
Article 1 lists the European Union 's institutions .
The lists of responsibilities are to be attached to the annual activity reports compiled by the Directors-General of the Commission .
Heads of delegations shall attend the meetings of the relevant parliamentary committees , together with the Directors-General .
The EEAS shall share an auditor and an accounting officer with the European Commission ; this arrangement is to be reviewed in 2013 .
The Member States must undertake to fully support the Union in pursuing any kind of liability of temporary staff working for the European External Action Service .
We subsequently have to discuss some important issues , which will be taken up during the triennial review of the Financial Regulation .
They include discharge for the institutions and the inclusion of the European Social Fund in the general budget .
The outcome of the negotiations has been good , especially for Parliament , in that its central importance has been strongly enhanced .
The fact that the regulation lists all the institutions - which means that discharge for the other institutions is just a matter of time - is an excellent result , as is the fact that it provides for a single auditor and accounting officer held in common by the two institutions .
I am grateful to everybody for the work that has been accomplished .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , and when I say ' ladies and gentlemen ' , I include you , Baroness Ashton , Mr Šefčovič , your team and the Council Presidency , because , at the end of the day , we experienced collegial cooperation , without which we would surely not have achieved the result that we did .
I am happy with the result , at least as regards the part for which I was responsible and where I had a grasp of the overall picture .
However , I would say that this is not so very surprising , because it is not as if we have only just started .
Mr President , it was a very clever idea of yours to call all the rapporteurs together on a regular basis for an exchange of ideas right from an early stage - back at the time of the Brok , Verhofstadt and Gualtieri reports .
As a result , for the relevant people , it was clear what would need to be done later , and for those who were to do this later work , it was clear what had already been done in terms of preparatory work .
For this reason , it was primarily a matter of applying to the Staff Regulations the organisational aspects of what had been agreed between Parliament and the Council in connection with the establishment of the European External Action Service in the particular areas of competence covered by these Staff Regulations .
When I say organisational , I mean that organisation is policy and policy is organisation .
That is , of course , something that we found repeatedly during the detailed negotiations , because it was already clear at that point that perhaps one person may interpret something one way and others may interpret it somewhat differently .
However , the spirit of cooperation resulted , I believe , in us finding very sensible solutions to such issues .
What did we actually need to do , then , in terms of policy adjustment and what did we need to lay down in the Staff Regulations ?
Firstly , we had to incorporate the equal treatment of the three staffing components .
I want to mention this point because , as you know , the treaty states that the staff of the EEAS shall comprise officials from the Commission , the Council and from the diplomatic services of the Member States .
The last of these elements , in particular , did pose something of an issue , as it was something new .
We had to resolve the almost antagonistic contradiction between the Community approach and the intergovernmental approach .
It goes without saying that the Council and the Member States take more of an intergovernmental approach , while we prefer the Community approach .
I believe I can say that we then worked out a solution to this together .
To that extent , then , we can be very satisfied .
What we needed , and indeed must continue , to take into account is gender balance and a balance in terms of geographical origin .
We want to have a service that is modern , including with regard to the issue of gender equality .
I am pleased , Baroness Ashton , that , in addition to what we have incorporated into the Staff Regulations as mandatory , you have assured us that you will make another personal statement , which will form part of the whole package .
That already represents considerable progress with regard to both the aspect of gender equality and the other aspect of geographical balance .
We need equal rights and equal obligations , and that includes loyalty - and indeed from all three components - towards the institution of the High Representative , currently embodied by Baroness Ashton .
In this regard , we had a bit of additional work to do as far as the veto right of the diplomatic services was concerned in connection with possible extensions to the contracts of staff coming from the diplomatic services .
However , we resolved this , too .
There is one issue that should not be underestimated .
We jointly agreed that this issue cannot be accommodated in the Staff Regulations .
This is the fact that the new European diplomatic service also needs something of a separate identity .
Everyone working there must be working towards the same goal and therefore , a common form of training and further training is also extremely important .
That was especially important to some of my fellow negotiators , and I can understand that .
I have just said that we did not succeed in doing this .
It was clear that it would not be possible to incorporate something like this into the Staff Regulations systematically .
However , here , once again , I have to thank the High Representative , because I have been informed that she also wants to say something about this and that she regards it as a major obligation and a major necessity and will also make another declaration of commitment in this regard , which , although not a component of the Staff Regulations , will reassure us and those who view it as particularly important as we look to the future work of the common External Action Service .
Bearing all that in mind , we have done a very good job , and the service is now set for a sound start on 1 December .
Mr President , Baroness Ashton , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , Parliament approves the establishment of a new section of the budget for the European External Action Service ( EEAS ) and the provision of additional funds for staff .
This position is due to Parliament 's desire to see the EEAS set up , because Europe urgently needs it , but , of course , it does not mean that it will give up its role as budgetary authority in the debate on the nature of the body that will deal with crisis management or on the priorities of staff policy , as shown by the reserve that we established in the 2011 budget .
The regulations that we are going to adopt reinforce the outcomes of the Madrid agreement and , in some cases , go further , for which I would like to thank Mr Rapkay , Mrs Gräßle and Mr Rivellini .

I must also thank Baroness Ashton and Mr Christophersen for their willingness and openness in our discussions .
The Staff Regulations ensure that all EEAS staff will have the same rights and duties irrespective of their origin , and requires the High Representative to ensure a geographical and gender balance .
These arrangements will be binding and Parliament will make sure that they are complied with .
At the same time , they avoid the use of quotas , which would be not just difficult to implement but also wrong .
The Financial Regulation ensures a solid control system and keeps the EEAS closely tied to the Commission .
I welcome the success we have achieved with the setting up of specific budget lines for the main common security and defence policy missions , which represents a major leap forward for Parliament 's ability to exercise control over the common foreign and security policy .
With tomorrow 's vote , therefore , we will have an EEAS that is stronger , more communautaire and subject to greater Parliamentary scrutiny .
We will be strict and demanding in performing this scrutiny but , at the same time , we will do it responsibly and in a constructive spirit , since we are determined to help the High Representative in the colossal task of providing Europe with a real foreign policy to serve its values and interests .
Mr President , I am pleased to see that this debate takes place in the presence of the Council and the commissioners .
When we planned the budget for 2010 , we raised the question about resources for the external diplomatic service .
The answer was that there was no need for resources in that respect , as this could be resolved by redistributing budgetary resources .
Well , as members of the Committee on Budgets , we did not really believe this .
The truth is somewhere in between .
It was indeed possible to resolve the bulk of costs through the redistribution of budgetary resources , but by adding up two amendments , there is an extra cost of approximately EUR 44 million .
This extra cost represents roughly the coverage of expenditures for one quarter , while we have seen that the setting up of the service is still at the 10 % level .
Obviously , the funds which I hope will be passed tomorrow would cover a period somewhat longer than what they are actually used for .
This does generate or could have generated certain tasks , such as amendment of the amount .
In our view , however , there is no point in doing so now .
It is much more important to have this service set up as soon as possible and see some progress with it , because one of the important messages of the Treaty of Lisbon is that we should be visible in the world .
However , while discarding time-wasting measures , we do formulate expectations , as it has already been done by previous rapporteurs .
We think that geographic balance is very important where the setting up of the service is concerned , but we did not include any binding provision of reserves , also in order to give an impetus to the whole system .
We would also like to see a guarantee that the funds available are used in a time-proportional manner and economically , as now we have to face constraints everywhere .
Finally , we would like to have very clear cooperation with , and mutual assistance from , Member States ' External Action Services , because if these elements are in place , it will allow certain tasks to be performed in countries where a Member State is not represented , but our European service is present .
This will also be cost efficient for the Member States affected and will obviously improve the atmosphere of cooperation .
Mr President , I hope that Parliament will support this redistribution of budgetary resources with its votes .
( DE ) Mr President , I would just like to interrupt the debate very briefly to inform you and my fellow Members that last night , three terrorists stormed the Chechen Parliament , killing several security officers and taking hostages .
The terrorists were also killed .
Parliament ought to express its condemnation of this act of terrorism in no uncertain terms , because terrorism can never be justified .
Our sympathy goes out to the families .
I wanted to mention this briefly , especially in view of the fact that we will be discussing the Northern Caucasus again this week .
I apologise for the interruption .
I would like to thank our fellow Member , Mr Fleckenstein , for this information .
Of course , in keeping with what you have said , we condemn all acts of terror .
This case is , for us , a particularly conspicuous act of terror , because it was carried out against a parliament .
We concur fully with your words , and we sympathise with the victims ' families and with those who have suffered .
I will make an official statement on this matter .
I had not been informed about this until now , but I will make an official statement shortly .
Thank you very much , Mr Fleckenstein , for calling our attention to this fact .

Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Fleckenstein for bringing this important matter to our attention .
Of course , the Commission also condemns any acts of terrorism and I am sure that it would react accordingly .
If you will allow me to return to our debate , let me start by thanking our rapporteur , Mr Rapkay , for the excellent work he has done to table this proposal to your distinguished House .
I commend the excellent cooperation we have had over the past months and weeks on this complex file .
Let me also extend my compliments to the shadow rapporteurs as well to the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Committee on Foreign Affairs who have worked hard and constructively during the whole process .
Last but not least , allow me to express my gratitude to Cathy , her team and the Commission services for their enormously hard work which will lead , I hope , to the establishment of the EEAS in a very short period of time .
This week 's work will conclude the complex work of laying the legal and budgetary foundation for the EEAS .
They build on and are fully in line with the cornerstone of this process - the EEAS decision .
I had the privilege of participating in the discussion on setting up the EEAS and I was honoured to represent the Commission in the famous quadrilogue in Madrid .

I can be a direct witness as to how important the contribution of the representatives of the European Parliament , Mr Brok , Mr Verhofstadt and Mr Gualtieri , was to the successful conclusion of our very intense debate on this matter .
I think the input they brought to our debate really contributed to having the EEAS as a truly efficient and effective European diplomatic service .
The same can be said about the work of your rapporteur , Mr Rapkay .
The amendments to the Staff Regulations appear to be of a purely administrative nature , but they are not .
They are essential in enabling the service to be up and running and to truly serve European interests .
The Commission is of the opinion that the compromise package tabled by your rapporteur , Mr Rapkay , is a very good result that can be fully supported .
The amendments have led , in my view , to a real improvement of the whole text .
Let me highlight just a couple of the core elements of the proposal .
As you know , the EEAS will be composed in its starting phase of the three sources mentioned in the treaty , namely , the Commission , the Council General Secretariat and national diplomats .
The relevant departments of the Council and the Commission will be transferred to the EEAS , while the existing rights of the staff working in these departments will be fully guaranteed .
National diplomats will be able to apply for published vacant posts .
I am happy to say that , as of 1 July 2013 , officials from other institutions including the European Parliament , will also be able to apply to the EEAS on an equal footing .
Permanent officials and national diplomats will have the same rights and obligations in the EEAS and the necessary provisions of the Staff Regulations will apply to ensure their independence and loyalty to the European Union .
National diplomats will have contracts which can last up to a maximum of ten years .
In addition , Member States will provide national diplomats with a guarantee of immediate reinstatement after their service in the European External Action Service .
The compromise also includes provisions which express a strong commitment to reaching geographical and gender balance in the European External Action Service .
The situation will be reviewed in 2013 with a report by the High Representative to be presented to the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission .
I know that some of you in this House would have wished for stronger provisions in these proposals , whereas others were vehemently opposed .
I am convinced that the amendments , as tabled to you now , constitute a balanced solution .
The negotiations on this file have not always been easy .
The preparatory process was quite complex as it required a consultation with our staff representative , but the hard work and the intensive negotiations have paid off , and you have a very good negotiation result for your House on your desks .
I therefore hope that the European Parliament will adopt these amendments tomorrow .
Allow me to conclude by expressing the Commission 's strong commitment to ensuring the smooth creation of the EEAS and its readiness to provide all necessary support and help to this new European service .
I hope that tomorrow will mark an historic vote by this House which will lead to the establishment of the European External Action Service .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , what we are discussing now is an encouraging beginning to a long day , rich in budgetary debates .
The launch of the External Action Service required amendments to the Financial Regulation but , for the first time , this has been done under the ordinary legislative procedure .
That is why tomorrow , Parliament will be amending the Council regulation .
I am really happy that we were able to reach an agreement in last week 's trialogue .
It is proof that we can deliver under the Lisbon Treaty .
It has also made it possible for us to give the European External Action Service a solid and timely basis .
I do not wish to go into too much detail , but it allows for the creation of a separate section of the budget , it secures optimal accountability of the heads of delegations and it allows this External Action Service section of the budget to be overseen by a Commission accounting officer and the internal auditor .
This is subject to review .
I should like to thank the rapporteurs , Mrs Gräßle and Mr Rivellini , for their constructive and cooperative approach .
With regard to amending budget No 6 , both arms of the budgetary authority are now , I hope , in a position to approve the amending budget without amendment .
That is also a pre-condition for the External Action Service to start operating very soon .
The justification for the first tranche of new AD posts is to cope with immediate additional tasks , but by 2013 , we aim to have upheld our commitment for one-third of AD staff to come from the diplomatic services of the Member States .
I therefore invite Parliament to support the amending budget already approved by the Council .
I should once again like to express my gratitude to the rapporteurs , Mr Surján and Mr Gualtieri .



High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy / Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , I rise briefly , first and foremost , to thank the rapporteurs Ms Gräßle , Mr Rapkay and Mr Gualtieri , very much indeed for the tremendous amount of work that they and many Members of this House have done in getting us to the point we are at this morning .
I know that these have been tough negotiations at times and you have been tough negotiators .
I believe that the outcome that we have before us is a good one and genuinely reflects the Lisbon Treaty in implementation , with Parliament playing a substantive and important role for the future .
This has been a joint and collaborative exercise and I am extraordinarily grateful to all of you for the work that has gone on .
Most importantly , I believe we have set the foundations for the service in a way that will engage Parliament properly in the future , and I have already made my commitments to transparency and the approach that I wish to take in working with Parliament .
I have also made it clear that this is a service that must reflect the breadth and the depth of the European Union .
It is a service that I wish every Member of this House , every Member State , and every Member of the Commission to be really proud of .
I wish to see Europe reflected in the staff that we have , in the ambassadors that we appoint , in the people at the centre .
You will have many opportunities to ensure that that commitment is brought to bear , especially with the review in 2013 .
I know , too , that Members have been concerned to ensure that we have proper training facilities and capacity .
We do have the legal basis for this , and I want to reassure this House that we will make sure that those who come from different traditions , from different sources , will be brought together to create a truly European service that again will reflect all that has been said in the process of building up to this moment .
I wanted to say thank you particularly to Ms Lichtenberger and Mr Saryusz-Wolski for the work they have done on the issue of training .
I know that there is much more we need to discuss and I look forward to doing so with you and with others over the coming weeks and months , but you have my full commitment to ensuring that training is part of how we approach the building of the service .
I say this in the context of the economic backdrop and climate in which this service is coming into being , and you have a full commitment from me that there will be a cost-effective service .
Finally , this enables us to fulfil our aspirations and ambitions in the world .
Every citizen of the European Union is affected by what we do in foreign policy , in trade and development , and in counter-terrorism .
This is , above all , a service for them , and I stand before the representatives of the citizens of Europe to make my commitment to see this service fulfil your ambitions .
Mr President , Baroness Ashton , Commissioners , honourable Members , on behalf of the Council , allow me to thank the Parliamentary rapporteurs who have invested so much effort working on the various dossiers needed to implement the European External Action Service : Mrs Gräßle and Mr Rivellini for the Financial Regulation , Mr Rapkay for the Staff Regulations and Mr Gualtieri and Mr Surján for the Draft amending budget 2010 .




After the political agreement of Madrid and the European Parliament 's opinion issued on 8 July , on 26 July , the General Affairs Council , as you know , adopted a decision setting out the organisation and functioning of the European External Action Service .
However , in order for this service to be properly established , we still need to adopt the three instruments that I have just mentioned .
Work on these various dossiers has been intensive both for Parliament and the Commission , for the High Representative and the Council , and everyone has made an effort to reach an agreement in the shortest possible time , within the deadlines we were set .
We can now all celebrate and give ourselves a pat on the back for getting the job done successfully thanks to the agreements achieved on the various dossiers , after Parliament 's vote here during this session .
On Monday , 25 October , the General Affairs Council may adopt these instruments at a political level .
The European External Action Service can therefore , as planned , begin operations on 1 December .
Everything was basically reiterated this morning by Baroness Ashton , the commissioners and the rapporteurs .
For my part , I shall limit myself to addressing the historical nature of this event which , a year after the Treaty of Lisbon came into force , embodies one of its most significant innovations .
By setting up the European External Action Service , both the coherence and the visibility of the Union 's external action will be strengthened considerably .
Obviously , the job is not over .
It is just the beginning and the challenge is equal to our expectations , but I am sure we can count on the High Representative , Baroness Ashton , to do so with energy and determination .
In any case , I wish her every success in this mission .
To conclude , Mr President , I should like once again to thank the European Parliament for its commitment and its constructive approach which was decisive in this matter .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs . - Mr President , my committee , the Committee on Foreign Affairs , pronounced itself in favour of a strong EEAS by an overwhelming majority .
' Strong ' means subject to democratic and parliamentary scrutiny and control .
' Strong ' means communautaire - i.e. representing the community of all 27 Member States , respecting the geographical dimension and diversity of the Union of today , and not of yesterday .
Half a year ago , geographical balance was not an issue .
Today it is , and will remain so , and paragraph 7 of our resolution and Article 6 ( 6 ) will point this out .
Two hundred MEPs from the new Member States in this House will also be keeping an eye on this .
Far more emphasis was placed on geographical balance than was the case in the initial proposal , although this was not sufficient .
Arithmetic is not always right , and laws and geography cannot be outvoted .
We believe that all men and women are equal and not that some are more equal than others .
This also applies to the foreign service of the Union .
Lady Ashton , we look forward to your actions to correct the present discrimination against new Member States in what will become the EEAS .
As rapporteur for the Committee on Foreign Affairs in respect of the Financial Regulation , my starting point was the Madrid agreement , but also the fact that greater detail was needed in some areas .
It is a question of creating openness and transparency in the budget by making the appropriations more specific , particularly when it comes to politically important tasks that place high demands on the budget .
We need to safeguard the right to information about the total costs , including the Member States ' share .
We need to safeguard satisfactory control over the handling of delegated powers , so that we do not lose our grip on this complex organisation .
This not only applies to Parliament 's influence ; above all , it is about the right of citizens to scrutiny of this important new service that the Union is now providing .
We have succeeded very well in this respect .
It has taken time and we fought hard to achieve it , but I believe that we can also say that , with this , we have laid a good foundation that will enable the new European External Action Service to enhance the EU 's role in the world , under the full and sound scrutiny of Parliament and the citizens , and that is important .
The opinion of the Committee on Development on the Staff Regulations was adopted unanimously .
The Committee on Development endorses the amendments put forward in the draft report of the Committee on Legal Affairs and , in particular , the amendments which are intended to ensure that recruitment of personnel to the European External Action Service is based on objective and transparent procedures set out in the Staff Regulations and conditions of employment of other servants of the Communities .
In addition , the Commission 's proposal is improved by the amendments proposed by the main rapporteur , Mr Rapkay , which introduce provisions concerning the personnel of the European External Action Service and which have been included in the political agreement .
They concern , in particular , gender equality and geographical balance among staff , as well as a balance between staff from European Union institutions and those with a background in national diplomatic corps .
I hope the new External Action Service will appreciate the autonomic character of cooperation on development and will not treat this issue as a ' carrot ' - an instrument for conducting foreign policy .
This was the most important objective of the Committee on Development 's work .
Mr President , Baroness Ashton , like many , my group wants some balance in the External Action Service staff in terms of geographic origin , gender and balance between the large and small countries .
However , it is the intergovernmental crusades and quotas all over again , and when all is said and done , candidates should ultimately be judged on their merits .
We are aware that neither current employment criteria nor staffing choices promote the required balance and that it cannot be achieved , as you said , just like that .
Yet although any imbalance concerns some people and , I confess , even in our ranks , we also know that it runs the risk of being exploited by those who want to weaken you , Baroness Ashton , and not support you in the challenges that lie ahead , and we know there will be some .
That is why , my group will tell you straight , it supports you and has every confidence in you , Baroness Ashton .
We must give you the means to succeed .
It is high time that the External Action Service was launched , but it is true that if , in two years time , you come back to us with a major problem of division amongst your staff , that will raise the small problem of discharge , and I am thinking of you as well as us when I say it should be avoided at all costs .
Good luck !
Mr President , Commissioner , here we are , finally , after many months of work , aiming to lay the foundations for the European Union 's future External Action Service but , like some of my fellow Members before me , I should like to thank the rapporteurs for the quality of their work .
Since our shared vision is to see a real European diplomatic service which is not just an extension of the diplomatic services of the 27 Member States , the Financial Regulation and Staff Regulations , which we will discuss today and vote on tomorrow , are of paramount importance .
They must give us the means to face a dual challenge : speaking with one voice on the international stage , but also guaranteeing consistency in all the Union 's external policies .
With this in mind , trade policy does not fall within the High Representative 's mandate , but as a former trade commissioner , I have no doubt that she can establish the dialogue which is needed to ensure that trade policy , as specified in the treaty , observes the goals of the Union 's External Action Service , in particular , sustainable development , eradication of poverty and the protection of human rights .
Lastly , I should like to stress that our shared political will will be measured by the budgetary resources earmarked ; our ability to have political punch on the international stage depends on it .


I , too , for my part , wish to congratulate Mrs Gräßle , Mr Rivellini and Mr Rapkay on the huge task they have completed .
Let us be very clear that setting up the European diplomatic service is a complex political process which must reflect the balance of interests and representation of Member States , while also providing the opportunity for the service to operate effectively and turn Europe into a key player on the international stage .
At the same time , I also wish to express my regret that the geographical balance proposal , which received majority support in the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Committee on Budgets and is also , I would like to point out , in line with the European Parliament resolution of 8 July 2010 , has not been mentioned sufficiently in the Rapkay report .
This is why , Lady Ashton , I am appealing to you , as you are the person who has perhaps the most to gain from the motivation and energy of the whole European Union .
I even dare believe that you will find a way to ensure that this geographical balance is adequately reflected in your service .
Good luck !
On behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , I welcome the establishment of the new body , which is one of the most important practical transpositions of the Treaty of Lisbon .
The new body obviously needs a budget .
Nevertheless , it is at least as important to define and comply with budgetary principles and financial rules , due to budgetary and financial accountability .
In the past years , our committee had a debate on this with DG RELEX .
Therefore , I would like to give special emphasis to this issue .
It is very important to establish appropriate organisational and operational regulations .
It is important to bear in mind that the duplication of tasks , functions and resources must be avoided , and all options must be considered in order to ensure the efficiency of expenditures .
Transparent and simple organisational structure and management of resources is the guarantee that the new organisation will operate efficiently .
Members will come from three sources : the EU institutions , the Member States and the experts of the recipient country .
It is especially important that this body comprising members of EU institutions and Member State employees has full equality in this respect .
Therefore , we consider that training is important , and it is very important that the principle and practice of selection be based on uniform processes and requirements .
The Committee on Budgets will control this on an annual basis .
I would like to thank all of my fellow rapporteurs whose professionalism meant we were able to reach a political agreement between the European Union institutions rather quickly and lay strong foundations for the establishment of the European External Action Service .
I have no doubt that the work of the EEAS will become increasingly effective and it will contribute to forming high level European foreign and security policy and strengthening the role of the European Union on the world stage .
The functioning of the EEAS must satisfy the principles of effective and efficient financial management .
This year , we allocated an additional EUR 9.5 million to the EEAS , but it will be possible to assess the true costs after the first year of operation when a report on all the expenditure related to the work of the EEAS will be presented to the European Parliament .
The European Parliament also plays a responsible role in the functioning of the EEAS to ensure the effective use of EEAS money and to make sure that European Union taxpayers ' money creates real added value for the Community 's policy and its people .
I am certain no one in this House is in the slightest doubt as to the important role the European External Action Service will play in the work of the Union .
Our work over the past few months has concentrated on ensuring that the service has the right legal basis and suitable instruments to enable its future work to be effective .
We have worked under time pressure , and the negotiations have often been difficult .
We have reached agreement with the Council and the Commission on many issues and I hope that the compromises which have been worked out will yield a favourable end result .
The Committee on Legal Affairs had the task of proposing amendments to the Staff Regulations which will be appropriate to the needs of the new service and which will also guarantee that it will be independent and that its work will be of a high standard .
I think the amendments adopted yesterday evening at the meeting of the Committee on Legal Affairs do give such guarantees , although personally , I do not find them completely satisfying , particularly on one matter .
I think the question of geographical balance , which is emphasised so often , could have been resolved in a much better way .
I do , of course , welcome the declarations made by the High Representative that she is going to give particular attention to ensuring participation in the service by citizens from all the Member States , and I also welcome the provision that in 2013 , a report will be presented in which the High Representative will provide information on the work of the service .
Union diplomacy is supposed to be European , and the truth is that the citizenship of its staff members should not play a special role .
However , where we come from and what our roots are form our worldview , and this has a significant influence on our perception of the world around us .
It is a fact that there are still Member States in the Union which are under-represented in all the institutions .
If Europe is to be united in diversity , it is necessary to give Europe a chance for that diversity to be properly maintained and expressed .
This , in fact , was what our discussions on geographical balance were about , and not , as some mistakenly think and understand , guaranteeing fixed quotas for Member States .
I thank the rapporteurs for good cooperation , and my wish for Mrs Ashton is that she will be able to put our efforts to good use in her work .
Mr President , I would first of all like to express my sincere thanks to the rapporteurs for the excellent work they have done and for the compromises that have been reached .
Of course , not everyone is satisfied yet , and I also understand the concern , particularly regarding geographical balance .
However , I can assure Mr Saryusz-Wolski that we all - not just the new Members of this House - must ensure that we achieve a better geographical balance , and that we all - not just the women - must ensure that we achieve a healthy gender balance .
That is necessary , and I take the promises seriously .
We will certainly press for these things to be implemented .
Above all , it is a question of providing a common service of the highest quality for the European Union .
I see no contradiction here .
On the contrary , everything must be reduced to a common denominator , because now it is time to act ; now it is also time to show our commitment to the European Union operating at international level .
In Iran , the High Representative has already taken over the leadership role , and it is very important that we achieve good results here .
In the Middle East , it is important for us not only to provide funds , but also to get involved , and we should do this for the sake of the issue at hand , not simply for the prestige .
Where Russia is concerned , we need to ensure that we achieve a pragmatic relationship , albeit one based on values , particularly in the interests of our common neighbours .
With the United States , we need to negotiate on equal terms .
Where there are problems , we also need to address these openly so that we can stand together with the United States in the fight against terrorism and in the reshaping of globalisation .
China is a new emerging power , and we do not want to prevent that , but we object to a form of nationalism that is developing a certain degree of aggressiveness , particularly in that region in Asia .
We want to involve China more in the international community , including in the international institutions .
For the High Representative , too , that is surely also one of the most important issues that needs to be addressed , namely to ensure that , in these new international multilateral institutions , we also achieve an appropriate new regulation and new distribution of influence and power , where the European Union is not restricted , but where there is acceptance of the fact that there are also new global players .
All of these are huge tasks for the diplomatic service and ones for which the High Representative needs our full support .
The Belgian Presidency - in other words you , Mr Chastel - has just promised that it will also give due support to the High Representative .
This promise is a good one , and the words of congratulations are also good , but I hope that the foreign ministers also recognise the fact that it does not make any sense to play one of us off against the other , but that there is only one option , and that is for the foreign ministers , the High Representative and us in this Parliament to be able , together , to represent Europe strongly to the outside world .
First of all , I would like to express my thanks for the excellent spirit of cooperation that we all experienced during our work on this very important matter .
Baroness Ashton certainly does not have an easy task ahead of her now that our common European External Action Service is to be established .
However , together with the Council and the Commission , Parliament has laid the foundation for an effective representative organisation that will truly be able to represent Europe and European values and interests around the world .
The EU 's strength is diversity .
The European Union is made up of people with different backgrounds , skills and experience .
By creating an External Action Service that utilises men and women recruited from all of our Member States , we are also utilising Europe 's greatest strength and resource .
At the same time , there must be absolutely no doubt that it is skills and qualifications that are decisive when it comes to making appointments to posts within the new External Action Service .
The European Parliament has a fine motto : united in diversity .
These are words that carry obligations and they have a deep meaning .
I hope that , under Baroness Ashton , the External Action Service will develop into a genuine European service that will represent citizens from all of our Member States , women as well as men .
Those who are to work in our common External Action Service must be clearly trained to represent the whole of the Union .
I wholeheartedly wish Baroness Ashton success in this important work .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I would like to congratulate everyone involved on how we have done this and where we are today .
We have saved the Community method and development priorities .
We have enhanced democratic scrutiny , especially on CFSP lines .
We have laid the ground for an inclusive service that is based on equality and an esprit de corps .
Thank you , Mrs Ashton , for mentioning the training measures in respect of gender equality and geographical balance in your proactive measures .
I should like to thank everyone in this House , Mrs Ashton and the Presidency .
But have we created a modern service that is more than a 28th national diplomatic service ?
What is the added value of the European External Action Service ?
I think the game is still open .
First of all , it will require effective coordination across policy areas .
I still want to see the structures in place to achieve that .
Second , we have to enhance crisis management and conflict prevention .
That can be an added value provided by the European Union .
That will depend on the implementation of the ' appropriate structure ' , and it will depend on how we use new posts and posts created through synergies across the Council and the Commission .
Along these lines , do we need more deputy ambassadors ?
Or will it not be your role , Mrs Ashton , to send an SMS ?
We are living in the 21st century .
The role of former diplomats belongs in the 19th century .
Should we not have a debate on whether we really need these people , and what we need them for ?
I hope your establishment plan and your staffing priorities will reflect the priorities as promised and will make the service really deliver added value - something that not every national diplomatic service has , and can do .
For us , there are two priorities : conflict prevention and civilian crisis management .
Create a mediation cell , for example .
On human rights , we want this service to be strong on human rights , with capacity at the highest level .
Gender equality does not end with staffing priorities .
It is also about gender mainstreaming and attaching a high degree of importance to missions and mandates .
In that respect , I think it would be a good idea to have an overview and review of the existing CSDP missions that have been completed , to learn from the past for the future of your service , Mrs Ashton .
I think that will bring us all forward .
I wish everyone luck and I am ready to cooperate again constructively in the future .
The Union is an association of 27 states , and this fact should be reflected in the structure of the institution which is to represent the European Union externally .
We must not create the impression that some countries are not being given recognition in relation to creation of the new service .
The service should reflect the cultural wealth and different national traditions in Europe , including in the field of diplomacy .
Therefore , a group of MEPs , which includes myself , has prepared an amendment which provides for the introduction of a geographical balance factor .
This is so that when candidates selected in competitions are found to have similar competences , the deciding factor for appointment should be the geographical criterion .
It is not , therefore , a rigid solution which imposes geographical criteria of this type when recruiting staff for the future service , but a flexible and auxiliary measure .
Adoption of such a provision will reduce current disproportions and allow us , in time , to ensure greater representativeness .
I would like to emphasise that this solution preserves the central significance of the competence criterion , which is so important for those who have created these measures .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , as this is the first speech today by a Member from my group , please allow me to start by saying , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , that we support the French workers who are on general strike against President Sarkozy 's anti-social measures .
The reasons mentioned by the President in his opening address for the lateness of the Council 's representatives are the blockades .
There are numerous blockades and it is a general strike , which our group hopes will be a complete success and result in these anti-social policies being rectified across Europe .
I would like to thank my fellow Members for the work they have done , but inform them that unfortunately our group is going to abstain tomorrow .
We are not going to vote against but we are not going to be able to vote in favour , as we consider that unfortunately , the result was not what we were aiming for .
What we were aiming for was comprehensive control by this House of the External Action Service .
Of course it has not been possible to change the structure , as that was not the matter in hand , and we are not convinced by that structure , which is taking responsibility for security and external policy .
We have fought a very significant democratic battle in the national parliaments - at least in mine - on security , in order to have complete control so that even any deployment of troops abroad must be subject to comprehensive parliamentary control .
Therefore , we are very far from that control , and for those reasons , we are not going to vote in favour tomorrow .
In any case , I would like to conclude by thanking you for the work you have done .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , when defining the structure of the new diplomatic service , we must not repeat the mistakes of the past but should aim to design a streamlined , low cost and , above all , efficient body .
An instrument at the service of European policy - and I emphasise ' European ' - must not select its staff on the basis of their geographical origin or gender , but according to their quality .
I agree that the Member States should be represented in the structure of the new service and that a large proportion of women would be appropriate .
None of that , however , can take precedence over the criteria of merit and professional excellence .
What we must do instead is ensure strictly equal access to these posts for everyone , without discrimination .
As regards training , there are places like the European University Institute in Florence that have the expertise to provide excellent training .
I therefore think the idea of setting up a European diplomatic academy from scratch would be inappropriate and costly .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in order to be able to represent the interests of the European States on the international stage in a more effective manner , foreign policy actions must be discussed in advance and then communicated to the outside world with one voice .
With the European External Action Service , we are now attempting to bring the foreign policy instruments of the Union within a coherent framework .
The resources that we already have are being bundled together and new ones are being added to complete the picture .
As stated in the report by our fellow Members , in view of the novel nature of this structure , ambitious provisions with regard to transparency and budgetary and financial accountability need to be applied .
We need a detailed overview of the tasks and of the staff employed in the EEAS .
In order for the budgetary sovereignty of the European Parliament to also extend to the EEAS , the service must be incorporated into the structure of the Commission , and the European Parliament , as the budgetary authority , must be provided with the all information to enable it to scrutinise the accounts efficiently .
The discharge of the Council remains on our agenda .
The EEAS can only bear its name if all of the Member States are fairly represented within it .
On the other hand , of course , the qualifications of the candidates must take priority .
This leads me to the proportion of women represented .
It is far too low for my liking and I call for qualified women to be found for these positions .
They do exist .
( DE ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Frank Sinatra was referred to as ' the Voice ' .
However , what would he have been without a big band ?
You , Baroness Ashton , are now the voice of Europe , and with the External Action Service , you are getting a splendid orchestra .
I hope that you will make use of this orchestra to bring Europe 's voice to the fore and to protect our interests .
Since Europe 's first priority is to safeguard peace in Europe , the next major task , in view of the international challenges - from energy security right up to combating terrorism , globalisation and much more - is to look after Europe 's interests in the world .
You and this service will have a special role to play in this regard .
Therefore , the progress that we make in the interests of our citizens will depend very strongly on your work and that of your orchestra .
In this process , we have succeeded in enhancing Parliament 's cooperation , control and right to information , including in the area of the budget .
We have succeeded in safeguarding the Community character of the policies that are Community policies and also in ensuring that more than 60 % of the staff must be Community officials .
I am certain that , in contrast to the Council , we have managed to introduce better geographical balance and gender parity .
The governments did not do this ; we did their job for them .
Moreover , if this is now legally binding and a review must also be carried out in 2013 , then it is an excellent achievement by this House - a good compromise that we have reached between the institutions .
This instrument must also be observed by us .
We will do this with the necessary flexibility , but we will also exert pressure to ensure that you , Baroness Ashton , are able to succeed in your task .
You will have our support in this , but you can also be sure of our criticism if we do not agree , because I believe that we can only stand together on this matter if our citizens have a future .
Mr President , there will be no successfully united Europe without a far-sighted vision of how our common interests must be promoted outside the borders of the Union at global level .
Such a vision will not last without an ambitious , accountable , efficient and ' communautarian ' External Action Service .
Such a service will not function effectively without staff recruited on the basis of merit .
I believe most of us can agree on these principles .
The devil is , however , in the detail .
And it is precisely these details , which have transformed a report that was meant to be technical into a source of passionate political debate , which risks dividing us deeply .
There is no dilemma between ' communautarianism ' and intergovernmentalism , between merits or quotas , between old and new Member States .
Nevertheless , the triumph of ' communautarianism ' requires that each and every national of each and every Member State feels fairly treated on the basis of their merits .
The triumph of the merit criterion must be tested by the equilibrium of the results of the selection , since God , I believe , distributed merits and sins in a balanced way to men and women , old and young , small and big , weak and powerful , westerners and easterners , etc .
The fact of the matter is that some in our Union - mainly but not only among the new members - feel they are discriminated against .
Even if this perception were wrong , we should still treat it with respect and care since our unity is of the utmost importance .
It is not the criteria which are being questioned , but the insufficiency of guarantees that they will be properly enhanced , and of corrective measures to be applied when imbalances are obvious .
I can only hope that the High Representative will correct the imbalances in the process which apparently fuelled these perceptions , and I also hope that a future European diplomatic academy , or something similar , will help us to create a corps of European diplomats who are competent and loyal to our common interest and to the European institutions .
( NL ) Mr President , in this debate , which mainly focuses on the supervision and organisation of the European External Action Service ( EEAS ) , we must not lose sight of the general interest of this service - which , after all , is very great .
This could prove one of the greatest strides towards a truly full-fledged European foreign policy .
Even in my own country , which I am afraid is becoming increasingly introverted , a transfer of tasks to this new EEAS is in evidence in the new coalition agreement .
Admittedly , this has only concerned the consular tasks so far , but I am convinced that the realisation will soon come that other diplomatic tasks , too , would be best handled at European level .
Mr President , today we are focusing , in particular , on the financial and organisational side of the EEAS , and that is an important aspect .
Not until sufficient transparency and financial responsibility are in place will this service be fully capable of action .
Therefore , I am delighted with the agreement that has been reached among the institutions to really get started .
That had been at risk on account of Parliament 's putting very detailed requirements on the table .
Indeed , we , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , had opposed those somewhat .
Nevertheless , I should like to congratulate the rapporteurs .
A good package has been achieved , which will enjoy the full support of my group .
I hope , above all , that after tomorrow 's vote , this package will enable the service to get up and running very quickly .
Mr President , the set-up of the hybrid sui generis EEAS has been characterised by much debate , but High Representative Ashton deserves some credit for crafting a consensus on the way forward at a time when European leaders have been distracted by the eurozone crisis .
British Conservatives opposed the creation of this service , fearing it would erode Britain 's prerogative to exercise an independent foreign policy .
Now that the service is a political reality , we will engage with it constructively in order to ensure that British interests are indeed promoted and protected .
One way is by lobbying for British EU officials and British diplomats from the Foreign Office to fill posts in the service , because surprisingly , the UK is under-represented in the EU institutions .
While the new service needs to be representative of the EU 's 27 Member States , it must be built , first and foremost , on merit .
Finally , Member States are making deep cuts in public spending .
The EU must be sensitive to the need for austerity , particularly when it comes to the budget of the EEAS .
Budget neutrality is vital if the European External Action Service is to gain and retain the confidence and approval of all of Europe 's citizens .
( CS ) The European External Action Service ( EEAS ) that is being set up represents a completely new instrument for institutionalising the foreign policy of the European Union .
At the moment , I see two basic problems associated with this process .
First , it is clear that foreign and security policy constitutes part of the sovereignty of the Member States .
When decisions are made on matters of principle , the power of veto still applies , and so , in the case of major decisions , such as the intervention in Iraq or the secession of Kosovo , there has been no European Union foreign policy in existence .
The foreign service that has been created will therefore largely have a reduced agenda and , in the case of major political decisions , will only second the decisions of individual countries , or even be silent .
The bone of contention is the composition of the diplomatic service , and the available information indicates that the role of the new Member States in the selection of this team has been disregarded , to put it mildly .
Mr President , while the idea of having a European External Action Service was never really welcome around Europe , the EU bureaucracy managed to sell it , saying it would be budget neutral .
Now we realise that it is not budget neutral , and that it will cost EUR 34 million more than the EUR 441 million originally planned .
And this difference emerges even before it is fully operational .
The report on the Financial Regulation calls for the Commission 's chief accountant and the Commission 's internal auditor to act in these roles for the EEAS , while it was agreed in Madrid that the EEAS would be a separate institution with its own heads of finance and audit .
It does not look as though the agreements made in Madrid back in June were set in stone .
We are now lost in a sea of confusion about the EEAS 's structure .
The implementation of this Lisbon Treaty novelty looks pretty disgraceful , but I must say I am not surprised .
As always , however , it will be the taxpayer who pays for these ' efficiencies ' .
( NL ) Mr President , what a sad - even tragic - day .
We are discussing the financing of Baroness Ashton 's new European External Action Service ( EEAS ) .
The Dutch have never been given chance to express their opinion on the Treaty of Lisbon , and now this EEAS , which will swallow up millions , is being rammed down our throats .
This is an insult to democracy .
The EEAS will cost us millions of euro extra in the rest of this year alone , and again next year .
The political hobby of the eurocrats may well cost money but it will leave us empty-handed .
Let it be absolutely clear that the Dutch Party for Freedom ( PVV ) will never , under any circumstances , support this monster from the vaults of the European Union .
We say ' no ' to the EEAS , ' no ' to a European superstate , and ' yes ' to true freedom and democracy shaped by the sovereign Member States themselves .
( PL ) Ladies and gentlemen , when discussing the structure of the European External Action Service , we must not avoid or marginalise the question of maintaining the right geographical balance among the staff .
At present , the number of employees from the countries of the ' old 15 ' is significantly and disproportionately greater than the number of those from the new Member States .
I will quote some figures : before the last nominations , of 115 ambassadors , just two were from countries which acceded to the Union from 2004 onwards .
Among the 29 ambassadors who were recently nominated , only four are from the new Member States .
We must not allow such a division to become a rule in the operation of the future External Action Service .
Without the right geographical representation , we are not in a position to establish a strong External Action Service which will act effectively in the interests of all of us .
Neither will we be proud of such a service , as the High Representative , Lady Ashton , has said .
I am also convinced that the use of a transition period , during which the disproportionally low representation of the new Member States would be gradually increased , will allow us to move efficiently and effectively towards a situation in which our objective , which is to promote the European Union as a key player in the international arena , will be achieved .
( BG ) Today 's session is the last one in our Parliament where we can discuss the structure , funding and general operating framework of the European External Action Service .
From tomorrow , when we are due to make the final decisions , we will expect real results .
I am confident , of course , even as the debate went on today , that the European Parliament will be a European institution which will help , encourage and pass on its ideas to the new service so that it will be really effective and successfully create a more active , visible role for the European Union on the international stage .
In fact , the European External Action Service is perhaps the most visible result of the Treaty of Lisbon .
All of us who supported this treaty would like to see this service , too , as a successful project .
Let me tell you , Lady Ashton , that you inherited a heavily imbalanced administration and it has transpired , unfortunately , that the main criticisms were somehow levelled at you .
Indeed , at the start of this year , since when you have been High Representative and Vice-President , new Member States had just one head of delegation in the European Union .
I want to challenge outright the notion that there is any conflict between qualifications and geographical balance .
On the contrary , I believe that geographical balance goes hand in hand with higher qualifications .
This is why we hope that your commitment will be implemented from now on .
( DE ) Mr President , the European External Action Service is one of the most important decisions in the Treaty of Lisbon .
It is now only six weeks until Baroness Ashton will no longer primarily be the Minister responsible for establishing an EU foreign ministry ; she will instead be the Foreign Minister for Europe , and that is a good thing .
This will commence on 1 December and we wish you every success in this regard .
We have had many debates and we have achieved a great deal .
It was a fruitful political battle .
The lack of democracy associated with the old common foreign and security policy has been eliminated , there is a greater degree of accountability and the quality of the public debate has improved .
There will be more stringent budgetary control , the prerequisites for a genuine team spirit have been created and national diplomats can , if they so wish , remain in the European External Action Service .
There will be no geographical quotas - you could sometimes get the impression that this is the most important issue here , but it most definitely is not .
Germany , in particular , would benefit greatly from a quota , but I am nevertheless against this .
A common form of training will be provided .
I believe that the prerequisites for a successful EEAS are in place .
In other words , the European Parliament is almost happy .
We would be really happy if you were now to take advantage of the opportunity and actually establish the appropriate structure for conflict prevention and crisis management that has been promised .
Then we would have European added value right from the start .
( PL ) We are distressed to see that the proposals of the majority of the members of the Committee on Foreign Affairs concerning balanced geographical representation in forming the Union 's External Action Service are encountering serious problems and outright determined resistance .
Difficulties are also evident in developing principles for recruiting personnel for Union diplomatic offices .
The principle of solidarity and representativeness , which has guided the Union for a long time , must not be obscured by the selfishness of some of the large Member States .
The distribution of positions in diplomatic offices lies in the hands of Mrs Ashton , who is present , today , and who is making appointments exclusively on a discretionary basis .
Out of the well over 100 diplomatic offices around the world , the sixth largest Member State of the European Union , Poland , has been given only two .
It should , therefore , be asked what criteria guided the Commissioner when she distributed appointments in this way .
I would like to remind everyone that it is , actually , our House which decides the structure of the budget for shaping Union diplomacy .
( IT ) Mr President , after the adoption of the Council decision establishing the organisation and functioning of the European External Action Service , we are today called on to make that decision operational by amending the Financial Regulation and the Staff Regulations of Union officials .
In that respect , I would like to focus on an aspect of the report that has involved us in difficult negotiations : the issue of geographical balance in the composition of the European diplomatic corps .
Some Members would , in fact , have preferred different criteria for the selection of staff , based on country of origin and citizenship .
Such proposals have been avoided by means of balanced compromise amendments , which have been able to take geographical and gender balance into account without imposing country-based selection criteria .
The selection of country-based quotas would not , in fact , have been a suitable or desirable solution .
After over 50 years of European integration , the Union 's first real diplomatic corps is now being created .
It has to be put in a position to be able to develop a common foreign policy and serve the Union 's interests on the international stage .
For it to accomplish this task , it is crucial that its staff represent the Union and not the Member States of which they are citizens or have been diplomatic officers .
That is the line that the Committee on Legal Affairs took yesterday when adopting the Rapkay report , and that is the line that I hope will continue to be taken in the vote in plenary .
( SL ) We need a strong European Union , a European Union of all 27 Member States , not just a minority .
We wish the European External Action Service ( EEAS ) every success .
We , the citizens of Europe , need it , the European Union needs it and the whole world needs it .
How do we ensure that the EEAS becomes a service for all citizens of the European Union ?
How do we ensure its efficiency and success , and its status as the genuine crème de la crème of Europe ?
Only if it recruits diplomats of all , I repeat all , nationalities of the European Union .
There is no greater threat to the strength and unity of the European Union than a situation where the EU is , in the main , represented by citizens of only six nationalities .
Two thirds of the current service , inherited by Mrs Ashton , have been recruited from just six countries .
What about the remaining 21 ?
What about the new Member States ?
I therefore regret the fact that we will not be adopting the provisions adopted by the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Committee on Budgets , as that would help us rectify the worst example of imbalance in at least ten years , I repeat ten years .
We need a strong European Union of all 27 Member States .
( PL ) An absolutely exceptional procedure is ending , today - the procedure of establishing a new European institution .
I represent the new Member States , and have watched with fascination to see what the essence of integration is like in practice , what the pushing and shoving between various institutions is like and how , finally , something has been born which is intended to consolidate , by a common foreign policy , that which is so much lacking in the European Union .
It has proved possible , and Parliament has been part of it .
We are very proud that we have been actively involved .
The new service is a service of the entire European Union , and not of just one institution .
However , this integration has , in addition , been about integration of the new countries with the old ones .
Let us say this frankly - the examination result is partially good .
If , today , there are questions and doubts , it is because the Commissioner , the Vice-President of the Commission , has to ensure that all recruitment decisions are transparent and that they show that the best people are being appointed .
Then I will not fight for geographical parity , because , for me , a parity of knowledge and qualifications is much more important than geographical parity , but you , Mrs Ashton , have to prove this .
( The President cut off the speaker )

( SK ) We are talking here today about a project that is unique ; we are talking about our common European foreign service .
I must point out that each of the players has their line in the sand , despite which the rapporteurs have managed to draw up a compromise that is acceptable to all , and I trust the European Parliament will support it tomorrow .
It rather concerns me that most of the speakers have focused on just one topic , which is geographical and ethnic representation , and few have spoken of the philosophy and idea behind this project .
The European Union , ladies and gentlemen , is losing its geopolitical standing and the common foreign service is the step that can put the EU back among the major great powers .
I am confident that Baroness Ashton will make a selection that will truly represent not only all 27 Member States of the EU , but will , first and foremost , represent the EU as our shared project .
( DE ) Madam President , the European External Action Service will , in future , take on the primary role in the European Union 's common foreign and security policy .
In order for it to do justice to this role , clear rules are needed to allow the EEAS to do its job smoothly and efficiently .
I would , in particular , like to highlight the monitoring guarantee for the financial transactions of the EEAS , which were clearly dealt with in the report by Mrs Gräßle and Mr Rivellini .
The key elements are , above all , the annual statements of assurance and activity reports that are to be presented to Parliament , as well as the European Parliament 's power of discharge .
I also welcome the approach of making the Member States liable for financial irregularities committed by the relevant staff from the individual Member States .
This report has my full support and it represents an important step in the right direction .
Madam President , I shall start off by congratulating the High Representative today for upholding the long parliamentary tradition of crossing the floor .
Most politicians who do that end up losing friends , but I am sure today she has won them .
There will still be some people in this House who have counted the number of minutes you have been on one side or another to accuse you of bias and , of course , I have my own questions about this new service .
I want crisis management fully in , I want human rights mainstreamed and linked to trade , and I have sympathy with what many of our eastern European colleagues say , but do I have absolute confidence that you are creating this service fully in the spirit of the treaty ?
Do I have confidence that you will continue to bring together and to speak for all of the different interests in this European Union ?
Do I have absolute confidence of your lifelong commitment to the principles of equality and representatives ?
Yes , I do , and so will this Parliament in our vote tomorrow .
( SL ) Finding a compromise with regard to the financial foundations of the European External Action Service ( EEAS ) has been as complicated as Europe itself .
Coordinating interests in every situation will be a tough job , because we are all different and because we have a different history .
However , the fact remains that intelligence , experience , wisdom and good will are most definitely distributed proportionally across Europe , and that is the foundation which actually connects us and which opens up the future for us .
I think it would be a very good thing if , in future , we paid as much attention to foreign policy , that is , Europe 's role in foreign policy at a global level , as we have paid to finances thus far .
This service will not be shaping foreign policy ; foreign policy will be shaped by Mrs Ashton , in cooperation with other players , amongst whom , I can assure you , Parliament is a major stakeholder .
I wish you , of course , every success in you work .
Madam President , I want to come back to the issue of the added value that the External Action Service can deliver .
I think one of the added values that it can , and indeed must deliver , is on policy coherence for development which Mrs Ashton has committed to .
This priority needs to be reflected in the staff policy , and especially in training , as well as in development in general , human rights and conflict prevention .
Sensitivity for these matters cannot be achieved by proclamation but needs thorough commitment and thorough training .
That is what we want to see from 1 December onwards .
( SK ) The European External Action Service is gradually developing its role .
Today , we are debating the funding for its activities .
In this context , it is necessary , Baroness Ashton , to be aware that the funding for the work of all European institutions is provided by the individual Member States of the European Union .
Even the European External Action Service will ultimately survive only on the money from the 27 Member States of the EU , and you must , Baroness Ashton , be well aware of this fact .
Even though we demand professionalism , quality and experience , above all , when selecting diplomats for this service , we cannot completely abandon the principle of balanced geographical representation from the individual Member States .
An absence of representation in the important external activities of the EU might provoke feelings of injustice or injury among the countries affected .
I would therefore like to ask you , Madam High Representative , to take a sensitive approach to the selection of diplomats .
( ES ) Madam President , we all agree that the External Action Service is an historic opportunity for European integration .
However , we need to have a broad perspective on it , as this is not the time for internal battles about resources being transferred or being retained in the short term , or for wars between the different European institutions .
Instead , what we need now is to have a general view of what the European Union has to be in the world ; in other words , we need to do exactly the opposite of what happened a few days ago when the Nobel Peace Prize was awarded , when too many voices were heard from Europe , which were not all brave voices .
I should point out that one of the exceptions to this was the President of this House , Mr Buzek , who produced a brilliant and commendable statement .
High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy / Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , very briefly from the other side of the Chamber - and I hope I have sat for the right number of minutes - I would again like to thank the honourable Members very much for a debate which I have listened to with great interest .
I take away with me the strength of feeling on geographical and gender balance within the context of a service that is truly European , appointed on merit .
I take away with me the need for people to see our working crisis management enhanced and to see it properly reflected in the European service .
I take away with me what I have described as a ' silver thread ' of human rights that must run through everything that we do in the service ; and I take away , again , the reminder of the economic backdrop against which I am pulling this service together , and the desire that honourable Members have to see an efficient service that uses resources properly and effectively .
Most of all , after what has been a long journey of many months , I take away the desire of this House to see the service come into being , to reflect the needs of the constituents you represent , and to be a service that will serve them well .
It is my promise to you to try and reflect that in everything that the service does .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I shall give a short reaction to Ms Andreasen - who is already absent - on the principle of budget neutrality .
It is our hope that the principle should establish itself in the longer run , with savings in the national diplomatic services , in the Commission and in the Council , and with the same internal auditor and accounting officer for the Commission and for the External Action Service .
It is a good solution for the time being , to be revised by 2013 , and the Financial Regulation does not prejudge the revision .
In the hope of a good positive vote tomorrow , I will abstain from further comment .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , I , too , would like to thank the honourable Members for their support and for the very positive atmosphere in this debate , and it is also very important to thank the Council for their important input into the whole exercise .
I think that this positive atmosphere has brought us very close to the historic decision of tomorrow .
So , let me once again express my gratitude to Parliament 's rapporteurs and representatives because they made the positive atmosphere here this morning possible .
I would like to use this opportunity to wish Cathy and her new service luck and success and to wish all of us a strong , coherent and coordinated EU foreign policy because I am sure that , with Cathy and the EEAS , the EU will further increase its influence on global affairs .
In conclusion , let me reiterate that the Commission is ready for close cooperation from the start and for the best of synergies that our institutions and Member States can achieve together .
Madam President , after my speech at the start of this debate , I actually only have two more comments to make .
The first , which I quite deliberately left to the end of the debate , is that I would like to thank all of the shadow rapporteurs for their friendly and constructive cooperation .
It is quite simply easier to negotiate when you know that your colleagues support you .
For that reason , these were not the most difficult of negotiations .
My second comment , however , is one that I would like to reiterate with regard to what has repeatedly been at the centre of this debate , namely , the question of geographical balance .
Mrs Neynsky stole the show by saying that the compromise states nothing at all about this .
I would simply suggest that , once we have adopted this , she quietly and calmly reads the text .
Read the text !
Reading the text will enlighten the mind .
Then you will see that the compromise most definitely does contain statements - and indeed very strict , legally binding statements - on this matter .
Then all of your concerns should , in fact , be dispelled .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I think the genuine satisfaction that has emerged in this debate shows that Members were aware of just how difficult yet important the task facing us was .
How to unify functions associated with different policies and subject to different decision-making procedures in order to make the European Union 's external actions more consistent , without endangering the communautaire nature of certain policies , but embracing the contributions of bodies operating in the field of the common security and defence policy , was not merely a problem of European law or administration science or a test of the power relations between institutions .
Instead , it was a necessary condition if we were to endow the High Representative with an instrument that could enhance Europe 's potential on the world stage , strengthen its role as a civilised power , and allow us to act more effectively in the Middle East , the Horn of Africa , the Caucasus or the Balkans .
Well , I think we have risen to the challenge marvellously , and so our satisfaction is fully justified .
The High Representative will , I believe , enjoy Parliament 's exacting support as she performs her duties .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 20 October at 12 : 30 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
This vote highlights that there is no equality between Member States and no solidarity within any political group .
The approval of the amendment tabled by the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , which will introduce ' merit ' as the criterion for selecting the EU 's Heads of Delegation ( the diplomats who will represent the European Union in third countries ) , will show us , once it has been implemented by the European External Action Service of socialist Catherine Ashton , that Romania and other new Member States will be left empty-handed .
I am disappointed that even this time , we have not been able to reach a consensus among Romanian MEPs promoting Romania 's interests .
I would have expected Adrian Severin , as a former foreign minister ( albeit for only a few months ) , to support the introduction of some clear criteria regarding the allocation of Head of Delegation posts ( number of inhabitants , number of seats in the European Parliament and the weighting of votes in the Council ) , instead of a highly subjective and vague criterion based on ' merit ' .
Especially because , as far as I am aware , intelligence is spread evenly across the EU and we do not have all the clever people gathered in the West , with only the idiots left in the East .
When it comes to diplomacy , Romania has representatives who deserve to take up positions as Heads of Delegation .
The European External Action Service must contribute to meeting its objective stipulated by the Treaty of Lisbon - implementing the EU 's external actions efficiently and consistently .
The current procedure for selecting staff is protracted and complicated , with positions being taken up gradually until the number of staff required to make the service fully operational is reached .
A number of new EU Member States , particularly the last two which joined in the last wave of enlargement , are under-represented on the foreign relations side within DG RELEX .
Lady Ashton has already expressed her desire for the EEAS to be made up of the best officials selected on the basis of professional criteria , and not according to countries of origin .
Let us remind Lady Ashton that all EU Member States enjoy the same rights and , therefore , they must be sufficiently represented in the structures of the new European diplomatic service , both at the headquarters in Brussels and in the EU delegations .
We therefore urge Lady Ashton to bear in mind that the European Union has 27 Member States .
They must be able to contribute through their representatives in the EEAS to achieving the EU 's foreign policy objectives and to ensuring this institution 's credibility in the eyes of all European citizens .
The Rapkay report on amending the Staff Regulations in the context of establishing the European External Action Service , the EEAS , is a very important document on the road to creating a Union foreign policy .
In the few days before adoption of the report , the matter of geographical balance proved to be a bone of contention .
Fellow Members from what are known as the old countries argued that the EU diplomatic corps which is just being set up should recruit the best of the best , and that recruitment should be based only on the criteria of candidates ' knowledge and experience ( merit only ) , while as Members from the new countries , we drew attention to the fact that in our countries , too , there is no shortage of superb professionals , but that despite the passing of six years from accession , the 10 new countries are still strongly under-represented in Union structures .
For example , the proportion of Poles in the European Commission Directorate-General for External Relations , which will be incorporated into the EEAS , amounts to only 2 % .
The concept of geographical balance , in the version proposed by the rapporteur , is , in my opinion , not clear enough and cannot be considered a clear legal basis for taking measures to correct this imbalance .
Therefore , unfortunately , I cannot endorse the report , although apart from this question , it does contain many valuable proposals .
in writing . - The European Parliament has used its new powers in a creative and responsible way , introducing new balances into the External Service 's architecture .
These should not be the balances of yesterday 's Europe , but the balances of the enlarged EU that are reflected in amendment seven .
I am happy that the High Representative has taken on board most of Parliament 's proposals , including the principle of parliamentary supervision .
It is crucial that the issue of geographical balance has been addressed comprehensibly , and in a legally binding way , which means that in case of serious problems , it is enforceable by law .
We are not rivals to the Commission , but allies , and can succeed only in mutual partnership .
As for the substance , I would stress the future responsibility of the EU delegations to monitor the human rights situation in a given country , including regular contacts with the Sakharov prize winners and candidates there .
It is in our common interests to make the EEAS operational in 2011 .
We look forward to the High Representative 's report to the European Parliament on its implementation in two years time and are prepared to make the necessary modifications .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I hope that appropriately drawn up regulations relating to the European External Action Service will ensure that it functions in an effective and productive manner .
Building such a complex entity , which deals with an essential and increasingly significant area of competence of the European Union , is no mean task in today 's global reality .
It is particularly vital to ensure that the work of the service serves to strengthen Europe 's position .
To this end , we must ensure that extremely well qualified people , with the relevant skills and experience , join its ranks , so that representatives from all the Member States will be able to participate in the implementation of the European Union 's foreign policy .
I welcome the fact that Mr Rapkay 's report takes into account issues such as the promotion of equal opportunities for the under-represented gender in certain function groups and a geographic balance in the recruitment of European External Action Service employees .
A well-organised service , which employs the foremost experts from all the Member States , provides an opportunity for the European Union to gain importance and to make full use of its potential on the international stage .
We are at the final stage in making the decisions which will enable the European External Action Service to be launched .
I support a compromise on the Staff Regulations and Financial Regulation which will allow the High Representative to have a service up and running this December .
However , this support does not equate to giving carte blanche .
The High Representative must meet her commitment , already reiterated on a number of occasions , to ensure that Member States such as Romania , currently under-represented in the Commission 's and Council 's foreign affairs structures that will be transferred to the EEAS , are fairly represented in the European External Action Service .
This is not a matter of exerting national control over the EEAS , but of an interest in having geographical balance included as a criterion for recruiting staff to the service .
This criterion and competence are not mutually exclusive .
Mass protests and strikes in reaction to harsh austerity measures are currently crippling France .
If the excessive administration is also increased at the same time , as has happened in Greece , with the government expanding despite the need for rescue packages , then the people in Europe will quite rightly be annoyed .
The EU has hitherto always boasted that it has a lean administration - which , of course , is not true if we take into account the separate agencies .
Fifty directors-general with a princely EUR 17 000 per month for an initial 30 employees , 73 promotions to the position of director - we could easily get the impression that this is a self-service shop .
Of course , it is important for an EEAS employee to have the right qualifications .
In this regard , gender quotas , for example , do not serve any useful purpose .
However , as the saying goes , ' he who pays the piper calls the tune ' , so it makes sense not to offend the net contributors .
The refusal to increase the use of German as a working language in the EEAS has already created some diplomatic rifts .
It is not a good idea to widen them .
The EEAS will have to ensure that the EU is no longer merely an extension of the United States , because up to now , we have allowed the Americans to interfere in sensitive EU matters , such as the forced enlargement to include Turkey , and , as a result , have neglected important partners like Russia .
The world order no longer consists of these two powers alone ; there are also emerging powers like China .
We must not overlook that fact .
in writing . - I am glad to welcome the formation of the European External Action Service after thorough and intricate debates .
It is a long-awaited measure towards consolidating the position of the European Union as a proficient global actor .
However , I am somewhat disappointed that although appointments to the EEAS will be made using a thorough selection procedure based on merit and having regard to gender and geographical balance , it still does not guarantee proportional representation of nationals of all Member States .
It should be noted that while pooling human resources from the Commission , the Council and the Member States , one third from each , some Member States are still under-represented in the Commission and the Council , which might result in an implicit imbalance in the service .
I fully agree that the service ought to be made up of competent professionals , but I am also more than sure that there are suitable candidates equally from both genders and from all the Member States .
The fact that the European Union is an egalitarian organisation of 27 Member States should be clearly reflected in the composition of the European External Action Service in order to put our values into practice .
in writing . - The final steps in creating the EEAS have been discussed today and will be voted tomorrow .
There were tough negotiations between the three pillars of the Union : the Council , the Commission and the Parliament , so each , even if not completely satisfied , saw its main interests safeguarded .
During the entire process , emphasis was placed inevitably on the national representation of the Member States in the staffing process .
Things were not helped when , in spite of the ongoing negotiations to set its rules , the process continued unabated and , as a consequence , only some countries have seen their representatives getting the positions they were seeking .
However , I think that the main challenge to the new service lies less in composition than in substance : if we want the members of the EEAS to be truly European , then we will have to provide them with a truly European foreign policy to implement .
In that respect , both the multi-polar structure of the international system and the current crisis are important obstacles to be dealt with vigorously .
Otherwise , the EEAS will only pursue the national objectives of the individual members .
The European Parliament has proven to date that it clearly supports both the establishment and the swift commissioning of the European External Action Service .
I think that the compromise reached with the Council on Parliament 's rights is a satisfactory compromise for all concerned .
It makes sense and we need to have activity reports from the heads of the delegations during hearings before the competent parliamentary committee during the procedure of exchange with the Council .
The EEAS also needs the same internal auditor and authorising officer as the European Commission for the purposes of financial control .
Finally , it is important that the Member States have committed to fully supporting the EU in the enforcement of any budgetary liability of temporary servants and in agreeing to create separate lines for CFSP expenditure , at least for major missions .
We feel that the compromise achieved will help enormously in achieving more transparent , sound and effective administration of spending by the EEAS under the Community budget .
Development aspects of the International Day for the Eradication of Poverty - Role of minimum income in combating poverty and promoting an inclusive society in Europe ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on the subject of poverty :
Statements by the Council and the Commission on development aspects of the International Day for the Eradication of Poverty , and
the report by Mrs Figueiredo , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the role of minimum income in combating poverty and promoting an inclusive society in Europe ( http : / / www.europarl.europa.eu / oeil / FindByProcnum.do ? lang = en & procnum = INI / 2010 / 2039 " ) .
Madam President , Commissioner , honourable Members , as 2010 is the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion , we are obviously well aware that the challenge posed by poverty does not stop at the Union 's borders nor can it be resolved exclusively within them .
The recent succession of global crises to have affected all countries , with the poorest countries being hardest hit , has shown how interconnected the world is .
Promoting development is therefore an integral part of Europe 's response to today 's global challenges and the next five years will be crucial for development policy in Europe and the world .
It is enshrined in Article 208 of the Treaty of Lisbon , and in the European consensus on development , we clearly stated that the overarching aim of EU development cooperation is the eradication of poverty in the context of sustainable development , including pursuit of the Millennium Development Goals .
However , achieving all the Millennium Development Goals , in the context of sustainable development , comes under a collective responsibility under which all partners should honour the commitments they have made .
The European Union is convinced that the developing countries are also responsible for and masters of their own development and that it is up to them , above all , to take responsibility for achieving the Millennium Development Goals .
It is therefore important to highlight the fact that global strategies are needed to achieve these goals , including democratic governance , the protection of human rights and the rule of law , pro-poor economic growth , private sector development , trade development , human and social development and environmental sustainability .
The European Union encourages partner countries to rapidly scale up their own efforts , in particular , with regard to the reduction of poverty and inequality as well as the introduction of partnerships with civil society , the private sector and local authorities .
The European Union will offer increased support for their efforts to mobilise domestic resources for development , in particular , in the context of improving public financial management and the strength and efficiency of their fiscal and customs systems .
On 22 September this year , on adopting the final document of the Millennium Development Goal summit , UN Member States also renewed their commitment to work together to improve the economic and social contexts of all people and to do everything within their power to ensure that the Millennium Development Goals are achieved between now and 2015 .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , let me first thank you for this opportunity to talk about the challenge of poverty and what the European Union can do on the global level through its development cooperation policy .
In the second part of this statement , I will also turn to the report by Mrs Figueiredo .
Eradicating poverty is the most pressing global challenge of our time .
It is a challenge that must be tackled , not only for obvious reasons of solidarity and duty , but also for the sake of worldwide prosperity and stability .
And that is in everybody 's interests .
In 2000 , world leaders gathered at the UN in New York and agreed on an international development agenda for the coming 15 years , the Millennium Development Goals .
Among the different goals and targets set in the framework , the world committed to reduce extreme poverty by half .
Where are we now , five years before the 2015 deadline ?
Encouraging progress has been achieved .
Overall , 120 million people moved out of poverty between 2000 and 2005 , which corresponds to an annual drop of 2.4 % , but there is no time for complacency .
Today , 1.4 billion people still live in extreme poverty , and there are huge disparities among regions , countries and population groups .
Besides , the recent and current global crisis - from food and fuel price shocks to economic instability and climate change - threatens both past achievements and future prospects .
Two weeks ago , the MDG summit confirmed the world 's ambition to fight against poverty .
Members of the European Parliament , led by Gay Mitchell , made an important contribution to that summit and I thank them very much for their participation and support .
I would also like to thank Parliament for its support in the whole preparation process ending with adoption of the Cashman report .
This House 's continuing attention to the MDGs made the EU 's position strong and ambitious in New York .
I think the MEPs who took part in the summit were reassured by the outcome .
There was no blame game ; rather , the gathering gave new energy , impetus and hope with regard to attaining the goals .
It demonstrated that the MDGs are still high on the political agenda , with some 110 Heads of State or Government attending the summit .
The European Union was instrumental in making this event a success by shaping and voicing a strong common approach among our 27 Member States .
The fight against poverty is also high on our agenda in the European Union .
This is part of our European project .
It is a central objective of the European Union development policy , as stated in the Lisbon Treaty , and it is also something that European citizens firmly support , which is equally important .
As the world 's leading donor , the European Union has made a major contribution to the achievement of the MDGs so far .
To give you just two examples , the European Commission alone has helped put 9 million more girls and boys in schools since 2004 , and we have connected 31 million households to clean drinking water .
I believe this is something to be proud of , but we need to do more and we can do more .
In June , Europe 's leaders helped make the MDGs stronger by agreeing on an ambitious plan and a set of actions .
The plan prioritises action on the goals on which we have made the least progress , and in those regions and countries that are lagging furthest behind , including those experiencing conflict and fragility .
The plan also confirms our commitment to meeting the 0.7 % GNI target by 2050 , despite the difficult economic and financial context .
To achieve this , we need to assess progress on this every year .
Turning the Millennium Development Goals - in particular , the goal relating to poverty eradication - into Millennium Development Realities by 2015 will also remain the overarching priority of my action .
We all know that aid alone will not be sufficient to attain the MDGs .
To meet the goals , it is also of paramount importance that we are more creative in enhancing the impact of our aid , in promoting more sustainable and more inclusive growth , and in mobilising other and additional sources of finance for development .
Equally important are the quality and effectiveness of aid , including through more transparency and accountability , as well as ensuring that non-aid policies are more supportive of the MDGs .
Development aid must be conceived as a catalyst , not as a cure .
No country has ever been transformed by aid alone .
Sustainable progress depends primarily on developing a country 's capacity to generate inclusive and sustainable growth .
Development can only come from within developing countries , not from outside , and so it is on this ' within ' that we must focus our development efforts .
In the end , this is what the principle of ' ownership ' means .
In November , I plan to launch a Green Paper and public consultation to gather views on how to improve our policies and instruments to better act on the enabling factors for sustainable and inclusive growth in partner countries , thereby tackling the root causes of poverty , bringing strong added value to our development cooperation .
I believe , as usual , that your contribution to this debate will be essential .
I would like to thank Ms Figueiredo for her report on minimum income schemes .
At the very heart of her report is the basic right of people to have sufficient resources to allow them to live in dignity .
This is enshrined in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union .
It has inspired several recent Commission initiatives in the area of active inclusion , in particular , the 2008 Commission recommendation on active inclusion which was endorsed by Parliament and the Council .
The recommendation sets out integrated active inclusion strategies based on three pillars - namely , inclusive labour markets , access to quality services and adequate income support .
The Commission therefore welcomes this report .
At the same time , we fully respect Member State competences as regards the design and functioning of social protection schemes in general and minimum income schemes in particular .
Adequate income is a fundamental component in the fight against poverty for people who cannot work .
It constitutes a necessary complement to inclusive labour markets , to combat poverty for people who can work .
The report rightly reaffirms the basic principle of income support , which has to be both adequate and incentive-compatible .
Member States are currently taking fiscal consolidation measures to ensure the long-term sustainability of public finances .
The Commission shares the view that these measures have to take account of the need to protect the most vulnerable members of society .
The European Commission will present a European Platform against Poverty by the end of this year , setting out concrete measures to support Member States in reaching the target of lifting at least 20 million European citizens out of poverty by 2020 .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the data on world poverty are alarming , disturbing and unforgiving .
The number of people living below the poverty line is rising all the time , just as the gap between those who live in penury and those who enjoy a high standard of living is constantly widening .
According to the latest United Nations report on the state of the world 's cities , 827 million people live in shanty towns today , and that number will continue to grow by an average of 6 million every year .
As has already been emphasised , Europe is not a stranger to this : today , almost 80 million of our citizens are living in poverty - 16 % of the Union 's population - and a good 19 million of them are children .
This year , 2010 , has been declared the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion , and that forms the backdrop to the report we are discussing today .
I was determined that the final text should analyse certain aspects that I consider extremely important , and I am grateful to Mrs Figueiredo for that .
The recent economic crisis has resulted in a rise in unemployment .
Unfortunately , it is once again women who have been hit hardest .
Fighting poverty first of all requires policies that promote employment , particularly for women and young people .
Everyone ought to be able to enjoy enough money to guarantee a decent standard of living .
It is a fact : the minimum wage can play an important role in combating poverty , by offering everyone the chance to take an active part in social , cultural and political life .
Nonetheless , each Member State must be free to decide whether to adopt a minimum wage ; it must not be a decision made at Union level .
To achieve true social integration and combat situations of degradation and poverty , we must not rely merely on social security measures : we need to aim our sights higher .
Let us therefore fight for better structural reforms and work towards more incisive employment policies , so as to encourage the weaker sections of society to join the labour market .
Madam President , Mrs Figueiredo put it excellently , and I should just like to add one thing .
The EU is founded on the idea that prosperity for as many people as possible is a guarantee of economic development for all Europeans .
Thanks to the open market , but also thanks to structural funding - to the redistribution of prosperity - the standard of living in the Central and Eastern European Member States is rising , and older Member States are benefiting from this .
All Europeans have a right to a decent living , as do all world citizens .
That is why poverty reduction features in the Treaty of Lisbon .
The Millennium Development Goals must be attained , and we can proceed at international level in exactly the same way we are proceeding with new Member States .
Poor countries increase in prosperity as a result of respect for the rule of law , as this gives businesses the courage to invest there , knowing that their contracts are secure .
Worldwide redistribution of prosperity reduces social tension and the chance of violence and refugee flows , and increases our potential markets .
Therefore , it is incomprehensible that some governments of Member States , such as the Netherlands - my own country - are now tampering with the development budget and also seeking to tamper with these objectives .
They are doing so out of mistaken , short-sighted self-interest .
Poverty reduction must remain the EU 's priority .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , I believe the minimum income report that we have voted through in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs is the best way forward and will achieve the widest support .
That is why I urge you to reject amendments 1 and 2 .
I have always been a passionate supporter of a minimum income in all Member States , and I have written it into all the reports I have ever done on social inclusion , but I believe the best way of achieving this is through an exchange of best practice .
In my view , if we try to take the legislative route , we will fail to take everyone with us and will not achieve what we all want - a decent standard of living for all and to take people out of poverty and avoid homelessness .
In the Employment Committee report , we also say that the most effective way out of poverty is to give labour market access to all .
One way of achieving this is to make sure the Employment Directive is implemented effectively across all Member States .
When formulating policy regarding poverty and social inclusion , we must listen to people at the sharp end - in other words , those who are experiencing poverty and homelessness themselves .
We must make sure that Member States meet their targets for poverty reduction as outlined in the EU 2020 strategy .
I would also like to point out in this debate that we are talking about a minimum income - in other words , out-of-work benefits and not wages .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , 80 million people living in poverty in Europe , over 5 million homeless , millions poorly housed , one in five children victims of poverty , and , at the other end of the scale , what do we have ?
The number of billionaires is increasing .
We have just held the International Day for the Eradication of Poverty on 17 October and the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion will soon draw to a close , but what will we have to show for this ?
What concrete solutions will Europe have offered to those who are the primary victims of a crisis for which they are not responsible ?
What hope can we offer my generation , this European generation bearing the brunt of unemployment , insecurity and exclusion , these young people who are mistrustful of Europe , who expect a lot from Europe and therefore from you ?
We are duty bound to answer their day-to-day concerns and their anxieties over the future .
The Lisbon strategy has failed in its mission to eradicate poverty .
We can no longer stand by idly and let things happen .
Now is no longer the time for meaningless rhetoric .
The time has come to be bold and show some political courage .
All the organisations working with victims of poverty , ATD Fourth World , the European Anti-poverty Network ( EAPN ) , the European Federation of National Organisations Working with the Homeless ( FEANTSA ) , Emmaüs Europe , have been demanding this for 20 years !
That is why we are asking the European Commission for a framework directive which aims to set an adequate minimum income .
This framework directive will ensure eligibility for and access to an adequate minimum income so that any child , adult or elderly person living in poverty can break free from it , thus guaranteeing them their inalienable right to live in dignity .
Time is running out , ladies and gentlemen , the need for action has never been more urgent .
Together , we can put an end to the outrageous scandal that is long-term poverty .
Poverty , end poverty , this should not be just a slogan .
It is a reality and together , I hope , we will take on this battle .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , I find this debate rather risible , almost laughable .
I have heard several speeches now and we have been talking about eradicating poverty without once mentioning how we create more wealth .
You cannot eradicate poverty without creating wealth , otherwise what you are doing is just distributing from one to another , not creating new wealth .
In the international domain , EUR 880 billion come out of the developing countries through all sorts of corruption and other activities which are not recorded or taxable or deposited in proper banks .
This is a scandal of the financial community in international development .
Those EUR 880 billion should be creating wealth in the developing countries .
In Europe , poverty is on the increase because we are over-regulating ourselves against creating wealth when challenges are now coming from India and China .
We need to revisit this .
Madam President , in today 's sitting on the subject of poverty , we are deliberately focusing on the connection between global poverty and poverty in the Member States of the European Union .
However , hundreds of thousands of people have already done that before us .
In recent weeks and months , they have increasingly taken to the streets in Europe to call for this and the global action day was deliberately held in the vicinity of the UN Millennium Development Goals summit .
In contrast to these people , however , as the European institutions , we remain vague and inconsistent in all of our strategies and we create framework conditions that , in turn , hamper the fight against poverty .
The Treaty of Lisbon and also the Europe 2020 strategy have de facto eliminated the poverty goals .
Numerous Member States of the European Union are using the call for the sustainability of public finances to justify the reduction in social services and reallocations by way of cuts in the health service and in the pension systems , reductions in labour market policy instruments and in services provided for the unemployed and for children and families .
We are doing this ourselves in our EU Member States , and in this assembly , we act as if we simply need to campaign for people in poverty to no longer be excluded .
We do this ourselves through our political methods .
I would like to point out that the Europe 2020 strategy and the sustainability strategy of the European Union contradict one another , thus making it impossible to combat global poverty .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Madam President , poverty , especially the number of those at risk of poverty , has grown as the EU has grown , with each new Member State adding to the problem , so it is pretty obvious how to prevent further increases .
One of your answers is to introduce a minimum income .
I am in favour of a minimum wage , but only as set by each country for itself .
A pan-EU minimum wage would distort the issue .
In Scandinavia , for example , domestic heating must be more expensive for all income groups than in southern Europe .
I oppose a minimum income because that means public funds to top up a low wage : more for the taxpayer to find in an economic crisis .
How do you stop some employers paying less than they might because they know the benefit system will make it up ?
Answer : more regulations and red tape for businesses , falling most heavily on the SMEs who , between them , employ half the workforce .
And , of course , minimum income harmonised across the EU will be followed by a harmonised tax system , reducing all to a grey amorphous mass , devoid of Europe 's greatest property : diversity .
( DE ) Madam President , it is disturbing that thousands of people in the EU are living on the poverty line despite having a permanent job .
In view of this , attempts to establish an appropriate minimum wage are very much to be welcomed .
However , a minimum wage only makes sense when combined with additional measures .
An isolated debate could lead to the decline of the business location and an increase in the number of people out of work .
Finally , small and medium-sized enterprises will not be able to afford to pay a statutory minimum wage if the tax burden remains as it is , and , of course , higher wages also carry the risk of an increase in the price of goods and services .
That would set the inflationary spiral in motion once again .
The focus must therefore be on relief in relation to work .
Work must become worthwhile again for EU citizens .
A minimum wage is certainly a good idea , but it should be provided within a meaningful overall package of tax relief for workers and also for Europe 's small and medium-sized enterprises .
( FR ) Madam President , the eradication of poverty is actually a Millennium Development Goal , but it is also a European objective in Europe .
Indeed , in Europe , we have the highest average standard of living overall in the world but nowhere else in the world is there such division within our European society as well as between Europe and Africa .
It has the biggest gap between living standards in the world . Our job then is to reduce these differences .
Too many Europeans , in Europe , have no access to a nutritional meal for two days at a time .
Too many children are poor and face health and educational problems rooted in ongoing poverty .
Too many women have to put up with wage disparities , are marginalised when it comes to employment , have no job security and , for this , training is the only way of bringing them back into society and out of poverty .
Too many elderly people , and more often than not women , have lagged behind in finding decent employment and decent salaries throughout their professional life .
There are too many people living below the poverty line in rural areas .
Many of our aid policies for combating poverty are urban policies .
We must also help the rural community combat poverty .
And so I urge you , the fight against poverty ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , today in the European Parliament , the dominant theme is combating world poverty .
It is important but , as Mrs Figueiredo pointed out , poverty is far too prevalent in Europe too .
The fight against this phenomenon is one of the priorities set in the 2020 strategy .
However , although it is good to set targets , which by the by , should have been more ambitious , it is better if the necessary means are in place .
And an adequate minimum income for everyone in Europe is clearly one of those means .
Our fellow Member 's excellent report demonstrates its purpose in this fight and truly moves things forward .
However , without legislative initiative on the part of the Commission , which also acknowledges the role played by minimum income , we are afraid that Member States cannot deliver on our promise to reject poverty .
For this reason , this report must be followed up by a framework directive that takes into account national practices .
( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , as far as I am concerned , there are three important observations to be made in this debate .
Firstly , globalisation has increased inequalities within countries but it has reduced inequalities between nations , evidence of which can be seen with the success of emerging countries .
This was pointed out by an expert from the International Monetary Fund at the Oslo conference , where the IMF joined forces with the International Labour Organisation .
True , there are still major differences between nations but it would be wrong to blame ongoing poverty on globalisation alone when it comes to the inequalities within our countries .
The situation in Europe , and this is my second observation , is very specific .
It is the only large economic area to have become accustomed to mass unemployment over the last three decades , as pointed out by Professor Fitoussi .
The 2020 strategy does indeed open up some interesting perspectives on how to tackle structural unemployment but it is within the context of managing the current crisis that the European Union needs to find ways of improving levels of employment .
Many of us believe that if things swing too far in favour of streamlining public finances , the goal of reducing poverty risks becoming a pipe dream .
Thirdly , our approach to combating poverty must be both international and outward-looking .
With sustainable development in mind , we can no longer afford to favour one over the other .
A Malthusian approach which involves asserting what is spent in the name of solidarity is quite simply ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Madam President , I think we are all aware of the importance of minimum income schemes across the European Union , although not all Member States have them in place yet .
We also know that there are very big variations in effectiveness , that there is often no clear basis for the amounts that are paid , and that the amounts paid do not necessarily keep pace with rising costs .
Some Member States have a very poor take-up , so people are not getting their entitlements , and some also time-limit these income schemes , which seems very bizarre for something that is meant to be a safety net .
I believe very strongly that we need a common framework across the European Union that gives clear principles for how we develop these schemes and a clear methodology for working on them .
We are not talking about the same level of payment in each Member State and to keep saying this is to perpetuate something which is deeply untrue .
We do need to develop these schemes so that everybody in the EU can live in dignity .
( PL ) We are holding this debate on poverty during the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion .
It is important that our efforts , as well as those of governments and non-governmental organisations , should be sustained and not be just campaigns and propaganda .
Of all the measures proposed in the report under discussion , there is particular significance in the proposal to define minimum income in relation to median income .
The causes of poverty are varied , and they are often associated with social ills and social exclusion .
However , particularly striking and very shameful is the fact of the occurrence of poverty among working people and even among those who have no children or a small number of children .
Such a situation is unacceptable , and so the steps taken by the European Commission and Parliament on this matter have to be exceptionally effective , consistent and resolute .
While helping people in different continents and sending humanitarian aid in the wake of natural disasters , we should first set an example by showing solidarity with citizens affected by poverty in the territory of the European Union .
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , I should like to highlight a sector in which we need to adopt a preventive policy if we are to avoid creating a new generation of nouveaux pauvres in Europe .
Recent studies have shown that there is a very large difference between workers ' wages and the pensions they will receive , a ' pension gap ' which , by default , will place them among the nouveaux pauvres .
At pan-European level , workers need to save EUR 2 billion a year in order to plug this gap in their insurance cover and ensure they have a decent standard of living once they retire .
I make this point in order to draw your attention to this very serious problem , which millions of European pensioners - Europe 's nouveaux pauvres - are already facing .
( FI ) Madam President , the report on minimum income is a good reflection of the wideranging debate that we on the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs had on the subject of combating poverty and exclusion .
It may be the European Year for Combating Poverty , but thanks to the economic crisis , unemployment and social hardship are still on the increase in many Member States .
Outstanding features of European poverty are child poverty , growing youth unemployment , the inferior position of women in the labour market , the exclusion of immigrants , the status of ethic minorities such as the Roma , and the plight of the unemployed of preretirement age .
Reducing poverty is one of the key targets of the Europe 2020 strategy , and there has been the desire to make these a reality through quantitative aims that are binding on the Member States .
There is good reason for this too , since the results of efforts to reduce poverty over the last decade have been virtually non-existent .
The majority on the Committee finally decided to propose that the Member States should set a minimum income of 60 % of their median income threshold , and some Members even called for a framework law on minimum income .
I do not support changes to legislation , because establishing a minimum income ignores the differing structures of the social security systems in the Member States .
In some Member States , differently tiered and income-related social services as well as universal services funded through taxation are also part of the social security system .
The question of minimum income should therefore be approached from the angle of the principle of subsidiarity in the Member States , and solutions should be sought through an exchange of best practices .

( FR ) Madam President , Mr Chastel , Commissioners , in the wake of 17 October , which is the day for action in combating poverty , in this the year for action in combating poverty and social exclusion , we know that in 2007 , before the crisis , 17 % of the European Union 's population were living below the poverty threshold .
We do not know the current figure , but we all know that it is high and that such a situation cannot be tolerated .
Yes , we are consistent in our commitments , yes , we believe in what we have adopted in basic law , in Article 1 of the Charter which states that everyone has the right to dignity , in the Treaty of Lisbon which sets combating social exclusion as an objective of the European Union , and in the 2020 strategy which sets combating poverty as one of its leading objectives .
However , at no time have we defined the means for implementing such a strategy , which means we will fail and our fellow citizens will become disillusioned .
We must take a legislative initiative on minimum income and organise the financing ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( MT ) As has already been said , the subject of poverty is occupying a high place on our agenda .
We are all aware of the statistics , the percentages and the rhetoric on this topic ; the fact that such a large number of citizens are living below the poverty line is a serious matter that needs to be addressed without delay .
It is a wonderful thing to be able to fight poverty by generating more jobs and encouraging the establishment of structures that can help us reach our goal .
This includes a plan to help European citizens to receive the necessary training that will translate into a job that pays .
We also require the necessary funds to provide support to those countries that are still lagging behind in this respect so that they , too , can fulfil these goals .
Clearly therefore , we need to encourage as many people as possible to enter the labour market , women in particular .
This report thoroughly evaluates this situation and here I would very much like to thank and congratulate the rapporteur on her very useful work .
However , we must make sure that we do not rush forward blindly , for the provisions in the treaty on the subsidiarity principle must continue to be respected .
To apply a one-size-fits-all concept to the whole of Europe is not a practical solution .
Moreover , we do not yet have the necessary legal basis that our treaty requires for this .
Subsequently , Member States should be free to regulate these requirements according to their own needs , unencumbered .
( PT ) Madam President , Europe is currently undergoing a period of transformation as a consequence of the economic , financial and social crisis .
The existing crises in certain Member States have worsened , social inequalities have widened , and this situation has led to an increase in the number of people living below the poverty line .
Today , there are more poor people in the European Union .
There are more men and women with an income lower than 60 % of the average salary for the country in which they live .
We have a serious problem requiring concrete and effective measures .
80 million Europeans are living on or below the poverty line .
Even though the poverty line differs from country to country within the EU , what is certain is that this is a growing phenomenon in our Union , which has the most advanced social model in the world as its development paradigm .
In Portugal , around 20 % of people live in or at risk of poverty , on less than EUR 360 per month .
The data on child poverty in my country are devastating .
Portugal is one of the eight countries with the highest levels of child poverty .
We welcome the target bringing 20 million people out of poverty by 2020 , just as we welcome the efforts to promote employment and social inclusion .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur for her contribution and stress that as a minimum income is desirable ; setting the amount should be the responsibility of each Member State .
( HU ) In 1992 , the UN declared 17 October the International Day of Poverty .
In 2000 , the international organisation committed to halving the rate of people living in severe poverty within 15 years .
Two thirds of this period have already elapsed .
The figures are alarming and we are behind the indicators , at a time when demand and expectations are very high .
Seventy-three percent of the EN population sees the main problem in the increasingly widespread poverty in their countries .
Eighty-nine percent of the citizens want urgent action to tackle the problem , and 74 % expect the EU to play an important role in eradicating poverty .
On the other hand , 6 million EU citizens have lost their jobs in the past two years , and child poverty is on the increase .
While we know and often refer to the fact that employment is the most efficient means of combating poverty , the model of the social Europe identified by Jean Monnet has been overshadowed by economic interests .
The aim of economic development is to ensure the well-being of citizens , but it is worth nothing without efficient social measures and a drastic reduction of the current poverty level .
It is obvious that social policy is primarily the task and responsibility of Member States .
However , I still think that we have to find answers to the most urgent issues jointly , by an increased use of the open coordination method and by facilitating the exchange of best practices .
( NL ) Madam President , Commissioner , one in six inhabitants of the European Union is at risk of poverty : young people up to 17 years in particular , but many elderly people are also vulnerable .
Poverty is increasing , including among Europeans who do have jobs .
Therefore , I believe we need to take an initiative at European level , too , ladies and gentlemen .
Economic growth , better education and training , more jobs : we are , of course , entirely in favour of this , but it is clear that this is not enough and that we need a specific policy to fight poverty .
As has already been said here , this is actually one of the flagships , one of the priorities of our new EU 2020 strategy .
What is it about in specific terms ?
It is about living in dignity - the right to live in dignity - and about food , housing , clothing : basic things that are evidently not guaranteed in our prosperous European Union in the year 2010 .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , that is why I believe that action needs to be taken at European level , too , to secure this minimum income .
As Mrs Bastos has already said , this is not an instrument that has to be developed in an identical way throughout the European Union .
There must be sufficient scope for Member States to opt for their own specific solution .
Yet we do have to keep increasing the pressure to prevent vulnerable persons being left out in the cold .
That is why we are expressly calling for a guaranteed minimum income scheme to be introduced in all the countries of the European Union .
This would be an important signal of hope to all the most vulnerable persons in Europe , those who are currently affected by poverty and social exclusion .
( SL ) I am pleased that we are also trying to raise this issue of poverty and social exclusion at the level of the European institutions .
That is very important .
The resolution which we are to adopt is heading in precisely that direction .
It describes the situation very well , but it has been somewhat less successful in finding a solution for it .
Minimum income can form one part of that solution , and indeed it already exists , in some form or another , in Member States ' social policies .
However , in this material , I have also come across a proposal for a universal basic income or unconditional income for all .
That , however , would be questionable , even from the perspective of social entitlement .
It is not a good idea for everyone to receive a basic income for a normal life , because we would then have less money for those who are in real need of social assistance .
I hope that , in this plenary sitting ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( RO ) The objectives set by the Lisbon Strategy - creating more jobs and eradicating poverty by 2010 - have not been achieved .
This is why Europe must continue its efforts to achieve them .
I believe that the European Union and Member States must focus particular attention on lifelong learning programmes .
They offer a means of combating poverty and social exclusion and help consolidate employability and the ability for labour market integration .
On the other hand , I think that the European executive should analyse the areas where there is a growing shortage of qualified staff in order to be able to promote measures in the future for plugging this deficit .
One possible measure would also be to extend the Erasmus programme , currently intended for students , to other socio-professional groups as well , such as young people without university qualifications or unemployed people included in professional retraining programmes .
( BG ) Given the European Union 's fundamental principle of solidarity and in the context of the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion , I am calling for the introduction of guaranteed adequate minimum income levels in all EU Member States , which will support people with insufficient incomes in order to consolidate their economic and social integration and provide a decent living .
We will only succeed in making significant , effective progress in the battle against poverty through adopting concrete measures aimed at introducing minimum income schemes .
This will enable us to guarantee an appropriate standard of living for all European citizens , which includes social security and equal access to social services provided by the state such as social welfare , healthcare and education .
Finally , I wish to stress that we will only be able to protect our citizens against social exclusion , especially women and risk groups , as well as ethnic minorities , with the help of an extensive range of concrete political solutions ensuring the provision of resources for social intervention and protection .
( DE ) Madam President , I would like to appeal once again to the Commission to ensure that , if it establishes a poverty platform , it does not allow this simply to remain empty words , but that it takes up Parliament 's initiatives .
Firstly , there is an initiative that provides for an examination of whether there should be a framework directive for minimum income , so that everyone in this European Union can have a dignified life .
Secondly , there is an initiative that goes further than just using the GDP when preparing the structural funds , but also includes the Gini coefficient as a measure of income inequality in the assessment - where there is disadvantage .
These are things that you must now decide on if we are to have any chance of introducing them .
I would therefore ask the Commissioner to place these two points from plenary on the Commission 's agenda and ensure that the Commission has an answer for the European Parliament in this regard .
( FR ) Madam President , for far too many years now , we have been celebrating International Day for the Eradication of Poverty , without many concrete results , and we run the risk of this day being marked for many decades to come if the same policies continue to apply .
From this point of view , Europe and the Western world , in general , cannot simply look the other way .
The fight against poverty implies fighting for a fair distribution of wealth both within Member States and at international level .
It is also a matter of respecting the environment and upholding the principle of equality between all human beings .
If our discussions today are not followed up by concrete actions based on what we have heard here today , I fear that the declarations made by us will fall on deaf ears , mere good intentions with no real impact on misery and poverty throughout the world and in Europe .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , poverty and social exclusion violate human dignity , in other words , fundamental human rights .
Those most at risk are single parents , children and older people .
Women make up a significant proportion of the population that is at risk of poverty , partly on account of the usual discrimination that is still prevalent from all sides in connection with wages and pensions and partly due to their very common precarious working conditions .
We need to take action that promotes investment in the labour market , for example , to create jobs , to promote Community programmes like the lifelong learning programme .
Yes , we should provide for a minimum level of material provision , but with extensive controls and conditions so that we can prevent any possible abuse right from the start .
Yes , we should provide for a minimum income , but with the proviso that it must not , under any circumstances , lead to a new form of indirect or reverse discrimination .
( SK ) Almost 85 million people in the European Union face the threat of poverty , and 17 % of the EU 's 500 million inhabitants lived below the poverty line in 2008 .
As poverty and social exclusion have a multi-dimensional nature , we must systemically incorporate their prevention into other policies , so that all EU citizens can have a decent life .
The fight against poverty requires not only active support for wage systems and social protection , but also the creation of decent and permanent jobs for disadvantaged employment groups .
I would like to emphasise that employment should generally be considered as the most effective form of protection against poverty , and job creation should therefore be a clear priority for the EU and the Member States .
Special attention must be devoted to the integration of young and also older people into working life .
Madam President , last Sunday , I met a group of young people in Ireland who are struggling to survive poverty .
They asked me , as a Member of this Parliament , whose side I was on . Was I on their side , or on the side of the bankers ?
That is the blunt question they asked me .
They gave me a series of testimonies which they asked me to convey to this Parliament .
They pointed out that they are no longer interested in voting because they see no prospect in change by continuing to vote .
They say that they are sick of being treated as nothing and that they feel that they have no value to society .
I believe that we have to take account of what these young people are thinking .
They are our future .
I see no evidence that the Commission is actually ensuring that the Member States being urged to engage in fiscal consolidation are taking account of the fact that we must not drive these people - who are already suffering pain - into more pain , and drive people who are currently on the margins into poverty .
It is extremely important that we ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Madam President , I would like to thank all my colleagues and also the Commission , the Council and the Belgian Presidency for what they have said here , but I would like to emphasise three points that several Members have also stressed .
First of all , good words and good intentions are not enough .
There needs to be a practical dimension to this European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion .
There needs to be a change in policies .
People need to be put first .
There needs to be an awareness that it is the workers who create the wealth , and that they need decent wages , but that in order to create more wealth , we need more jobs .
More jobs , that is , with rights and fair wages .
Yet there also needs to be another kind of redistribution of wealth and income , and in this context , the minimum income system is a vital tool to help in this fight , maintaining minimum incomes that may differ from country to country , but which share a common objective ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , poverty is a tragedy for individuals as well as for society .
Poverty leads to violence , crime and conflict .
I would like to thank the European Parliament for putting the fight against poverty so high on the agenda and today 's debate demonstrates European determination to address this challenge .
The Europe 2020 strategy , Ms Figueiredo 's report , activities in the Member States - these are all steps in the right direction .
I would like to emphasise that as long as global poverty exists - with 1.4 billion people living on less than one dollar a day - we cannot expect to also solve this issue inside the European Union .
That means the Millennium Development Goals policy is a policy that also matters to us .
I believe that we are trying to find the right solution and it is inclusive economic growth - of our partner countries and also in the European Union .
I know inclusive economic growth sounds rather simple , but that is exactly what we are trying to address in changing our development policies .
The EU 2020 strategy also goes in this direction .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in my first speech , I intentionally focused upon the development aspect of combating poverty .
I shall , of course , say a few words regarding the European Union .
The Belgian Presidency is committed to developing instruments for combating poverty and social exclusion , particularly through flagship initiatives under the Europe 2020 strategy .
One of the objectives of the strategy , which was approved by the Council on 7 June 2010 , is to promote social inclusion , in particular , by reducing poverty .
This objective states that at least 20 million people should be removed from the risk of poverty or exclusion by 2020 on the basis of three indicators put forward by the Social Protection Committee , that is , the risk of poverty , material deprivation and living in a jobless household .
Furthermore , the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion aims to raise public awareness of this problem and to convey the message that poverty and exclusion undermine social and economic development .
It also seeks to call into question the point of view that combating poverty represents a cost for society and to reaffirm the importance of collective responsibility , not only for the political decision makers , but also for those involved in the public and private sectors .
The Belgian Presidency has been keen to participate in this European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion .
I would like to mention some of the initiatives and events that have been organised .
A conference on child poverty was organised in September .
The purpose of this conference was to give scope to the European debate about adopting a recommendation on child poverty in order to break the vicious circle of poverty being repeated from generation to generation .
In reply specifically to Mr Daerden , a round table has been organised today in Brussels .
Its subject will be the implementation of the recommendation in relation to active inclusion with its three pillars : minimum income , inclusive labour market and access to quality services .
Another conference on the subject of the social economy is to take place on 27 and 28 October and one on homelessness will be organised on 9 and 10 December .
Finally , on 17 December , on the fringe of the European Council , the official closing session of the Year for Combating Poverty will take place , presenting good practice and the flagship events of the year .
That , Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , is how the Belgian Presidency 's intention to put social issues at the top of the European agenda has been put into practice .
( FR ) Madam President , allow me to welcome to the diplomatic gallery a delegation of young people from the International Movement ATD Fourth World .
I congratulate them for all that they do to combat extreme poverty and I thank them for coming here today to this plenary session .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 20 October at 12 : 30 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Poverty is a very serious problem which affects 85 million of our fellow Europeans , and so no one should remain indifferent to it .
It needs to be at the forefront of our priorities , and it merits a collective response which ensures that our fellow Europeans who find themselves in a situation of social vulnerability have a modicum of dignity .
This pervasive problem is affecting our young people , our elderly , and also increasingly our workers , who have been hit by the loss of 6 million jobs in the last two years alone , and by the low level and instability of their wages even if they manage to stay in their jobs .
We undoubtedly need a systemic approach that addresses and resolves the causes of the problems , nipping incipient problems in the bud .
However , at the same time , we cannot currently provide immediate and urgent responses to their consequences .
In view of this , ensuring that those who are vulnerable in our society receive a minimum income for living and are given urgent responses to enable them to get out of this situation is not only a necessity , but also a requirement that we should endorse , and one which this report advocates very well .
In 2009 , Europe felt the full brunt of the global economic crisis .
Indeed , the impact of this period could not have been more detrimental on the poverty level across the EU , especially for the 17 % of Europeans living below the poverty line in 2008 .
Unfortunately , this percentage has most likely increased .
It is only now in 2010 that we are beginning to see a glimmer of hope that the overall economic situation might be improving .
Our strongest efforts must be targeted at the Europeans who have been hardest hit by the crisis , especially as 2010 is the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion .
Bearing in mind the objective to eradicate absolute poverty and poverty among children by 2015 as well as the target to reduce relative poverty significantly , I , too , wish to highlight the need for national minimum income thresholds to be introduced as a matter of urgency at European Union level .
These will offer protection against the risk of poverty and ensure social inclusion for all European citizens .
As we mark the International Day for the Eradication of Poverty and the European Year for Combating Poverty , sadly , there are already more than 85 million people in the European Union living below the poverty level .
Although unemployment is the main reason for poverty , many Europeans , even those in work , are struggling with poverty on a daily basis and do not have the opportunity to lead life to the full .
It is absurd that the income working people receive is insufficient to ensure a dignified life for their families .
I would like to remind you that economic growth itself did not reduce poverty and social exclusion and the hard times are only increasing poverty , but minimum income schemes allow us to defend the most vulnerable people .
The guarantee of minimum incomes is an important and effective means of overcoming poverty , which supports social integration and access to the labour market and gives people the opportunity to live in decent conditions .
I would like to draw attention to the fact that even during the crisis , minimum incomes should not be viewed as an element that increases costs , but as a basic tool for combating the crisis , because early investment in the fight against poverty provides most benefit by reducing long-term social expenditure .
Therefore , in order to meet the Europe 2020 strategy commitment to eradicate the threat of poverty and exclusion for at least 20 million people in the European Union , the European Commission must take concrete actions and propose European legislation , which would ensure minimum incomes throughout Europe to combat poverty .
During the worldwide economic crisis , in the ' European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion ' , and three days after World Food Day , it is particularly important for child poverty to also be given appropriate attention at European level .
Every six seconds , a child dies of hunger on Earth .
There are several million undernourished children in Europe .
The rate of children living in poverty , often with multiple disadvantages , is 19 % at EU level , exceeding the rate for the total population by 3 % .
The need for special attention is also supported by the figures , and the strategy for children 's rights at EU level must also attach proper emphasis to this .
The worldwide economic crisis we experience today is not only a burden upon us but also an opportunity .
An opportunity for creative thinking , for a shift of approach in business life , and an opportunity for a paradigm shift in our way of thinking in terms of economy , society and the environment , to which our societies are increasingly receptive .
Social solidarity and local initiatives can contribute to the mitigation of child poverty and malnutrition .
As a result of the ' Sufficient food for all children ! ' initiative recently launched in Hungary , several thousand children can get warm meals on a daily basis .
At the same time , as a result of the initiative launched by the Franciscan monk , Csaba Böjte , in Transylvania , close to 2 000 children are fed and supervised in 18 children 's homes and 40 day care homes .
In agreement with the opinion of the Eurochild international organisation , I would also like to emphasise that combating child poverty should be handled not only as an economic challenge but also as a children 's rights issue .
Firstly , the fact that combating poverty has been taken into account in the 2020 strategy is , for me , a significant advance .
The economic crisis has intensified the problem of poverty in recent years .
The European Union must be able to encourage Member States to face up to this problem .
Secondly , the European Social Fund ( ESF ) is an essential European tool in combating poverty .
I am the rapporteur for the European Social Fund and I support its use in order to get back to work the people who are furthest away from the labour market .
This has been the ESF 's role since it was set up under the Treaty of Rome , and it must keep employment as its prime objective .
Thirdly , I am against a minimum income without contributing in return , except for people who are unfit for work .
Employment is the benchmark in reducing poverty .
It is the only way of giving back dignity to everyone .
Fourthly , the governments of Member States have a responsibility to combat poverty actively .
Europe is there to support them and to complement what they do but not to take their place .
Europe cannot cure all ills .
Above all , Member States must face up to their responsibilities .
in writing . - When talking about poverty , we often forget those who are seriously underpaid in their jobs .
In this regard , poverty still has a feminine face in Europe .
The disadvantageous situation of women is structural .
They work less , as household work is not acknowledged as legitimate work .
If they work on the labour market , they earn less , because of discrimination and segregation .
A reminder : all in all , the gender pay gap is still over 17 % in Europe ( meaning that women work 17 % more for the same pay men get ) .
And , in the end , of course , women also get less pension due to the circumstances described above .
Is this not profoundly unfair ?
We can break this vicious cycle by acknowledging that non-paid work is work indeed , by encouraging women to work and gain their economic independence , by attacking the structural causes of labour market segregation , and by paying attention to women 's problems when reforming our pension schemes .
It may be more expensive today , but in the long run , less inequality and less poverty will help balance our budgets as well .
Tackling women 's poverty would be beneficial for all of us - not only for women , but also for men .
I welcome the opening of a debate on the role of minimum income as an instrument in the fight against poverty .
It is unquestionable that , in the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion , this type of action is completely appropriate .
The first question that I would like to ask is about the explanatory capacity of official data on unemployment , the average income , the percentage of people living in poverty and the setting of the poverty line .
The average income is an indicator based on implausible , if not downright false , figures .
If you add together the millions paid to various managers and the salaries of minimum income workers , the figure might be considered very unreliable .
When comparing wages , managers and executives should be considered separately .
In addition , the relationship between the incomes of citizens - measured , for example , as GDP per capita - has a very loose relation to the minimum wage .
In Portugal and the Czech Republic , citizens ' income , measured by GDP , is roughly the same .
The minimum income , however , varies by nearly 50 % .
The ' poverty threshold ' and ' at-risk-of-poverty rate ' are simply incomprehensible to my poor understanding .
When I read that in Sweden , the at-risk-of-poverty rate for the population is 12 % , in the Czech Republic 9 % , but in Luxembourg 13 % , I can only wonder .
Despite these shortcomings , this report is certainly informative .
In terms of the disputed issues we have heard as regards minimum income , I find it important to emphasise that we have to decide not only about today and tomorrow , but also about the day after tomorrow .
Inactivity is much more destructive than many of us would think or know .
However , this is what people living with disabilities experience day after day .
They do not need single-digit percentage improvements in income levels while they are unemployed .
It is activity that must be increased and encouraged at any cost .
In addition , gerontology and lifestyle research should be supported .
Up-to-date , innovative investments improving everyday life and supporting adaptation and access must be facilitated .
Let us not legalise and strengthen dependency , increasing the masses of dependants and citizens in need .
This , too , is a self-perpetuating stigma , which is untenable .
Resources needed for social provisions are increasingly difficult to obtain from dwindling public sources ( taxes ) .
The people whose situation is continuously worsening are those with actual needs , those who are incapacitated and live with severe disabilities : we see more and more examples of widespread abuse , for example , in the area of disability pensions , which bring down the standard of provisions .
Coming back to ageing : the dependency rate is continuously increasing , which means that the value of existing social provisions will also decrease , due to a lack of sufficient numbers of active citizens to ensure adequate levels of social benefits and minimum income .
The number of active European citizens will drop by millions even in the next decade .
This forecasts a deterioration in the lives of those actually in need , which should not be tolerated .
Ladies and gentlemen , according to statistics , the problem of poverty affects 16 % of the European Union 's citizens .
Among the principal causes of the rise in the number of poor people in the EU 's Member States are a lack of adequate education and a failure to adapt abilities to the requirements of the labour market .
Poverty is also associated with an enormous psychological burden and with fear , stress and an inability to make appropriate choices .
These factors mean that people affected by poverty very often have to struggle with yet another problem - that of social exclusion .
Children from poor families are deprived of the opportunities enjoyed by children from better-off families .
Young people growing up in such an environment have neither the opportunities nor the right role models to enable them , in the future , to escape from this closed circle of poverty .
The year 2010 has been declared European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion .
We have , therefore , a unique opportunity to introduce the entire international community to the problems of the poor and socially excluded and to suggest specific solutions .
In the European Union , this year has been dedicated to the fight against poverty and social exclusion .
However , let us ask what the EU is actually doing to combat poverty .
At present , there are 80 million people living below the poverty line in the EU , which represents 17 % of the EU population .
The most at risk in this group have long been not only older citizens but mainly young people .
While overall unemployment in the EU stands , on average , at 10 % , the figure is twice as high for young people - 21 % , and in some countries , such as Spain , for example , it is as high as 40 % .
Poverty , therefore , mainly threatens young people .
For the future development of the EU , it is therefore important to ensure not only a minimum wage , but surely job opportunities for the young in particular .
It is very difficult for someone finishing education to find a job .
We may talk about lifelong learning , but that too has a direct aim - to train someone for a profession .
I am therefore appealing to the representatives of the EU . Adopt measures to improve conditions for young people , and in that way let us foster a healthy society in the future .
Young people are the future of the European Union and of the whole world .
Poverty and social exclusion violate human dignity and fundamental human rights .
The main aim of income support programmes should be to lift people out of poverty and to enable them to live a dignified life .
The latest statistics are frightening .
There are 1.4 billion people in the world , and around 85 million in the European Union , currently living in poverty .
The European Parliament and the Member States should take further measures to create more jobs and to improve the quality of those jobs and salary levels , as well as to guarantee fair pensions , benefits and family allowances .
It is vital to ensure universal access to high quality public services .
One of the European Parliament 's proposals is to establish a minimum income level of at least 60 % of the median income in a given Member State .
In Poland , the minimum income level currently stands at around 42 % of the average income .
Increasing the minimum wage would help to lift adults and elderly people out of poverty and to give them the right to a dignified life , as well as providing all children with the opportunity to foster their development and obtain an education .
With regard to the issue of education , it is particularly important to take effective action , first and foremost , to combat factors which contribute to children prematurely dropping out of the education system , as well as improving the level of vocational training .
I think that we need to create the basis for implementing specific measures and political strategies to broaden young people 's access to education , for example , through grants or student loans and subsidies .
The objective set by the EU 2020 strategy to reduce the number of Europeans living below the poverty line by 25 % , which is more than 20 million people , must contribute to the development of national policies which will protect citizens against the risk of poverty .
Women constitute a large section of the population threatened by poverty due to unemployment ( with the unemployment rate rising from 7.4 % in 2008 to 9 % in 2009 ) , unshared caring responsibilities , precarious , low paid jobs , wage discrimination and smaller pensions .
In Romania , 25 % of women live in poverty ( compared with an average European level of 17 % ) , as well as 33 % of children .
Romania has the European Union 's second highest rate of people living in poverty at 23 % of the population .
The minimum salary barely amounts to EUR 140 , while the average gross salary does not exceed EUR 460 .
I call on Member States to take concrete measures which will be aimed at creating decent , sustainable jobs and will promote appropriate income and social protection schemes for preventing and reducing poverty , especially extreme poverty , and also to devise medium- and long-term strategies which will take the gender aspect into account and be integrated in all relevant policy areas .
In the European Union , the year 2010 is European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion .
One in six Europeans , or 17 % of the population , live below the poverty line .
In Poland , that is about 6.5 million people .
Poverty can affect anyone .
It is enough to lose your job or become seriously ill .
The ranks of the poor are increasingly being swollen by people who do have jobs .
Poverty most often affects children and the elderly , young white-collar workers , graduates , families with many children and people who are repaying loans .
It is Parliament 's obligation to be effective in resisting and combating the causes of poverty .
Our objective is to reduce the number of the poor by 20 million by 2020 .
First place in national strategies to combat poverty should be given to guaranteeing suitable material support for the poor , enabling easier access to the labour market and providing opportunities for education , as well as ensuring a high quality of public services for all .
Equally important are social and ethical issues .
Poverty is also the state of mind associated with loss of dignity and humiliation . In fact , it is changing this attitude which is one of the most difficult aspects of combating poverty .
We need , here , effective psychological care and speed in giving help .
National strategies should be consistent with initiatives supported by the European Social Fund and projects of the EU 's PROGRESS programme .
May the year 2010 be an opportunity for social dialogue to achieve ratification of the European Social Charter by all Member States of the European Union .
A few days after the International Day for the Eradication of Poverty and a good two months before the end of the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion , the European Parliament has the opportunity to make its voice heard loud and clear .
There is one choice that we have to make here : is 2010 to be the year of fine words and empty promises on poverty reduction , or do we take a specific measure that helps millions of Europeans ?
Parliament can opt for the latter by requiring the Commission to make a proposal for a framework directive laying down the principle of an adequate minimum income in Europe .
After all , there are excessive differences within the EU at present , with some countries having no minimum income at all .
Even in the countries that are doing better , however , such as Belgium , integration incomes still often fall below the poverty threshold .
I believe that everyone deserves equal opportunities .
Whenever people are pushed below the poverty threshold , they are deprived of these opportunities , and this manifests itself at various levels ( such as those of health , housing and the chances of employment ) .
In addition , if we really want to set to work on achieving the EU 2020 objectives , we simply cannot afford to just desert people .
Formal sitting - Address by Ban Ki-Moon , Secretary-General of the United Nations

Mr Secretary-General , distinguished guests , colleagues , friends , it is a great honour for us to welcome to the European Parliament , on his first official visit , His Excellency the Secretary-General of the United Nations , Dr Ban Ki-moon .
This visit is very timely .
Last month , at the United Nations summit on the Millennium Development Goals , we had an opportunity to review our accomplishments and see what still needs to be done .
Last Sunday was International Day for the Eradication of Poverty .
We are two months from Cancún .
We are awaiting a binding agreement and some crucial decisions and practical steps .
We are also witnessing important developments that affect global security , with developments in the Middle East , in Asia and in Africa .
However , a visit by the Secretary-General of the United Nations would always be timely , because we , the United Nations and the European Union , share a common responsibility for global issues .
As you wrote a few minutes ago in the European Parliament 's golden book , we are natural allies . That is true ; we feel the same .
You will address our Parliament and our citizens in a few minutes .
The European Parliament has always been the driving force behind ambitious European policies . This is how we understand the aspirations of our citizens .
They want a Europe of solidarity , of solidarity within Europe , but also of solidarity with all people all over the world , of solidarity with nations that continually work to ensure that their citizens live in dignity .
But dignity not only means freedom from hunger , illness and violence .
It also means freedom to realise the ambitions of education and active participation in social and political life .
Dignity is also the freedom of belief and respect for differences .
Mr Secretary-General , we believe that you share those aspirations with us .
Your tireless and passionate commitment to the values that the United Nations and the European Union have in common is very important for us .
We are looking forward to listening to your speech .
( Applause )
Mr President , Mr Welle , Ministers , ladies and gentlemen , good afternoon .

It is a great honour for me to be here addressing the European Parliament .
Ladies and gentlemen , you were sent to Strasbourg by the citizens of your countries in order to construct a stronger Europe for the 21st century .
I myself have come because you are the democratic voice of the European people , that is , almost 500 million people .
You adopt budgets , you pass legislation and you debate with an extraordinary spirit .
You are the vital link between the global , regional and local levels .
You are a powerful vehicle for peace , stability and prosperity in your own region .
You also play a crucial role in formulating policies whose scope extends far beyond your borders .
Your responsibilities are bound to increase given the possibilities opened up by the Treaty of Lisbon .
We are very pleased about this progress .
The United Nations and the European Union are natural partners .
We are making a real difference for people in countries all around the world .
Millions of poor girls and boys are in school , billions of young children are being immunised against deadly diseases , and thousands of soldiers are keeping the peace from Lebanon to Central Africa to Cyprus and beyond , all as a result of our partnership and Europe 's extraordinary generosity and leadership .
That work must deepen and grow .
We are confronting many challenges and multiple crises .
But something else is happening - a light bulb moment around the world .
Country after country , leader after leader , is coming to recognise that the best way to address our challenges is by taking them on together - together with the United Nations and together with all the members of the European Union .
No nation , no group , no region can do it alone .
If we share in the burden , we will share in the benefits .
So , today , I would like to talk about solidarity - about how the European Union and the United Nations together can address the real fears of real people .
Everywhere , we see currents of concern .
Jobs are scarce , tensions are high , people are hurting , angry and disillusioned .
That has led to an erosion of trust in institutions , in leaders , and among neighbours .
These are testing times , even in a prosperous region like Europe .
I believe we can pass the test .
Together we have framed a vision for our work - a precise definition of the overarching challenges of our time .
We have mobilised global support for common action .
Let me be clear : we are beholden to the people , who rightly demand results .
Now is not the time for simply delivering speeches , but now is the time to implement those speeches and this is the time for delivering action .
I would like to focus on three global challenges : first , tackling extreme poverty around the world ; second , confronting climate change ; and third , building a world free of nuclear weapons .
Let me be specific . First , the poverty challenge .
Last month , world leaders gathered at the United Nations summit meeting on the Millennium Development Goals in New York .
There is good news - major progress in combating extreme poverty and hunger , in school enrolment and child health , clean water , and in fighting malaria , tuberculosis and HIV / AIDS .
Yet our achievements are uneven . Obstacles stand in the way .
Global trade talks have stagnated , locking in place harmful subsidies and an unfair regime that denies developing countries new opportunities .
Rising prices are putting essential medicines out of the reach of many of the neediest .
Nearly one billion people go to bed hungry every night .
This year alone , an additional 64 million people will fall into extreme poverty .
All of this calls for a renewed push to achieve the goals by the deadline of 2015 . At the recent MDG summit meeting , that is precisely what we agreed .
We will boost resources and accountability .
I commend those members of the European Union that made strong commitments despite fiscal pressures .
We can tighten belts without closing our eyes to common challenges .
I ask all of you to support the United Nations where action is urgently and especially needed .
We must focus on employment-centred growth - decent work .
Investment in clean and renewable energy is crucial for jumpstarting jobs and innovation .
Where people go hungry , we must help people to help themselves .
Thank you for your investment in the European Union Food Facility , an amount of EUR 1 billion .
We must put resources where they will have the greatest impact - in particular , the health and empowerment of women .
Last month , we were able to generate USD 40 billion in pledges over the next five years for our Global Strategy for Women 's and Children 's Health .
This is the most stubborn of the Millennium Development Goals .
Some might say , go for the easy wins , but I do not believe in declaring victory that way .
We must strive for the hardest-to-reach goals and the hardest-to-reach people in the hardest-to-reach places .
We can save the lives of more than 16 million women and children .
Our second great challenge is climate change .
Here , too , Europe 's vision and voice have been central .
Scientists warn that the extreme weather we have witnessed in many countries could be the opening act on our future .
We have seen raging fires in Russia and epic floods in Pakistan .
However , we must always be careful about linking specific weather events to climate change .
Neither should we avert our eyes from what is plain to see .
The message is clear : the more we delay , the more we will have to pay - in competitiveness , in resources and in human lives .
We must take action now to reduce climate risks , strengthen our resilience , and support developing countries in pursuing clean energy growth .
Copenhagen was not perfect , but it provided an important basis for moving forward .
Since then , there has been progress on important implementation issues , such as adaptation , technology cooperation , and steps to reduce deforestation .
Movement has been slower on mitigation commitments , long-term financing , monitoring and verification , and the future of the Kyoto Protocol .
At the upcoming UN Climate Change conference in Cancún , we must capture progress on those issues where there is consensus .
On those issues still unresolved , governments must agree on how they will move forward to resolve them .
I call on all parties to show flexibility , solidarity , and muster the courage to compromise if needed .
The health , security and prosperity of millions of people depend on it . There is no time to waste .
Most immediately , finance is crucial for building trust and spurring action .
There is still a wide gap of trust between the developing and the developed world .
The quickest way to bridge this gap is through providing financial support for those who do not have any capacity .
I call upon all developed countries , including those represented in this august Parliament , to provide their fair share of the USD 30 billion in fast-track financing pledged at Copenhagen for 2010-2012 .
Many view this as a litmus test of industrialised countries ' commitment to progress in the broader negotiations .
We have also to generate USD 100 billion annually by 2020 .
This was a promise by the developed world made in Copenhagen .
My High Level Advisory Group on climate change financing has been working this year and they will come up with several options as to how to generate USD 100 billion annually for developing countries by 2020 .
Climate change is a crucial part of the broader agenda on sustainable development .
That is why I recently established a new High Level Panel on Global Sustainability , co-chaired by President Halonen of Finland and President Zuma of South Africa .
Their job will be to connect the many different dots which are interconnected , and to find the right path through the interlinked economic , social and environmental challenges of the coming decades .
In all this , Europe 's leadership - your leadership - will be essential .
Europe has been a historic engine of growth and change .
Now , when governments are not moving - when the train has hit the buffers in our talks on climate change or other issues - Europe can be the locomotive , driving it forward .
You can push , you can pull and you can get the train back on track . You can keep us moving in the right direction .
We are also advancing together on building not only a cleaner world , but a safer one .
This is the third global challenge that I wish to bring to you today .
The goal of achieving a world free of nuclear weapons is a subject of great interest to the Members of this Parliament .
I commend you for speaking out on disarmament issues , posing timely questions and urging new progress .
Thank you for your resolution of April 2009 which supported total nuclear disarmament and cited the proposal for a Nuclear Weapons Convention .
Today , there is new momentum in fulfilling disarmament commitments .
This progress will continue if - and only if - the voices of the people are fully reflected in national and regional issues , and if the half a billion voices in the European Union speak out in harmony on this issue , joined by voices from other regions .
I appreciate and welcome your support for my five-point proposal on nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation and that of many leaders , including the Inter-Parliamentary Union .
We are working to eliminate other weapons of mass destruction , curb trade in small arms and light weapons and counter the risk that nuclear materials could fall into the hands of terrorists .
Let us move beyond our over-armed and under-developed age to a more secure world for all .
These are big challenges and great goals - diverse issues with a common denominator , namely , global solidarity .
We rise or fall together , so we must guard against division - division around the world and division within communities .
Almost seven years ago , my predecessor Kofi Annan stood before you .
In his address , he made an impassioned call for Europe to seize the opportunities presented by immigration and to resist those who demonised these newcomers as ' the other ' .
I wish I could report , today , that the situation in Europe has improved over the intervening years , but as a friend of Europe , I share profound concern .
It is almost a cliché to say that the birth of the European Union ended centuries of war and brought lasting peace to the continent , yet it remains a profound truth and a beacon of hope .
Europe has served as an extraordinary engine of integration , weaving together nations and cultures into a whole that is far , far greater than the sum of its parts .
But for Europe , ' winning the peace ' was the narrative of the last century .
The 21st-century European challenge is ' tolerance within ' .
Inclusion and building diverse communities is as complex a task as the one Europe faced after the Second World War .
None of this is easy .
Migrants , whether from within Europe or beyond , suffer disproportionately from unemployment , discrimination , and unequal opportunities in schools and the workplace .
A dangerous trend is emerging - a new politics of polarisation .
( Applause )
Some play on people 's fears .
They seek to invoke liberal values for illiberal causes .
They accuse immigrants of violating European values .
( Applause )
Yet too often , it is the accusers who subvert these values - and thus the very idea of what it means to be a citizen of the European Union .
Europe 's darkest chapters have been written in language such as this .
Today , the primary targets are immigrants of the Muslim faith .
Europe cannot afford stereotyping that closes minds and breeds hatred .
The world cannot afford a Europe that does this .
( FR ) Modern Europe is founded on human rights and on the fundamental values of humanity .
Our ambition therefore is for a united continent that is not divided by ethnic or religious differences . A Union in which all children , whatever the origin of their parents , have the same chance of success .
I have confidence in the European model , in a Europe that represents not only a geographical entity but also an ideal . We are going through difficult times .
It is precisely because they are difficult that we must continue to show solidarity .
We must be equal to global challenges .
I have mentioned three of them today : combating poverty , climate change and building a world without nuclear weapons .
I call upon you , Members of the European Parliament , to show leadership and solidarity both within and beyond Europe .
As that famous man from Alsace , Albert Schweitzer , said , the first step in developing ethical rules is a feeling of solidarity with other human beings .
I do not doubt that Europe , a symbol of solidarity , will show itself to be equal to it .
( Parliament accorded the speaker a standing ovation ) .
Mr Secretary-General , thank you for your very encouraging words , such as the European Union having leadership , our solidarity , and also being a locomotive of our global train .
I am quite sure we will keep the train on the track .
For both of us - the United Nations and the European Union - the most important word is ' united ' .
We say we are united in diversity , so let us cooperate .
Let us work together for a better world , for all nations , the United Nations .
Thank you very much once again .
( Applause )
( PL ) Ladies and gentlemen , several hours ago , a brutal terrorist attack was made on one of my party 's offices in Poland .
As a result of this attack , two people have died , including one of the staff of our Parliament , who worked for one of our fellow Members .
I hope this brutal act of political aggression , which is unprecedented in the history of my country , and as a result of which two people have died , will be met by the condemnation of Parliament and by a very clear condemnation of the methods of violence and the killing of political opponents .
( Applause )
Thank you , Mr Kamiński .
As you have seen , this Chamber has expressed its solidarity with the victims of this absolutely unacceptable act .
1 .
Statistical returns in respect of carriage of goods and passengers by sea (
2 .
Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund : Nordjylland / Denmark (
3 .
Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund : NXP Semiconductors / Netherlands (
4 .
Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund : Qimonda / Portugal (
5 .
Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund : Cataluña automoción / Spain (
6 .
Scheme of control and enforcement applicable in the area covered by the Convention on future multilateral cooperation in the North-East Atlantic fisheries (
7 .
Convention on Future Multilateral Cooperation in the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries (
8 .
Precarious women workers (
That concludes the vote .
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
( ES ) Madam President , I would also like to thank the rapporteur and the Council for the work they have done in order to reach an agreement .
I believe that this has been a significant step forward in the progress and recognition that the Treaty of Lisbon gives to Parliament and to the Committee on Fisheries specifically , and I think that it is going to be a decisive step forwards for ensuring that future agreements on fisheries matters are conducted using the ordinary legislative procedure .
That is what I would like to highlight in this agreement .

( PL ) Control of vessels engaged in illegal , unreported and unregulated fishing activities is essential and should be conducted efficiently , effectively and as frequently as possible , with particular attention paid to areas where the risk of illegal fishing is the greatest .
This is why we very much need the new control measures introduced by the regulation which has been adopted .
The schemes of control in use by regional fisheries organisations should be transposed into Union law in such a way as to avoid the delays and legal loopholes which arise as a result of complicated procedures .
I also share the opinion of the author that justifying these delays by citing a lack of human resources is not acceptable .
( IT ) Madam President , I voted for this report because I agree with the rapporteur that the scheme of control and enforcement adopted by the Convention on future multilateral cooperation in the North-East Atlantic fisheries must be swiftly transposed into EU law .
I refer , in particular , to those new provisions that specifically introduce a new port state control system , which will close European ports to landings and transhipments of frozen fish which have not been verified to be legal by the state in question .
I am quite sure , however , that when these changes are transposed , some compromise solutions will need to be evaluated , and it will be essential to carry out any resulting adjustments so long as they are considered feasible in terms of the convention itself .

( ES ) Madam President , this agreement is also going to mean fighting to defend fishermen , combating illegal fishing , control measures - which must govern fisheries policy - and one more step towards sustainable fishing .
It is also going to mean greater control levels and defending fishermen and the sector in Europe .
I am therefore very pleased that we have reached this agreement .
( PL ) The fundamental objective of the Convention on Future Multilateral Cooperation in the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries is optimum utilisation of the fishery resources in the territories covered by the agreement .
It should be remembered that the convention is intended to secure wide-ranging international cooperation and the use of scientific research to ensure that utilisation of marine fishery resources is as effective as possible .
The fundamental changes to the convention concern streamlining the structure of the North Atlantic Fisheries Organisation , reform of the budget contribution formula , new definitions of the obligations of the different parties and reform of the dispute settlement procedure .
I concur with the rapporteur and think that these changes will have a beneficial effect on the interests of the European Union , which , thanks to the convention under discussion , has permission to fish in these territories .
( ES ) Madam President , I voted in favour of this initiative because when we talk about precarious work , we are talking once again about the inequality and discrimination that women suffer in Europe .
The economic crisis has increased this inequality because it has impacted the lower paid jobs done mainly by women , involving domestic and care work , which , according to research , represent 31.5 % of jobs in businesses , including part-time jobs .
The difference in salaries also has an equal impact in Europe , and lack of security is also affecting jobs done by women who have higher-level training .
The lack of joint responsibility between men and women in the home is one of the reasons for that lack of security and that discrimination .
We need to work to ensure that we have high quality services to care for children and the elderly and that women can access the labour market under better conditions .
I should add that immigrant women are doing the work done by European women so that we can access the labour market .
In short , we need to continue to work for real equality .
( SK ) The labour market has seen a shift away from standard to non-standard forms of employment , and there is therefore a need to prevent employers from prioritising the cheapest and most advantageous forms of employment , which leads to insecure jobs .
Employees who are in a vulnerable position in jobs where even basic health and safety standards are not fulfilled , and where there is no protection against discrimination , no social protection and no collective representation , must be protected against demeaning work conditions and exploitation .
I therefore support the protection of workers through the introduction of minimum social standards for employees , the securing of equal access to healthcare and old age pensions , and the guarantee of an adequate wage and reasonable working time .
In my opinion , Member States should prevent ordinary jobs becoming insecure by introducing strict employment regulations .
( IT ) Madam President , the current economic and financial crisis has aggravated the problem of precarious women workers .
Since they often have to balance work and family commitments , they find themselves in a weaker bargaining position , which often leads to their having worse working conditions .
I voted for this report because I agree with the need to combat this problem by calling on the Member States and social partners to align to a large extent their legislative and contractual rules on standard work and atypical work , without underestimating the real risk of a possible increase in undeclared work .
We therefore call on the Commission and all the Member States to develop concrete new strategies on precarious work that take the principle of gender balance into account .
This report also urges the Commission to submit a proposal relating to the application of the principle of equal pay for men and women .
We must remind the Member States to transpose Directive 2006 / 54 / EC without further delay .
We therefore call on the Member States to facilitate the development of childcare and care networks and to implement all the measures designed to allow women who so choose to work full time , thus improving their labour market participation and economic independence .
( CS ) I voted against the adoption of this report on women employed under precarious working conditions because I think that part-time work , temporary work and other similar forms of contract are a benefit to women in the labour market , especially for women who are caring for children and who want to work as well .
These flexible forms of work are very beneficial , in my opinion , and we should support them more so that , on the contrary , employers have an interest in using them and thus giving women more space to decide .
At the same time , I cannot agree to the setting of quotas relating to childcare : for example , saying that by 2013 , 33 % of children up to three years of age will be placed in collective care facilities .
We need to promote the principle of freedom for families and leave the decision up to them on how to care for children .

( SK ) I would particularly like to take this opportunity because the President was unwilling to call everyone who wanted to contribute to the debate yesterday , and precisely on that topic , which is enormously important , because Mrs Thomsen 's report draws attention to the increasingly insecure conditions faced by women on the labour market and the deteriorating social situation .
The uncertainty on the labour market affects women in general .
So-called non-standard jobs , whether in the services sector or in agriculture , are the first to be hit , particularly in a time of global crisis .
As it is mostly women working in these sectors , layoffs mainly affect them .
This is again an area where we must reject the apparent logic of the market , and in the name of fairness and in the name of supporting the purchasing power of the population and supporting demand , it is necessary to intervene positively and , for example , to end the practice of concluding contracts that do not stipulate working hours .
( IT ) Madam President , the huge majority that voted for the report is an important warning signal from Parliament about the problem of precarious women workers .
In Europe , it is still women who bear most of the burden of precarious work , and the situation is getting worse because of the international crisis affecting our countries .
The European Union has always demonstrated its commitment to gender policy in specific legislation transposed by the Member States , and it must continue to do all it can to achieve real parity in access to work .
This own-initiative report sends out a clear signal to the Commission and the Member States that they should abolish precarious work and increase social protection for precarious women workers .
I congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Thomsen .
( SK ) I supported the report , although with certain reservations .
The report also shed important light on my report from the previous session , which talks about female poverty in the European Union .
It is an example of the fact that we are taking the situation of job threats seriously .
Many women and families are asking whether European politicians have a practical solution and concrete policies for social problems .
Politicians should not interfere in the economy .
Economic freedom is one of the characteristics of the common market .
However , if the profit motive leads some companies to demand of employees that they work in hazardous and insecure conditions , law makers must erect barriers against this .
We must finally acknowledge that the work of women in the home is also not properly secured .
Insurance companies have already quantified this , and now it is the turn of the politicians .
I would like to call on the Commission to put forward proposals for the recognition of the work of women in the home as a non-monetary investment in national prosperity .
( IT ) Madam President , this is an important and significant report for the protection of women .
The European institutions , however , suffer from the major fault of not practising what they preach .
Last Friday and Saturday , a meeting attended by the President of the Commission , Mr Barroso , the President of Parliament and President Van Rompuy was held with dignitaries from the most important European Masonic lodges , yet not a single word was said about the fact that most of these lodges do not allow women to join .
More seriously , the meeting was held inside the European Parliament , behind closed doors , and not even Parliament 's own staff were allowed in .
All that stands in contrast to the principles of transparency that should govern all activities of the European institutions .
Written explanations of vote
I welcome this proposal , since its aim is to make the collection of data by type of goods obligatory for maritime transport statistics , which allows a useful general framework for supporting and monitoring the policy of promoting co-modality .
In the case of islands , this should mean more support for a combination of maritime and air transport , since these are the only means of transport available .
This statistical survey would also enable a greater understanding of the costs associated with the outermost regions , both in terms of goods and passengers , which may influence decisions on other policies such as trans-European networks and , more particularly , the ' Motorways of the Sea ' , which should include maritime transport between islands , as well as between islands and the European mainland .
I would like to affirm my support for the rapporteur 's opinion on the possibility of adapting the present provisions to the new rules on delegated acts introduced by the Treaty of Lisbon , with the aim of strengthening Parliament 's powers in this area .
I am voting for the report by Mr Simpson because I consider statistical returns in respect of carriage of goods and passengers by sea to be very useful .
In fact , the collection of data by type of goods is already mandatory for European statistics on road , rail and inland waterway transport .
As the report clearly states , ' the availability of comprehensive and homogeneous statistics by type of goods for all the modes of transport would provide a general framework useful to support and monitor the policy promoting co-modality , i.e. the possibility of optimally combining various modes of transport within the same transport chain , and the modernisation of freight transport logistics . '
in writing . - ( LT ) I agree with this proposal for a regulation , the purpose of which is to amend the directive in force in order to make the collection of data by type of goods mandatory for maritime transport statistics .
This data is currently collected on a voluntary basis by 18 Member States .
Furthermore , the collection of data by type of goods is already mandatory for road , rail and inland waterways transport statistics .
The collection of data will provide the opportunity to compare carriage by transport mode and will create the possibility to combine various modes of transport within the same transport chain and to modernise freight transport logistics .
It is believed that the collection of the relevant data will not impose any additional burden on respondents as the Member States concerned would compile the data by using already existing data sources ( for example , custom documents ) .
Directive 2009 / 42 / EC , which is currently in force , makes provision for data capture for statistics on maritime transport on a voluntary basis .
The amendment to this directive will make data capture by type of goods mandatory .
I am satisfied with this amendment , which does not impose any additional burden , given that the Member States should be in a position to compile data from existing sources .
It makes sense for these rules to be mandatory for maritime transport , as they are already mandatory for road transport , rail transport and inland waterway transport .
Furthermore , I welcome the introduction by the rapporteur of amendments concerning the enforcement of the regulation in accordance with the delegated acts procedure .
Parliament should seize this new prerogative provided for in the Treaty of Lisbon .
I voted in favour of this report as I agree that the existence of complete , standardised statistics by type of goods is crucial for all modes of transport .
This information provides a general framework that is useful for supporting and monitoring the policy of promoting co-modality , namely , the possibility of achieving the optimum combination of different modes of transport in the same transport chain , along with the modernisation of freight logistics .
I would like to call for all European statistics on all modes of transport to be collected in line with common concepts and standards in order to achieve the greatest possible comparability between modes of transport .
in writing . - This concerns the collection and registration of data when it comes to shipping applicable in the Member States that have a coast .
The proposal will alter the way that data is collected in that it will be organised by the type of goods , as is already the case with regards to other forms of transport .
I believe that this is a positive development and have had no qualms in supporting the rapporteur .
in writing . - ( IT ) Although the single market was declared complete some time ago , the persistent differences between the various points of access for goods and people still reveal the national nature of its borders .
The Member States may have decided to give way to the European institutions on this point , but such differences , which penalise some areas and favour others , cannot continue to exist .
This further provision aimed at harmonising the treatment of people and goods is another step on the way towards completely integrating the European single market .
European Union Member States must help set up a European database for data on the monthly carriage of goods and passengers by sea and for the ships which carry them .
This will enable the EU 's specialist service , Eurostat , to compile European statistics for every mode of transport in compliance with EU standards .
Using this data will then help establish an integrated European system containing statistics on this area , with a view to achieving the maximum degree of comparability between the modes of transport deployed in European countries .
This proposal aims to make the collection of data by type of goods obligatory for maritime transport statistics and to standardise the type of information collated and processed in the 27 Member States .
As the rapporteur says , the existence of comprehensive and uniform statistics by type of goods for all forms of transport would provide a general framework that would be useful for supporting and monitoring the policy of promoting co-modality ; that is , the possibility of an optimal combination of different modes of transport in the same transport chain , along with the modernisation of freight logistics .
Given the importance of safe and effective transportation of goods in international trade , I support the Commission 's proposal .
The objective of this proposal for a regulation by Parliament and the Council is to change Directive 2009 / 42 / EC , with the aim of making the collection of data by type of goods obligatory for maritime transport statistics .
At present , these data are collected on a voluntary basis by 18 Member States .
Five Member States do not have a sea coast and do not provide data in accordance with the directive .
In most cases , the collection of relevant data will not impose any additional burden on respondents , since the Member States concerned should be able to compile these data using existing data sources , such as customs documents .
I voted in favour of this report as I agree with the need for complete and standardised statistics by type of goods for all modes of transport in order to allow a general framework of comparability within the EU .
The proposal for a regulation aims to make mandatory the collection of data by type of goods for maritime transport statistics , as the rapporteur believes that in the majority of cases , the collection of relevant data will not impose any additional burden on respondents , since the Member States concerned should be able to compile these data using existing data sources , for instance , customs documents .
Moreover , the collection of data by type of goods is already mandatory for European road , rail and inland waterways transport statistics .
We share the view that the existence of statistics on all forms of transport , goods and passengers will provide a framework of information that will be useful for defining a policy of interoperability and co-modality ; that is , the possibility of an optimal combination of different modes of transport in the same transport chain , contributing to the modernisation and rationalisation of freight logistics and promoting their sustainability .
Of course , this depends on the comparability of the available statistics , which requires some harmonisation of standards and ideas .
in writing . - The simple aim of this proposal is to make the collection of data by type of goods mandatory for maritime transport .
It is already done in the case of European road , rail and inland waterways transport and it would help improve the harmonisation in this field .
The collection of data will not impose any additional burden on respondents .
The purpose of this text is to amend Directive 2009 / 42 / EC to make the collection of data by type of goods mandatory for maritime transport statistics .
Currently , 18 Member States voluntarily collect that data .
Five Member States do not have a coastline and do not supply the data provided for in the directive .
In the majority of cases , the collection of the relevant data will not place any additional burden on those who supply it , as the Member States affected should be able to compile the data using existing sources of information ( such as customs documents ) .
The collection of data by type of goods is already mandatory for European statistics concerning transport by road , rail and inland waterways .
European statistics on all modes of transport must be collected according to common principles and rules in order to ensure the highest degree of comparability between modes of transport , which is why I voted in favour of the text .
The availability of comprehensive and homogenous statistics by type of goods for all modes of transport would provide a useful general framework for supporting and supervising the policy promoting co-modality .
in writing . - ( LV ) I fully supported Mr Simpson 's report .
I agree that data on the breakdown by type of goods is necessary for maritime transport statistics .
These statistics will offer exporters and importers the possibility of finding the best scheme for cargo transportation .
This means that the cost of goods for the European population will fall , and that exporters will be able to charge prices for goods supplied from third countries more efficiently .
This type of statistical data will help to avoid unforeseen costs and will stimulate the circulation of both internal and external goods .
I would additionally introduce this sort of statistical data in relation to air freight as well .
In order to be able to react , statistics are important , because they provide facts on which decisions can be based .
However , in the case of the collection of statistical data , it is always important to maintain a balance between the necessary collection of facts and the administrative costs .
Up to now , the data on the carriage of goods and passengers have been collected by 18 Member States on a voluntary basis .
This makes sense if the relevant data really do not impose any additional burden , in other words , if the Member States are indeed in a position to collate these data using already existing data sources .
The collection of complete statistics for the carriage of goods and passengers for all goods and for all modes of transport for the purpose of comparison seems excessive to me in terms of the administrative costs involved .
I have therefore voted accordingly .
The report proposes a series of amendments which aim to adapt provisions on the regulatory procedure with scrutiny to the new provisions on delegated acts introduced by the Treaty of Lisbon .
The rapporteur 's aim was to introduce amendments to the EU directive on data collection by types of goods for maritime transport statistics .
At the moment , 18 Member States collect this data on a voluntary basis .
Five Member States have no maritime coast , and therefore do not provide the data required under that directive .
It is worth mentioning that the collection of the relevant data does not impose any additional burden on respondents , as the Member States concerned should be able to compile the data by using already existing data sources ( for example , custom documents ) .
The collection of data by type of goods is mandatory for European road , rail and inland waterways transport statistics .
Given the need to create effective , coordinated and eco-friendly communication and transport networks ( maritime , land and inland waterways ) , action with regard to the collection and analysis of data for all types of transport is indeed very relevant .
I voted in favour of the Simpson report because , by amending Directive 2009 / 42 / EC , it puts the finishing touches to the relevant legislation on the collection of data on the transport of goods and passengers from and within Europe .
Previously , data collection was mandatory only for road , rail and inland waterway transport , but with the amendment to the directive , it will also be mandatory for maritime transport , providing a series of data on goods entering and leaving across our borders .
Such data are essential not only for statistical purposes .
The implementation of the amendment to the directive will also provide data on maritime transport , starting next year , allowing greater transparency as regards the types of goods transported and making the transport of specific goods more efficient , since comparability will make it possible to find the most efficient means of transport for each kind of goods .
This proposal seeks to establish the mandatory collection of data by type of goods for maritime transport statistics .
At present , this collection of data is carried out on a purely voluntary basis by 18 Member States for shipping , with collection of data by type of goods already mandatory for European road , rail and inland waterways transport statistics .
The existence of comprehensive and uniform statistics by type of goods for all forms of transport , including shipping , will provide a general framework that will be useful for supporting and monitoring the policy of promoting co-modality ; that is , the possibility of an optimal combination of different modes of transport in the same transport chain , along with the modernisation of freight logistics .
in writing . - The purpose of this proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and the Council is to amend Directive 2009 / 42 / EC in order to make the collection of data by type of goods mandatory for maritime transport statistics .
These data are currently collected on a voluntary basis by 18 Member States .
Five Member States have no maritime coast and do not provide any data under that directive .
For the most part , the collection of the relevant data will not impose any additional burden on respondents as the Member States concerned should be able to compile the data by using already existing data sources ( for example , customs documents ) .
The Greens / EFA have voted in favour of the proposal .
I believe that the mandatory collection of data by type of goods with a view to collating maritime transport statistics is vital in order to promote co-modality and the possibility of combining different modes of transport .
Since data collection is already mandatory for statistics on other modes of transport - road , rail and via inland waterways - I think a common framework which includes the collation of maritime transport statistics is appropriate , and it can also help to ensure maximum comparability between the different modes of transport .
In accordance with the Commission proposal , the revision of Directive 2009 / 42 / EC should work along these lines and be applied to data from 2011 , in line with the voluntary practice that 18 EU Member States are already developing .
Ladies and gentlemen , this issue of the systematic collection of statistical data is particularly important to us .
In Lithuania , the carriage of goods by sea constitutes just a small percentage of all goods carried and therefore , it is possible to achieve much more in this field .
Furthermore , our coastal tourism sector also has great growth potential .
By modernising goods transport logistics and promoting co-modality , i.e. combining various modes of transport within the same transport chain , we have the opportunity to increase the prosperity of the Baltic region .
This is particularly important in order to maintain the future competitiveness of Europe 's ports , such as the Lithuanian port of Klaipėda .
Closer cooperation between the Baltic countries will help bring them closer together and will make our region 's market more harmonious and accessible to the whole of the European Union .
Currently , the Baltic countries are , to a large extent , isolated from the European transport network .
It is hoped that traffic between the Baltic countries will double by 2020 and therefore , we must address the lack of suitable infrastructure and accessibility .
Most importantly , we must ensure that data collection does not create an additional burden for Member States .
We have nothing to lose .
Given that Denmark has submitted a request for assistance for 951 redundancies in 45 companies operating in NACE Revision 2 Division 28 ( manufacture of machines and equipment ) in the NUTS II region of Nordjylland , I voted in favour of the resolution because I agree with the Commission 's proposal and with the amendments to it tabled by Parliament .
I also agree that the Commission 's proposal , in its explanatory statement , should include clear and detailed information on the application , analysing the eligibility criteria and explaining the reasons which led to its approval , in accordance with the requests made by Parliament .
in writing . - The EGAF is an important structural fund in the EU that enables us to aid workers that have been rendered unemployed as a result of the shifts in global trends .
This has been the case in a number of EU Member States such as Spain , where the existence of the fund has proved to be particularly beneficial .
In view of the above , I am in agreement with the decisions that have been established by the rapporteur and have decided to vote in favour of the report .
In the light of the structural changes in international trade , it is vital that the European economy is able to effectively implement the instruments to support workers affected by this , along with empowering them with a view to assisting their swift reintegration into the labour market .
Given that Denmark has submitted a request for assistance for 951 cases of redundancy at 45 companies in the Nordjylland region , I would like to recall the range of reasons I set out in the explanation of my vote on the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund in the Spanish region of Catalonia in order to explain my vote in favour of this report .
This is a resolution on the proposed decision of Parliament and the Council on the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund in terms of Point 28 of the interinstitutional agreement of 17 May 2006 between Parliament , the Council and the Commission on budgetary discipline and sound financial management .
The machinery and equipment manufacturing industries for the shipping sector in the Danish region of Nordjylland were taken unawares by the changes to the markets and the global credit crunch , having suffered dramatic cuts in orders , which led to redundancies in more than 40 companies .
In regions like Nordjylland that are particularly dependent on one sector , market recovery and the redeployment of workers in other areas of activity tend to be slower and more difficult .
I believe that the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund is justified in this case .
Given the social impact of the global economic crisis , which has had a particular effect on employment , the proper use of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) is of pivotal importance in alleviating the plight of many European individuals and families , contributing to their social reintegration and professional development , while , at the same time , supplying new resources to meet the needs of companies and boost the economy .
Denmark 's plan of action to help 951 people made redundant from 45 machine and equipment manufacturing companies in the small Nordjylland region falls within the same framework .
In this case , 40 % of the workers made redundant were skilled in manual work , metallurgy and mechanical construction , and 33 % of the workers were classed as unskilled manual labour .
This situation clearly shows the need for effective technical and professional evaluation of the people affected by this global crisis .
I hope therefore that the European institutions will redouble their efforts in implementing measures that speed up and improve the rates of utilisation of such an important resource as the EGF , which currently has very low levels of mobilisation .
This year , only 11 % of the EUR 500 million available was requested .
Once again , Parliament has been asked to validate payment of aid from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund to employees made redundant as a result of the crisis or relocations .
Once again , this aid will be spread across budgetary lines initially allocated to other European programmes , as the Globalisation Adjustment Fund does not have any funds of its own within the current financial framework .
In order to put an end to this situation , I worked , during the drafting of the 2011 budget , on the creation of a line of payment appropriations specific to the Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
The sum of EUR 50 million was therefore adopted by Parliament during the vote on its reading of the budget on 20 October 2010 .
This sum , which is symbolic compared with annual requirements , has yet to be confirmed , as the European Council initially rejected the proposal to give the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund its own financing .
I shall therefore continue to keep an eye on this question , in the hope of achieving budgetary and legislative consolidation of this mechanism .
I must congratulate Mrs Matera most sincerely on a total of four reports on the mobilisation of the Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
The broadening of the scope of the Globalisation Adjustment Fund to include workers was an important step to enable us to support European citizens directly .
The instrument of the Globalisation Adjustment Fund is intended to help those who have been caught unawares by the effects of globalisation .
In order for it also to be possible for the money made available to be used effectively , it must reach its destination quickly and in a targeted manner .
That is the only way to ensure that we help European citizens and increase confidence in the EU .
I voted for the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) in favour of Denmark because I consider that instrument to be a valuable resource for the support of workers in difficulties on account of the economic crisis .
The EGF was set up in 2006 to provide practical support to workers made redundant either for reasons associated with the relocation of their companies or , following the 2009 amendment , on account of the economic crisis , in order to assist their reintegration into the labour market .
Today 's vote concerned a request for support for 1 122 workers at 45 machinery manufacturing companies in the region of Nordjylland , amounting to a sum of EUR 7 521 359 financed by the EGF .
To conclude , I welcome the adoption of the report , which shows that the EGF is a useful and effective resource for combating unemployment resulting from globalisation and the economic crisis .
I voted in favour of this report on using funds from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) , specifically for the 951 redundancies that have been made from 45 businesses operating in NACE Revision 2 Division 28 ( manufacture of machines and equipment ) in the NUTS II region of Nordjylland .
The EGF provides additional help to workers who suffer the consequence of major structural changes in the patterns of global trade , and help with reintegrating into the labour market .
Denmark has made an application for EGF funds for redundancies in the automotive sector which are in line with the fund 's regulation .
Now it must be ensured that the EGF supports workers who have been made redundant to reintegrate into the labour market , despite the fact that EGF assistance should not replace the measures that are the responsibility of the businesses under national legislation or collective agreements , or measures to restructure businesses or sectors .
in writing . - ( LV ) It is very important not to adopt a laissez faire approach to the unemployment process .
In this area , it is essential for people to feel that they are supported both by national governments and by the EU as a whole .
Although I voted in favour , I am still unclear as to how the amount of support will be distributed .
Why will the Netherlands receive around EUR 3 000 for every redundancy , while Spain will receive EUR 1 000 and Denmark EUR 7 000 ?
Does retraining and reskilling cost seven times as much in Denmark as in Spain ?
Regardless of this extremely discomfiting issue , I am forced to agree with the rapporteur , Mrs Matera , that the award of this financial support is a necessary and timely measure .
It is a shame that the government of Latvia did not participate on this occasion and did not submit an application .
Currently , there are 180 000 unemployed people in Latvia .
Given that Denmark has submitted a request for assistance for 951 redundancies in 45 companies operating in NACE Revision 2 Division 28 ( manufacture of machines and equipment ) in the NUTS II region of Nordjylland , I voted in favour of the resolution because I agree with the Commission 's proposal and with the amendments to it tabled by Parliament .
I would like to highlight the following as being particularly relevant : ( 1 ) the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) supports the reintegration of workers made redundant from the labour market , without absolving the companies of their responsibilities ; ( 2 ) in the context of the mobilisation of the EGF , the Commission has proposed an alternative sourcing of payment appropriations other than unused European Social Fund ( ESF ) resources , as Parliament has urged ; ( 3 ) the functioning and added value of the EGF should be evaluated in the context of the general assessment of the programmes and various other instruments created by the IIA of 17 May 2006 within the process of the 2007-2013 multiannual financial framework ( MFF ) mid-term review ; ( 4 ) the Commission 's proposal includes information about the application , analysing the eligibility criteria and explaining the reasons which led to its approval , which is also in line with Parliament 's requests .
Given that Denmark has submitted a request for assistance for 951 redundancies in 45 companies operating in NACE Revision 2 Division 28 ( manufacture of machines and equipment ) in the NUTS II region of Nordjylland , I voted in favour of the resolution because I agree with the Commission 's proposal and with the amendments to it tabled by Parliament .
I also agree that the Commission 's proposal , in its explanatory statement , should include clear and detailed information on the application , analysing the eligibility criteria and explaining the reasons which led to its approval , in accordance with the requests made by Parliament .
in writing . - With this vote , the EP takes note of the fact that Denmark has requested assistance in respect of cases concerning 951 redundancies in 45 enterprises operating in the NACE Rev. 2 Division 28 ( manufacture of machinery and equipment ) sector in the NUTS II region of Nordjylland .
The application fulfils the eligibility criteria set up by the EGF Regulation . In its resolution , the EP requests the institutions involved to make the necessary efforts to accelerate the mobilisation of the EGF ; recalls the institutions ' commitment to ensuring a smooth and rapid procedure for the adoption of the decisions on the mobilisation of the EGF , providing one-off , time-limited individual support geared to helping workers who have suffered redundancies as a result of globalisation and the financial and economic crisis ; and emphasises the role that the EGF can play in the reintegration of workers who have been made redundant into the labour market .
The Community of European Shipyards ' Associations ( CESA ) reckons that global demand in the shipbuilding industry will fall by 2014 as a result of the global financial crisis , while , in future , the shipbuilding industry will relocate to areas with lower costs , especially to regions in Asia .
Given the lack of a European policy supporting the shipping sector , it is unlikely that production levels will return to those prior to the current crisis .
In my own city of Galaţi , the Damen Shipyard is also facing the effects of the economic and financial crisis , making around 600 workers redundant in 2009 alone .
In 2010 , another 500 workers are expected to be made redundant .
I voted for the European Parliament Resolution on mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) , requested by Denmark , for using EUR 7 521 359 to cofinance the support programme for 951 workers made redundant in the Nordjylland region between 15 February 2009 and 14 November 2009 .
The redundancies were made in 45 companies involved in producing machinery and equipment for the shipbuilding sector .
This is a question of providing support for enterprises in the machinery and equipment manufacturing sector in the mid-level region of Nordjylland .
In this region on the north-eastern tip of North Jutland , 951 people in 45 enterprises were made redundant between 15 February and 14 November 2009 .
In order to support these workers in their reintegration into employment , an amount of EUR 7 521 359 is being mobilised from the Fund .
As I had occasion to explain in March this year at the time of the vote on the Böge report , using the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund as a useful instrument for tackling the consequences of the economic and financial crisis is a very valuable initiative that provides a practical response in terms of financial aid .
Several other requests have been accepted since then , including the one in question .
That , I think , is the best demonstration of how useful the initiative is .
Given that the Netherlands has submitted requests for assistance for 512 cases of redundancy at NXP Semiconductors Netherlands , which operates in the electronics sector , in the NUTS II regions of Gelderland and Eindhoven , I voted in favour of the resolution as I agree with the Commission 's proposal , combined with the respective amendments introduced by Parliament .
I also agree with the Commission 's proposal of a funding source for alternative payment for unused European Social Fund ( ESF ) resources , in connection with the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) , following Parliament 's frequent reminders that the EGF was created separately as a specific instrument , with its own objectives and deadlines , and that it is therefore necessary to identify appropriate budgetary headings for transfers .
in writing . - The EGAF is an important structural fund in the EU that enables us to aid workers that have been rendered unemployed as a result of the shifts in global trends .
It has become necessary to grant access to this fund to workers in the Netherlands that have suffered redundancies in the electronics sector .
In view of this , I am in agreement with the decisions that have been established by the rapporteur and have decided to vote in favour of the report .
Aid to the workers made redundant due to restructuring and relocation must be dynamic and flexible so that it can be implemented rapidly and effectively .
Given that the Netherlands has requested assistance for 512 cases of redundancy at NXP Semiconductors Netherlands , which operates in the electronics sector in the Gelderland and Eindhoven regions , and in the light of the justifications which I presented in the explanation of my vote on the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund for the Spanish region of Catalonia , I am voting in favour of this report .
Once again , we are faced with the problem of the closure of a town 's main industry , in this case in Nijmegen , with the aggravating circumstance that the establishment of any others with the same potential for employability is not envisaged .
Looking for resolutions adopted by Parliament allows one to understand more clearly the scope and extent of the problem in several European states .
Those states have still not shown that they are capable of countering the lack of coordination and the loss of attractiveness for investment and innovation .
With nothing being done , I am concerned that requests for the mobilisation of the fund will multiply and that the fund itself may prove to be insufficient to help workers who are the victims of sudden and unexpected changes in their respective businesses .
Given the effects of the current global economic and financial crisis on industrial activity and the specific jobs carried out in the electronics sector , there needs to be an urgent and effective programme of support for the 512 workers made redundant from the company NXL Semiconductors Netherlands , in the Dutch regions of Gelderland and Eindhoven .
It is worth pointing out the regional and social impact resulting from the decline in activity at the business unit in Nijmegen , in the province of Gelderland , where it was the largest local employer , with a large number of unskilled workers who had worked at the company for decades .
This situation emphasises the need for a plan to aid the recovery and re-qualification of these former employees , so as to promote their reintegration into the labour market .
I would like to repeat the word of warning about the need to ensure mechanisms to facilitate and speed up the mobilisation and use of European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) resources by European countries .
I voted for the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) in favour of the Netherlands because I consider that instrument to be a valuable resource for the support of workers in difficulties on account of the economic crisis .
The EGF was set up in 2006 to provide practical support to workers made redundant either for reasons associated with the relocation of their companies or , following the 2009 amendment , on account of the economic crisis , in order to assist their reintegration into the labour market .
Today 's vote concerned a request for support for 1 590 workers at NXL Semiconductors Netherlands , an electronics company in the regions of Gelderland and Eindhoven , amounting to a sum of EUR 1 809 434 financed by the EGF .
To conclude , I welcome the adoption of the report , which shows that the EGF is a useful and effective resource for combating unemployment resulting from globalisation and the economic crisis .
I voted in favour of this report on using funds from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) , specifically for the 512 redundancies that have been made from NXL Semiconductors Netherlands , operating in the electronics sector in the NUTS II regions of Gelderland and Eindhoven .
The EGF provides additional help to workers who suffer the consequences of major structural changes in the patterns of global trade , and help with reintegration into the labour market .
The Netherlands has made an application for EGF funds for redundancies in the automotive sector , which are in line with the fund 's regulation .
Now it must be ensured that the EGF supports workers who have been made redundant to reintegrate into the labour market , despite the fact that EGF assistance should not replace the measures that are the responsibility of the businesses under national legislation or collective agreements , or measures to restructure businesses or sectors .
Given that the Netherlands has submitted requests for assistance for 512 cases of redundancy at NXP Semiconductors Netherlands , which operates in the electronics sector , in the NUTS II regions of Gelderland and Eindhoven , I voted in favour of the resolution as I agree with the Commission 's proposal , combined with the respective amendments introduced by Parliament .
I would like to highlight the following as being particularly relevant : ( 1 ) the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) supports the reintegration of workers made redundant from the labour market , without absolving the companies of their responsibilities ; ( 2 ) in the context of the mobilisation of the EGF , the Commission has proposed an alternative sourcing of payment appropriations other than unused European Social Fund ( ESF ) resources , as Parliament has urged ; ( 3 ) the functioning and added value of the EGF should be evaluated in the context of the general assessment of the programmes and various other instruments created by the IIA of 17 May 2006 within the process of the 2007-2013 multiannual financial framework ( MFF ) mid-term review ; ( 4 ) the Commission 's proposal includes information about the application , analysing the eligibility criteria and explaining the reasons which led to its approval , which is also in line with Parliament 's requests .
Given that the Netherlands has submitted requests for assistance for 512 cases of redundancy at NXP Semiconductors Netherlands , which operates in the electronics sector , in the NUTS II regions of Gelderland and Eindhoven , I voted in favour of the resolution as I agree with the Commission 's proposal , combined with the respective amendments introduced by Parliament .
I also agree that the Commission 's proposal , in its explanatory statement , should include clear and detailed information on the application , analysing the eligibility criteria and explaining the reasons which led to its approval , in accordance with the requests made by Parliament .

in writing . - Whereas the Union 's financial assistance to workers made redundant should be dynamic and made available as quickly and efficiently as possible , in accordance with the Joint Declaration of the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission adopted during the conciliation meeting on 17 July 2008 , and having due regard for the IIA of 17 May 2006 in respect of the adoption of decisions to mobilise the EGF ; whereas the Netherlands has requested assistance in respect of cases concerning 512 redundancies in NXP Semiconductors Netherlands , operating in the electronics sector in the NUTS II regions of Gelderland and Eindhoven ; whereas the application fulfils the eligibility criteria set up by the EGF Regulation , the EP requests the institutions involved to make the necessary efforts to accelerate the mobilisation of the EGF ; recalls the institutions ' commitment to ensuring a smooth and rapid procedure for the adoption of the decisions on the mobilisation of the EGF , providing one-off , time-limited individual support geared to helping workers who have suffered redundancies as a result of globalisation and the financial and economic crisis ; and emphasises the role that the EGF can play in the reintegration of workers made redundant into the labour market .


I voted for the European Parliament Resolution on the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) in response to the request submitted by NL / NXP Semiconductors in the Netherlands .
On 26 March 2010 , the Netherlands requested financial assistance from the EGF for 512 of the 590 workers made redundant at NXP Semiconductors , which operates in the electronics sector in the NUTS II regions of Gelderland and Eindhoven .
The total number of redundant workers is made up of 425 men and 87 women , which also includes seven workers with serious health problems or a disability ( 1.3 % ) .
The Netherlands stresses the major impact of these redundancies as NXP Semiconductors is the biggest industrial employer in the area , offering jobs to a large number of low qualified workers who have been employed with the company for several decades .
The lack of job opportunities in similar companies in the region will pose a particular problem for workers with specialist experience in semiconductor production .
Mobilising the EGF is particularly important in terms of reintegrating redundant workers into employment .
However , I wish to draw the attention of the Commission and Member States to the need to develop an EU industrial policy which will be sustainable and create new jobs .
Since 1 May 2009 , the scope of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund has been broadened . It is also intended to provide support for workers made redundant as a direct result of the global financial and economic crisis .
In the NUTS II regions of Gelderland and Eindhoven in the Netherlands , 512 workers have been made redundant at NXP Semiconductors Netherlands .
An amount of EUR 1 809 434 is being mobilised to support these workers .
I voted in favour of this report which approved the mobilisation of EUR 2.4 million from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) for Portugal , the aim of which is to support the workers made redundant from Qimonda .
This follows the Portuguese application for the mobilisation of the EGF in December 2009 .
The EGF was established in order to provide additional support to workers affected by the consequences of important structural changes in international trade .
The EGF aid package is intended to safeguard the position of the 839 workers made redundant from Qimonda Portugal between 8 June and 8 October last year .
This amount will cover the following measures : recognition of skills , professional training , training and support aimed at creating jobs , support for self-promotion and incentives for recruitment and experience gained in the workplace .
I therefore believe that it is essential for us to do everything we can to speed up the mobilisation of the EGF , bearing in mind the commitment made by the European institutions in order to ensure a rapid and simple process for approving these decisions .
I voted in favour of the resolution for the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) totalling EUR 2 405 671 to Portugal , for 839 cases of redundancy which took place at Qimonda Portugal S.A. between 8 June and 8 October last year .
These funds are aimed at supporting the Qimonda workers who have been made redundant , through the recognition of skills , professional training , training and support with a view to setting up businesses , assistance in self-placement and incentives for recruitment and professional practice gained in the workplace .
This is the second time that Portugal has submitted an application for the mobilisation of the EGF to the Norte region .
In 2009 , EUR 832 800 was mobilised following redundancies in the textile sector .
Finally , I regret that the Portuguese Government has not learned to make use of the fund 's potential .
While former employees of the Dutch company NXP Semiconductors will receive EUR 3 534 per capita and the Danish former employees from Nordjylland will receive EUR 7 908 each , the Portuguese former employees of Qimonda will receive only EUR 2 867 per capita from the aid granted by the fund .
Given that Portugal has requested assistance for 839 cases of redundancy at Qimonda S.A. , a multinational company operating in the electronics sector in the NUTS II Norte region , I voted in favour of the resolution as I agree with the Commission 's proposal , combined with the respective amendments introduced by Parliament .
I also agree that the functioning and added value of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund should be evaluated in the context of the general assessment of the programmes and various other instruments created by the interinstitutional agreement of 17 May 2006 within the process of the 2007-2013 multiannual financial framework mid-term review .
in writing . - The EGAF is an important structural fund in the EU that enables us to aid workers that have been rendered unemployed as a result of the shifts in global trends .
In order for this fund to be effective , it is crucial that access be given to this fund when it is needed and in a timely and efficient manner .
For these reasons , I must support the rapporteur in her conclusions and have decided to vote in favour of the report .
The closure of Qimonda in Vila do Conde had the immediate effect of adding another 1 000 unemployed workers to the Norte region of the country .
At the time , this region already had the highest unemployment rates in the country : between January and October 2009 , employment centres in the northern region recorded an average monthly flow of 22 000 unemployed people .
Following the redundancies carried out by the company Qimonda Portugal S.A. , a request for assistance for 839 redundant workers was presented on 17 December 2009 .
Based on the assessment that it carried out , the Commission came to the conclusion that all the necessary conditions had been satisfied .
It presented this proposal for a decision with a view to mobilising the European Globalisation Adjustment fund to support the reintegration of these workers , who are victims of redundancy as a direct consequence of the global financial and economic crisis .
I therefore support this decision , which allows the mobilisation of EUR 2 405 671 under the general EU budget for 2010 in order to provide financial assistance in response to the Portuguese request .
I would also like to emphasise the need to ensure that its adoption is processed rapidly .
The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) , an initiative by the President of the Commission , Mr Barroso , in 2005 , following the Commission 's report European Values in a Globalised World , now has a new format which makes it more transparent , with broader objectives incorporating the consequences of the current crisis and pointing the way towards shorter waiting times for funds to become available , which I hope will happen in this case .
Although I voted in favour of this proposal , I find it regrettable that once again , the Portuguese Government has not known how to make full use of the fund , as has been done in other countries and as is amply demonstrated by the per capita amount of the funds requested from the EGF , when different applications are analysed .
Today , for example , there were votes on other requests for support from the EGF which showed that while former workers from the Dutch company NXP Semiconductors will receive EUR 3 534 per capita , the Danish former employees of Nordjylland will receive EUR 7 908 each .
The Portuguese former employees of Qimonda who are covered by the fund will receive only EUR 2 867 per capita in support from the fund .
This is aimed at measures such as recognition of skills , professional training , training or support with a view to setting up businesses , assistance in self-placement or incentives for recruitment and professional practice gained in the workplace .
I voted in favour of this report as I believe that the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) for Portugal is crucial , with a view to supporting the workers made redundant from Qimonda .
The EUR 2.4 million to be mobilised will certainly fall short of addressing the negative effects of the redundancies , but it will be of significant help .
The mobilisation needs to be simple and swift , and it should include training programmes that contribute to the effective reintegration into the labour market of the workers affected .
The Portuguese company Qimonda , part of a German world leader group , was seen in Portugal as an example of success and as a company at the vanguard of its sector .
It was the largest Portuguese exporter , and before being known for the problems that led to its insolvency , it was preparing to invest in new technologies and had secured public funding to support the production of solar cells .
The employees of Qimonda were highly qualified and had high rates of productivity , with nothing to suggest that the company would cease to be viable in such a short space of time .
In 2008 , the company even entertained the possibility of creating three more plants in Portugal , all around the town of Vila do Conde .
The Norte region , where Qimonda was based , is traditionally industrial , and has been badly hit by the closure of businesses and by unemployment .
Qimonda 's ability to attract much needed skilled workers to the region has now been compromised .
I hope that the employees of Qimonda can derive sufficient benefit from the mobilisation of the fund and succeed in becoming fully reintegrated into the labour market .
I would like to express my solidarity with them and their families here .
The closure of the Qimonda factory in Vila do Conde has exacerbated the high levels of unemployment in the north of Portugal .
In this case , 900 workers were made redundant , the great majority of whom have low levels of education : 36.6 % received only basic schooling and only 10.7 % proceeded to post-secondary education .
It is therefore worth pointing out the importance of this plan of aid for 839 of the workers made redundant in order to mitigate the impact of the severe economic , financial and social crisis that this region is experiencing .
I would also like to stress the importance of measures such as the certification of skills , professional training , incentives for job creation and the opportunity to gain new experience in the workplace .
On the other hand , it is regrettable that in two years , this is only the second application that Portugal has submitted to the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund in order to receive direct support for workers in the Norte region .
Faced with overwhelming numbers of unemployed and the impoverished state of public finances in Portugal , alongside the economic recession in 2011 under recent austerity measures , the government has a duty and obligation to act more competently in raising these funds to support unemployed workers in a concrete way .
Parliament has approved the mobilisation of EUR 2.4 million from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) , aimed at supporting the workers who have been made redundant from Qimonda , following an application by the Portuguese Government on 17 December 2009 .
This entails the mobilisation of a total sum of EUR 2 405 671 from the EGF for Portugal , and concerns the 839 redundancies carried out at Qimonda Portugal S.A. between 8 June and 8 October last year .
The estimated total cost of this package is EUR 3.7 million , of which EUR 2.4 million , or 65 % of the total cost , was requested from the EGF .


Regrettably , the Commission and the Council were not on hand to intervene when it would have been possible to keep the company running and prevent this Germany-based multinational company from making workers redundant .
This meagre support for the unemployed is only being given now , belatedly .
This is the 16th application to be examined under the 2010 budget , and it will include the following measures : recognition of skills , professional training , training and support aimed at creating jobs , support for self-promotion and incentives for recruitment and experience gained in the workplace .
The Norte region , where the redundancies took place , had already been approved for EGF support based on a previous application in 2009 regarding redundancies in the textile sector .
A sum of EUR 832 000 was mobilised on that occasion .
I voted for the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) in favour of Portugal because I consider that instrument to be a valuable resource for the support of workers in difficulties on account of the economic crisis .
The EGF was set up in 2006 to provide practical support to workers made redundant either for reasons associated with the relocation of their companies or , following the 2009 amendment , on account of the economic crisis , in order to assist their reintegration into the labour market .
Today 's vote concerned a request for support for 839 workers at Qimonda Portugal , S.A. , an electronics company , amounting to a sum of EUR 2 405 671 financed by the EGF .
To conclude , I welcome the adoption of the report , which shows that the EGF is a useful and effective resource for combating unemployment resulting from globalisation and the economic crisis .
I voted in favour of this report on using funds from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) , specifically for the 839 redundancies that have been made from Qimonda AG , a multinational company operating in the electronics sector in the NUTS II region of Norte .
The EGF provides additional help to workers who suffer the consequence of major structural changes in the patterns of global trade , and help with reintegration into the labour market .
Portugal has made an application for EGF funds for redundancies in the automotive sector , which are in line with the fund 's regulation .
Now it must be ensured that the EGF supports workers who have been made redundant to reintegrate into the labour market , despite the fact that EGF assistance should not replace the measures that are the responsibility of the businesses under national legislation or collective agreements , or measures to restructure businesses or sectors .
Given that Portugal has requested assistance for 839 cases of redundancy at Qimonda S.A. , a multinational company which operates in the electronics sector in the NUTS II Norte region , I voted in favour of the resolution as I agree with the Commission 's proposal , combined with the respective amendments introduced by Parliament .
I would like to highlight the following as being particularly relevant : ( 1 ) the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) supports the reintegration of workers made redundant from the labour market , without absolving the companies of their responsibilities ; ( 2 ) in the context of the mobilisation of the EGF , the Commission has proposed an alternative sourcing of payment appropriations other than unused European Social Fund ( ESF ) resources , as Parliament has urged ; ( 3 ) the functioning and added value of the EGF should be evaluated in the context of the general assessment of the programmes and various other instruments created by the IIA of 17 May 2006 within the process of the 2007-2013 multiannual financial framework ( MFF ) mid-term review ; ( 4 ) the Commission 's proposal includes information about the application , analysing the eligibility criteria and explaining the reasons which led to its approval , which is also in line with Parliament 's requests .
Obviously , I am voting in favour of the financial decision to mobilise the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) for workers made redundant from Qimonda in Portugal .
At this point , it is important to state that this decision has come too late , and that the money will arrive in Portugal even later : not before late November or early December .
Things did not have to be this way , and they should not be this way .
The EGF can and should be streamlined so that victims of collective dismissal do not have to wait 17 months for support which is declared to be urgent , as they have in this case .
If Europe continues to be so kind to financial capital , it cannot continue to be ungracious to the victims of the crisis .
Given that Portugal has requested assistance for 839 cases of redundancy at Qimonda S.A. , a multinational company which operates in the electronics sector in the NUTS II Norte region , I voted in favour of the resolution , as I agree with the Commission 's proposal , combined with the respective amendments introduced by Parliament .
I also agree that the Commission 's proposal , in its explanatory statement , should include clear and detailed information on the application , analysing the eligibility criteria and explaining the reasons which led to its approval , in accordance with the requests made by Parliament .
in writing . - Portugal has requested assistance in respect of cases concerning 839 redundancies in Qimonda AG , a multinational firm operating in the electronic sectors in the NUTS II region of Norte .
The application fulfils the eligibility criteria set up by the EGF Regulation .
The EP has voted in favour of calling on the institutions involved to make the necessary efforts to accelerate the mobilisation of the EGF .
It recalled the institutions ' commitment to ensuring a smooth and rapid procedure for the adoption of the decisions on the mobilisation of the EGF , providing one-off , time-limited individual support geared to helping workers who have suffered redundancies as a result of globalisation and the financial and economic crisis . It emphasised the role that the EGF can play in the reintegration of workers made redundant into the labour market ;
The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) is an EU legislative and budgetary instrument that was set up to provide additional assistance to workers affected by the consequences of major changes in the structure of global trade .
Given that Portugal has submitted requests for assistance for 839 cases of redundancy at Qimonda S.A. , a multinational company which operates in the electronics sector in the NUTS II Norte region , I welcome the adoption of the report by Parliament .
I hope that the aid will be provided as dynamically and effectively as possible , through a simple and rapid process , so as to allow the workers affected by the redundancies brought on by globalisation and the economic and financial crisis to be reintegrated into the labour market .
In the multinational firm Qimonda S.A. , which operates in the electronics sector in the mid-level region of Norte , there have been 839 redundancies as a result of the global financial and economic crisis .
The EUR 2 405 671 mobilised from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund will fund a coordinated package of personalised services , which will be supplemented by national measures and measures taken by the company .
I support the granting of EUR 2 752 935 in aid from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) for Catalonia as additional aid for the 1 429 workers made redundant from the 23 businesses manufacturing motor vehicles , trailers and semi-trailers , as a result of the structural changes in the patterns of global trade .
The redundancies took place over a period of nine months , from 23 February 2009 to 22 November 2009 .
This aid must be used to support the reintegration into the labour market of the people who have been made redundant , who , in 25 % of cases , do not have a basic level of education or did not finish school , and , in 40 % of cases , only have a basic level of education .
Out of these , around 75 % are male and 25 % are over 55 years of age .
This aid should not , under any circumstances , replace the responsibilities of the businesses under national legislation , or collective agreements , or measures to restructure businesses or sectors .
As the report by the Committee on Budgets states , we will need to gain clarification as to why 23 % of the workers are not included in the profiling exercise and find out what measures are being offered to those workers in particular .
Given that Spain has submitted a request for assistance in relation to 1 429 redundancies from 23 companies operating in NACE Revision 2 Division 29 ( manufacture of motor vehicles , trailers and semi-trailers ) in the NUTS II region of Catalonia , I voted in favour of the resolution because I agree with the Commission 's proposal and with the amendments to it tabled by Parliament .
I also agree that it should be ensured that the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) supports the reintegration of individual redundant workers into employment , and I would like to reiterate that assistance from the EGF must not replace measures which are the responsibility of companies by virtue of national law or collective agreements , nor should it finance the restructuring companies or sectors .
Financial assistance given to workers affected by redundancies as a result of globalisation must be carried out on a case-by-case basis and have their reintegration into the labour market as its goal .
It is therefore important to emphasise that this assistance is not a substitute for the responsibilities that normally belong to the companies , nor is it intended for the funding and restructuring of companies .
In view of this , the joint statement by the institutional trialogue highlights the importance of ensuring that procedures are as simple and swift as possible for adopting decisions on the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) .
Bearing in mind that Spain has requested assistance in relation to 1 429 redundancies in 23 companies operating in the region of Catalonia , I am voting in favour of this report .
I voted for the report on the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund : Cataluña automoción / Spain , as it will allow complementary aid to be given to the Catalonian workers affected by the consequences of major changes to the structure of the world economy , along with assisting the reintegration of these workers into the labour market .
When I think about the crisis that has hit this sector , I remember hearing the former prime minister of Spain , José María Aznar , recounting how the former president of the United States of America , George W Bush , was astonished to learn that the foremost Spanish export was not an agricultural product , but cars .
This was a positive sign that the old stereotypes about the economies of southwest Europe were ceasing to apply .
Unfortunately , the effort to modernise Spanish industry , undertaken particularly by the government of the People 's Party , has experienced a major setback with this global crisis .
The fall in the demand for cars in the EU is very serious , and production in the second quarter of 2009 decreased by almost 40 % , a situation which threatens to jeopardise even more jobs , not only in Spain , but throughout the EU .
I view this setback with concern , and I hope that the Spanish economy is able to respond adequately to the crisis , with this fund as only part of that response .
The proposed aid plan for 1 429 former employees of 23 manufacturers of motor vehicles , trailers and semi-trailers in the region of Catalonia , Spain , is urgently required for the technical and professional development of a large number of Europeans who have been directly affected by the current global economic and financial crisis .
Approximately 25 % of the workers covered by this plan did not go to school or left school early , and more than 40 % of the workers only have a basic level of education .
The low levels of education and training among the workforce in key sectors of production in Europe are a big problem in the light of the Europe 2020 strategy objectives .
In order to support sustainable , smart and inclusive growth , there needs to be a strategy that ensures better efficiency and profitability of the resources available to the Member States and the European public , such as through the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) .
In the case of the EGF , only just over 10 % of the EUR 500 million provided for in the budget was used this year , which is unacceptable given the extent of unemployment in Europe and the increased difficulties in finding other work .
I voted for the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) in favour of Spain because I consider that instrument to be a valuable resource for the support of workers in difficulties on account of the economic crisis .
The EGF was set up in 2006 to provide practical support to workers made redundant either for reasons associated with the relocation of their companies or , following the 2009 amendment , on account of the economic crisis , in order to assist their reintegration into the labour market .
The report adopted today concerned an application for funding submitted by Spain in relation to 1 429 workers in 23 different firms in the motor vehicle industry , totalling EUR 2 752 935 .
Lastly , I must point out that today 's vote on the four reports relating to the mobilisation of the EGF to provide total funding of approximately EUR 14 million shows that the fund is a useful and effective resource for combating unemployment resulting from globalisation and the economic crisis .
I voted in favour of this report on using funds from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) for the Autonomous Community of Catalonia , specifically for the 1 429 redundancies that have been made from 23 businesses operating in NACE Revision 2 Division 29 ( manufacture of motor vehicles , trailers and semi-trailers ) in the NUTS II region of Catalonia .
The EGF provides additional help for workers who suffer the consequence of major structural changes in the patterns of global trade , and to help them to reintegrate into the labour market .
Spain has made an application for EGF funds for redundancies in the automotive sector , which are in line with the fund 's Regulation .
Now it must be ensured that the EGF supports workers who have been made redundant to reintegrate into the labour market , despite the fact that EGF assistance should not replace the measures that are the responsibility of the businesses under national legislation or collective agreements , or measures to restructure businesses or sectors .
Given that Spain has submitted a request for assistance in relation to 1 429 cases of redundancy in 23 companies operating in NACE Revision 2 Division 29 ( manufacture of motor vehicles , trailers and semi-trailers ) in the NUTS II region of Catalonia , I voted in favour of the resolution because I agree with the Commission 's proposal and with the amendments to it that were tabled by Parliament .
I would like to highlight the following as being particularly relevant : ( 1 ) the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) supports the reintegration of workers made redundant from the labour market , without absolving the companies of their responsibilities ; ( 2 ) in the context of the mobilisation of the EGF , the Commission has proposed an alternative sourcing of payment appropriations other than unused European Social Fund ( ESF ) resources , as Parliament has urged ; ( 3 ) the functioning and added value of the EGF should be evaluated in the context of the general assessment of the programmes and various other instruments created by the IIA of 17 May 2006 within the process of the 2007-2013 multiannual financial framework ( MFF ) mid-term review ; ( 4 ) the Commission 's proposal includes information about the application , analysing the eligibility criteria and explaining the reasons which led to its approval , which is also in line with Parliament 's requests .
in writing . - Spain has requested assistance in respect of cases concerning 1 429 redundancies in 23 enterprises operating in the NACE Revision 2 Division 29 ( manufacture of motor vehicles , trailers and semi-trailers ) sector in the NUTS II region of Catalonia .
The application fulfils the eligibility criteria set up by the EGF Regulation .
As a Catalan , I am glad that Parliament agreed to call on the institutions involved to make the necessary efforts to accelerate the mobilisation of the EGF , and to recall the institutions ' commitment to ensuring a smooth and rapid procedure for the adoption of the decisions on the mobilisation of the EGF , providing one-off , time-limited individual support geared to helping workers who have suffered redundancies as a result of globalisation and the financial and economic crisis .
Parliament also emphasised the role that the EGF can play in the reintegration of workers made redundant into the labour market ;
In January 2010 , Spain submitted a request to mobilise the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) in view of the redundancies made by 23 firms in the Catalonia region involved in the production of road transport vehicles , trailers and semi-trailers .
I voted for the European Parliament resolution on the mobilisation of the EGF for granting aid to the redundant workers .
The redundancies were made against the backdrop of the financial and economic crisis , which resulted in a slump in demand for vehicles in Spain and worldwide at an unprecedented rate .
Between February and November 2009 , 2 330 workers were made redundant in the Catalonia region alone , with 75 % of them being men and nearly 25 % of them over the age of 55 .
I support redundant workers receiving financial support and training so that they can secure new jobs for the longest period possible .
This mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund will benefit 1 429 workers in the motor vehicles , trailers and semi-trailers manufacturing sector in the Spanish region of Catalonia .
The Commission proposed that , in this particular case , an amount of EUR 2 752 935 be mobilised from the fund in order to support the reintegration into the labour market of former employees of a total of 23 enterprises , since the application , which was supplemented by additional information in April , meets the conditions for a financial contribution from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
I am very pleased that the European Parliament has today decided to support numerous people who have been adversely affected by globalisation .
However , the European funds must now be provided quickly and with no red tape , so that these people can find a new job as quickly as possible .
This is an important and highly visible contribution by the European Union , which will demonstrate clearly to these people that the EU wants , and is able , to also help individuals in emergency situations .
However , we must also make every effort to shape globalisation in a way that makes sense .
It is therefore important that the European Union supports fair conditions for competition in international economic relations . This will enable the disadvantaging of particular sectors to be avoided at the outset .
I should like to offer my congratulations on the excellent work carried out by Mrs Matera .
Today , I have voted in favour of the four requests for funding for workers who have lost their jobs in Spain , Denmark , the Netherlands and Portugal .
The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) was set up in 2006 with a ceiling of EUR 500 million to help job seekers find new jobs , to finance specific training courses , to help workers set up their own businesses , and to provide temporary income supplements in the form of mobility allowances , job search allowances , and allowances for training or reintegration into the labour market .
The EGF is showing a good degree of flexibility and is providing assistance in specific cases in many regions of Europe .
We must , however , do whatever is required to speed up the mobilisation of this instrument , particularly in view of its positive role in tackling the economic crisis .
I welcome this report , which arranges the implementation of this convention and the recommendations adopted by the North-East Atlantic Fisheries Commission ( NEAFC ) , allowing the adoption of control and enforcement measures for all fishing vessels which are being used , or are intended to be used , in fishing-oriented activities as fisheries resources .
Some of these provisions were incorporated into EU legislation through the annual total allowable catch ( TAC ) regulations and quotas , and the rapporteur 's position should be supported with respect to rejecting this past method , as the legislation is becoming confused and is having a negative effect on the credibility of the EU .
The highest priority needs to be given to the implementation of measures by regional fisheries organisations ( RFOs ) for combating illegal fishing , so that the system of monitoring and enforcement adopted by this convention should be rapidly implemented in EU law , with Parliament informed in a comprehensive and timely manner of all stages of the negotiations with RFOs , ensuring that observers from this institution are present at the negotiations .
I would first like to offer my compliments to the rapporteur .
I voted for this report because I agree that the scheme of control and enforcement adopted by the Convention on future multilateral cooperation in the North-East Atlantic fisheries must be transposed into EU law .
I generally welcome the new regulations on the control of vessels that carry out illegal and unreported fishing , these regulations being the subject of the report we have just adopted .
I also agree with the new port state control system , which will close European ports to landings and transhipments of frozen fish which have not been verified to be legal by the flag state of a foreign fishing vessel .
I believe , however , that when these changes are transposed , some compromise solutions will need to be evaluated and any adjustments carried out , so long as they are considered feasible in terms of the convention itself .
Finally , I am sure that transposition can be achieved more quickly and effectively if Parliament is kept constantly informed at all stages of the negotiations , by ensuring that observers from this House sit at the negotiating table .
It is vital for the European Union to establish an EU system for preventing , deterring and eliminating illegal , unreported and unregulated fishing .
The proposed regulations should integrate measures which set out the fishing opportunities and the associated conditions in EU waters , and , for EU fishing vessels , in waters where catch limitations are necessary .
It is crucial that this is in line with the objectives of the common fisheries policy ( CFP ) and that it contributes to sustainable development .
It is methodologically correct to review and update the content of conventions , as has been done on this occasion .
At the same time , however , it is appropriate to question Parliament 's role in this review .
Apart from formal issues , the functioning of bodies associated with the European institutions must be constantly monitored to ensure they are effective , efficient , up to date and able to respond to challenges that might change once the corresponding agreement has been signed .
I voted in favour of the report on a system of monitoring and enforcement applicable to the area of the Convention on future multilateral cooperation in the North-East Atlantic fisheries ( NEAFC ) as it introduces a new scheme of monitoring and enforcement measures to ensure the conservation and balanced use of fisheries resources in the region .
In particular , this scheme includes the monitoring of vessels carrying out illegal , unreported or unregulated fishing and a monitoring system to be carried out by the country of the port where the fishery products are unloaded .
Given the importance of fisheries for Europe ( both as an economic activity that generates jobs and wealth , and for its role in feeding people ) , we should always look very carefully at any regulation that seeks to impose new and more stringent obligations on European fishermen .
The current proposal aims to update EU regulations that transpose the monitoring and enforcement system adopted by the North-East Atlantic Fisheries Commission ( NEAFC ) convention .
Such measures are aimed principally at promoting compliance by non-contracting party vessels with the rules of the convention , and including a new monitoring system by the Member State of the port . This prevents frozen fish whose legality has not been confirmed from being landed at European ports .
In addition , it establishes new measures that include the monitoring of vessels engaging in illegal , unreported and unregulated fishing activity .
I believe that these measures will ultimately serve to protect European fishermen from the introduction of fish that do not comply with EU rules into the European market , and this is something to be welcomed .
I voted in favour of this document because I share the view that the system of monitoring and enforcement adopted by the Convention on future multilateral cooperation in the North-East Atlantic fisheries ( NEAFC ) needs to be carried into EU law .
Among the new rules , I would like to point out the monitoring of illegal and undeclared fishing vessels , along with the new port state control system , which will effectively close European ports to landings and transhipments of frozen fish which have not been verified to be legal by the flag state of fishing vessels flying the flag of another contracting party .
In 2007 and 2008 , Parliament was not represented at the annual meeting of the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organisation ( NAFO ) .
I cannot therefore neglect to say that in the light of the Treaty of Lisbon , Parliament should be represented in future discussions on international conventions on this matter .
The proposed monitoring system includes provisions to promote compliance with conservation and enforcement measures for vessels from non-contracting parties , and thus ensure full compliance with the conservation and management measures adopted by the Convention on future multilateral cooperation in the North-East Atlantic fisheries ( NEAFC ) .
It therefore relates to bridging the gaps in the monitoring system , particularly with regard to illegal , unreported or unregulated fishing activity , and thus receives our agreement .
The report considers that the Member States whose vessels are authorised to fish in the NEAFC regulatory area should put appropriate means for inspection into effect under this system .
It is important to point out that monitoring of fishing activities today places increased demands on the Member States , whether under the common fisheries policy ( CFP ) or within the scope of the regional fisheries organisations .
We therefore believe that it is advisable to reconsider the financial resources allocated to monitoring , particularly with regard to the maximum rates of cofinancing provided for in regulating the financial measures of the CFP for the acquisition , development and / or modernisation of control equipment by the Member States .
For this reason , we have proposed raising the current rate of 50 % to 75 % , taking into account the ongoing process of revising this regulation .
The Convention on future multilateral cooperation in the North-East Atlantic fisheries , to which the Community and the EU have now become a contracting party , came into force in 1982 .
The aim of the convention is to ensure the long-term preservation and maximum use of the fisheries resources of the North-East Atlantic , in the interests of society , sustainability and the environment .
Control and implementation measures can be introduced to ensure that this convention and the recommendations adopted by the North-East Atlantic Fisheries Commission ( NEAFC ) are put into effect .
These relate to all fishing vessels used for fishing activities conducted on fisheries resources as defined in the convention .
The aim of the proposal is to bring Union legislation up to date .
In 2006 , the NEAFC accepted a new scheme for improving the control and implementation of its recommendations .
Another change is that the port state control system is now included , which does not allow frozen fish to be landed at European ports where this has not been determined to be lawful by the foreign vessel 's flag State .
There are new measures concerned in relation to regulating vessels engaged in illegal , unreported and unregulated fishing .
I voted for the report on the proposal for a regulation laying down a scheme of control and enforcement applicable in the area covered by the Convention on future multilateral cooperation in the North-East Atlantic fisheries , to which the EU is a signatory , because I believe that that scheme needs to be incorporated into EU law .
In 2006 , the North-East Atlantic Fisheries Commission adopted a new scheme aimed at improving control and enforcement of its recommendations , and then both the European Union and the European Parliament said they were fully in favour of adopting these recommendations .
In particular , there is strong support for the new provisions for introducing a port state control system , which will close European ports to landings and transhipments of frozen fish which have not been verified to be legal by the authorities of the state in question .
In short , this series of recommendations adapts the scheme previously in force to current requirements , and I therefore believe it would be useful to have it transposed speedily .
The fight against illegal , unreported and unregulated fishing is crucial in order to preserve the sustainability of fisheries resources , along with ensuring greater fairness and equality in the distribution of wealth . The very existence of the fishing community depends upon these conditions .
The control of all fishing vessels used , or to be used , for fishing in the areas set out by the convention , as well as enforcement measures , are greatly important in this context .
This report is heading in that direction .
We should all be involved in this effort and develop it further .
Preventing , deterring and eliminating illegal , unreported and unregulated fishing should be a priority of the common fisheries policy .
The European Parliament has stressed on several occasions that full priority should be given to measures to combat illegal , unreported and unregulated fishing applied by regional fisheries organisations ( RFOs ) .
Consequently , the rapporteur considers that the control and enforcement scheme adopted by the North-East Atlantic Fisheries Commission ( NEAFC ) must be swiftly incorporated into EU law .
Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1005 / 2008 establishing a Community system to prevent , deter and eliminate illegal , unreported and unregulated fishing ( the IUU Regulation ) entered into force on 1 January 2010 .
Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1006 / 2008 concerning authorisations for fishing activities of Community fishing vessels outside Community waters and the access of third country vessels to Community waters , establishes that EU fishing vessels are obliged to be in possession of a fishing permit in order to conduct fishing activities outside EU waters .
I therefore voted in favour of the Fraga report as I feel there is a need to control illegal , unreported and unregulated fishing .
in writing . - ( LV ) Cooperation in North-East Atlantic fisheries means primarily fair quotas for all participants in the process .
The legal basis that is being introduced , to apply to all participants , must be based on logic .
No one must have exclusive rights to exploit Atlantic fish resources .
I voted ' for ' in the hope that the legislation will provide for equal opportunities and equal liability for all breaches of the fisheries catch , where there will be no favourites and no outsiders , as often happens when legislation is drawn up to favour the interests of the large EU countries .
in writing . - ( DE ) Rising incomes and improved infrastructure lead to a higher consumption of fish in developing countries , too .
The quantities of fish caught are already increasing yearly and will therefore continue to grow .
Studies have shown that increasing fish stocks in the oceans and inland waters are mainly a result of aquaculture .
Increasingly , larger fleets are being used to attempt to catch fish from increasingly smaller stocks .
In order to curb the merciless overfishing , it is important to introduce a control and enforcement scheme .
Reports from fishermen who are held captive on the high seas like servants and have to work their fingers to the bone for extremely low wages in conditions that are akin to slavery are also cause for concern .
If we want our descendants to know the taste of fish , controls are essential .
For all that , at least a partial renationalisation of fisheries policy makes sense , in order for it to be possible for regional problems to be dealt with comprehensively .
I voted with this in mind .
The report mentions the Convention on future multilateral cooperation in the North-East Atlantic fisheries , which came into force on 17 March 1982 .
The North-East Atlantic Fisheries Commission ( the NEAFC ) was established to ensure control over the recommendations laid down in that document .
The report stressed the importance of adopting the necessary measures to ensure the control and enforcement of provisions applicable to all fishing vessels used , or intended for use , for fishing activities conducted on fishery resources in areas defined in the convention .
The key issue is to implement measures in that area to combat illegal , unreported and unregulated fishing , enforced by the regional fisheries organisations ( RFOs ) .
It is therefore a matter of priority to change the control and enforcement scheme adopted by the NEAFC , which should be transposed into EU legislation as soon as possible .
The rapporteur also stresses that it is important to ensure that EU fishing vessels are obliged to possess an authorisation to fish outside European Union waters .
This report will allow us to close the legal loopholes which have existed to date with regard to legislative provisions on European Union fleets , which will improve the European Union 's credibility in this field , and contribute to the fight against illegal fishing .
The proposal for a regulation by Parliament and the Council establishing a system of monitoring and enforcement applicable to the area of the Convention on future multilateral cooperation in the North-East Atlantic fisheries ( NEAFC ) is of paramount importance in view of the updates to the EU regulations for implementing the system of monitoring and enforcement adopted by the NEAFC .
Like other cases where the regional fisheries organisations ' ( RFO ) recommendations have been implemented in EU law on fisheries , this also seeks to introduce tighter controls to combat illegal fishing , eliminate possible loopholes and defend the basic principle of the common fisheries policy ( CFP ) for sustainable fishing inside and outside EU waters .
Moreover , in my view , the text agreed and voted upon today advocates Parliament 's prerogatives under the ordinary legislative procedure and includes the necessary changes arising from Articles 290 ( E ) and 291 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the EU .
For all these reasons , I shall be voting in favour of this proposal .
in writing . - The Convention on future multilateral cooperation in the North-East Atlantic fisheries , to which the EU is a contracting party , was approved by Council Decision 81 / 608 / EEC and entered into force on 17 March 1982 .
Control and enforcement measures can be adopted to ensure that this convention and the recommendations adopted by the North-East Atlantic Fisheries Commission ( the ' NEAFC ' ) are implemented . These are applicable to all fishing vessels used or intended for use for fishing activities conducted on fishery resources in areas defined in the convention .
The aim of this proposal is to update EU legislation transposing NEAFC 's control and enforcement scheme .
To allow the new NEAFC scheme to be implemented , the proposal envisages the subsequent repeal of Council Regulation ( EC ) No 2791 / 1999 of 16 December 1999 , which implemented the first scheme adopted by NEAFC in 1998 .
I am in favour of this report because , although Europe has capped or actually banned the catching of various species of fish , there is a large number of illegal fishing vessels that not only catch protected fish but do not even comply with EU directives on worker protection .
Adoption of this report means that the new recommendations that entered into force between 2007 and 2010 become law , and their transposition is an important instrument both in the fight against illegal fishing and in order to prevent a legal vacuum for EU fleets .
Another positive point is the introduction of a new control system that will close European ports to landings of frozen fish of doubtful or illegal origin .
Given the importance of this convention in contributing to the consultation , cooperation , optimum use , rational management and conservation of fisheries resources in the Northwest Atlantic area , along with promoting international collaboration in order to improve the sustainable management of marine resources based on scientific research , the amendment presented here is essential , as it completely recasts the convention , with the aim of aligning it with other regional conventions and international instruments , and incorporating modern concepts of fisheries management into it .
Among the positive measures , the following stand out : the simplification of the structure of this convention , the modernisation of contributions to the budget in line with the ' user pays ' principle in relation to the contracting parties , a new definition of obligations and a review of the decision-making process and the resolution of disputes with respect to the latter .
These improvements are crucial as a way of promoting the common fisheries policy ( CFP ) in future .
I voted in favour of the recommendation on the proposal for a Council decision concerning the adoption of the amendment to the Convention on Future Multilateral Cooperation in the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries on behalf of the European Union , since the amendments offer a positive contribution to the reformulation of the internal structure and redistribution of powers in the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organisation .
I believe , however , that in the light of the Treaty of Lisbon , the European Parliament should be represented in future discussions on international conventions .
Given the importance of fisheries for Europe ( both as an economic activity that generates jobs and wealth , and for its role in feeding people ) , we should always look very carefully at any regulation that seeks to impose new and more stringent obligations on European fishermen .
In this case , however , we have a proposed amendment which strengthens the fishing opportunities for the European Union , under the Convention on Future Multilateral Cooperation in the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries , which is to be welcomed .
I am therefore voting in favour .
I voted in favour of this document because I share the view that the system of monitoring and enforcement adopted by the Convention on Future Multilateral Cooperation in the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries needs to be carried into EU law .
Among the new rules , I would like to point out the monitoring of illegal and undeclared fishing vessels , along with the new port state control system , which will effectively close European ports to landings and transhipments of frozen fish which have not been verified to be legal by the flag state of fishing vessels flying the flag of another contracting party .
In 2007 and 2008 , Parliament was not represented at the annual meeting of the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organisation ( NAFO ) .
I cannot , therefore , neglect to mention that in the light of the Treaty of Lisbon , Parliament should be represented at future discussions on international conventions on this matter .
The main objective of the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organisation ( NAFO ) is to contribute to sustainable management and the conservation of fisheries resources in the area of the NAFO Convention , based on cooperation between states .
We support and value the principle of international cooperation and collaboration in this area , based on solid scientific foundations .
As such , we believe that the amendment to the convention adopted in 2007 and 2008 , in line with these objectives , with the aim of accommodating other regional conventions and international instruments and incorporating modern concepts of fisheries management , should be supported .
We cannot , however , fail to point out the regrettable delay in calling Parliament to rule on this matter .
Indeed , the Commission proposal for implementation into Union law is dated 8 March 2010 , so more than two years went by before the document was drafted and Parliament was able to hear it .
In future , more timely involvement and participation may be vital , and would ideally accompany the negotiating processes themselves .
The Convention on Future Multilateral Cooperation in the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries was signed on 24 October 1978 in Ottawa and came into force on 1 January 1979 .
The main aim of the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organisation ( NAFO ) since then is to engage in consultation and cooperation in order to achieve maximum use of fishery resources in the conservation area , to preserve and manage those resources properly and to promote new thinking about encouraging international cooperation for improving sustainable management of marine resources on the high seas .
At the Annual NAFO Meetings in 2007 and 2008 , the contracting parties to the convention adopted the ' Amendment to the Convention on Future Multilateral Cooperation in the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries ' .
This amendment effects a significant change to the convention , bringing it more into line with other regional conventions and international instruments and taking modern practices in fisheries management into account .
Therefore , this amendment adds significantly to the effectiveness of the organisation 's structure .
The Convention on Future Multilateral Cooperation in the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries was signed in Ottawa on 24 October 1978 and entered into force on 1 January 1979 after the instruments of ratification , acceptance and adoption were deposited with the government of Canada by the seven contracting parties .
The primary objective of the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organisation ( NAFO ) is to contribute , through consultation and cooperation , to the optimum use , rational management and conservation of fisheries resources in the area included in the NAFO Convention , and to promote ideas for international cooperation in order to improve the sustainable management of deep-sea marine resources according to scientific principles .
The contracting parties to the convention adopted the Amendment to the Convention on Future Multilateral Cooperation in the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries at the annual NAFO meetings in 2007 ( English version ) and 2008 ( French version ) .
The amendment is an overall revision of the convention , with the main purpose of bringing it more into line with other regional conventions and international instruments and incorporating modern fisheries management concepts into it , which is why I voted in favour of it .
We were already considering optimum utilisation and rational management for the conservation of fishery resources a good 30 years ago .
Now , the regulations of the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organisation ( NAFO ) are to be revised , not only to harmonise them better with other regional agreements and international instruments , but also to bring them into line with current knowledge , for example , the fisheries management concepts .
Fish quotas and stock management are essential in order to prevent the complete overfishing of inland waters and oceans .
However , in this regard , we must also ensure that organisations like the NAFO remain capable of action by virtue of a streamlined structure and good organisation .
It is also important to prevent the costs becoming excessive .
For all that , at least a partial renationalisation of fisheries policy makes sense , in order for it to be possible for regional problems to be dealt with comprehensively .
I voted with this in mind .
This proposal updates the EU legislation transposing the scheme of control and enforcement adopted by the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Commission .
A new procedure is adopted with the aim of improving control and enforcement of its recommendations on fisheries and , in particular , encouraging vessels of non-contracting parties to comply with the rules .
In addition , it introduces a new port state control system , which will close European ports to landings and transhipments of frozen fish that have not been verified to be legal by the flag state of a foreign fishing vessel .
New measures are introduced to control vessels that carry out illegal , unreported and unregulated fishing .
The main reason for my vote in favour is to prevent , discourage and eliminate illegal , unreported and unregulated fishing .
Mr Wałęsa 's report refers to amendments to the Convention on Future Multilateral Cooperation in the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries , which was signed on 24 October 1978 in Ottawa , and came into force on 1 January 1979 .
NAFO , namely the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organisation , has the task of ensuring the rational management , optimum utilisation and conservation of fishery resources , on the basis of consultation and cooperation .
The main task of this organisation is to foster international cooperation to improve the sustainable management of marine resources in the open seas , based on the fundamental principles of scientific research .
The rapporteur introduces positive amendments to the convention , which will bring the current regulations more in line with instruments at international and regional level .
The proposed changes include : modernising the NAFO structure ( merging the General Council and the Fisheries Commission into a single body ) , reforming the system of contributions to the budget , introducing clear guidelines on the rights and obligations of NAFO contracting parties , changes to the decision-making process and the introduction of a new conflict resolution procedure , in order to resolve disputes in an effective manner , which will benefit European Union interests .
The Wałęsa report amends the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organisation ( NAFO ) Convention of 1978 and represents a step forward for cooperation and management of fisheries resources in the north-western Atlantic .
I voted in favour of the amendment to the convention because scientific research improves international cooperation in the exploitation of the marine resources of that area .
In addition , approval of the amendment is a sign of Parliament 's new role following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon because it underlines the need to speed up the work of approving and updating conventions .
The main objective of the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organisation ( NAFO ) is to ensure the rational management and conservation of fisheries resources in the area of the NAFO Convention .
The EU is one of the contracting parties in this regional fisheries organisation ( RFO ) and , like the other contracting parties , at the NAFO annual meeting in 2007 it adopted the amendment to the Convention on Future Multilateral Cooperation in the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries .
This amendment aims to simplify and modernise the structures of this organisation , adapting it to the current realities of fishing , introducing new definitions of obligations for the contracting parties , namely flag states and port states , and clarifying the rights and obligations of the NAFO contracting parties .
Taking into account the best interests of the EU , especially the fishing opportunities afforded the EU under the convention , I believe that the approval of this amendment is crucial , and can be criticised only for its lateness .
Like the rapporteur , I regret the Commission 's delay of more than two years in submitting its proposal from the date on which the amendment was adopted during one of NAFO 's annual meetings in 2007 .
This report merits my vote in favour .
I must congratulate Mr Wałęsa on his excellent report , and I would like to recall and emphasise the fact of the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon in December 2009 .
In the context of the powers newly acquired by the Committee on Fisheries , the European Parliament should be well represented during subsequent negotiations on future international conventions .
In 2007 and 2008 , the European Parliament was not represented at the annual meetings of the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organisation .
The institution has granted assent within its competences but , at the same time , would like to remind the Council and the Commission of the new procedural requirements and the need to respect the new powers of the European Parliament .
in writing . - The Convention on Future Multilateral Cooperation in the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries was signed on 24 October 1978 in Ottawa and came into force on 1 January 1979 following the deposit with the government of Canada of the instruments of ratification , acceptance and approval by seven signatories .
The priority objective of NAFO is to contribute through consultation and cooperation to the optimum utilisation and rational management and conservation of the fishery resources of the Convention Area NAFO and the promotion of ideas for international collaboration to improve the sustainable management of marine resources in the high seas based on the scientific research fundamentals .
The Contracting Parties to the Convention adopted the , ' Amendment to the Convention on Future Multilateral Cooperation in the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries ' , ( the Amendment ) at the Annual Meetings of NAFO in 2007 ( English version ) and in 2008 ( French version ) .
The amendment revises the convention comprehensively with the primary purpose of making it more in line with other regional conventions and international instruments and of incorporating modern concepts on fisheries management .
I am in favour of the recommendation on the comprehensive revision of the Convention on Future Multilateral Cooperation in the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries , inasmuch as it incorporates modern concepts on fisheries management .
The changes include streamlining measures , on the one hand , and clear definitions of the responsibilities of flag states and port states , on the other .
Companies should be prevented from changing permanent jobs to atypical work , which leads to a lack of job security .
This situation is even more serious if we take into account the increase in undeclared female workers , and the fact that many women have no choice but to accept precarious jobs .
In spite of this , women are shown to be under-represented in precarious work , as paid domestic work and care work , for example , are not taken into account .
The legislative framework should be adapted to the current situations that can lead to precarious working conditions , particularly involuntary part-time work and the fact that companies do not announce a lack of basic working conditions : a complete lack of job security , low wages , a lack of social protection and opportunities for career advancement , or even the lack of collective representation for workers .
Initial and ongoing training , improved information on rights and a real examination of women 's professional and family life must be promoted , as opposed to these situations , because the way that women 's income is considered as a second income can be misleading , as it is often the sole family income .
The Europe 2020 strategy proposes bringing the employment rate for the 20-64 age group up to 75 % and reducing the number of people at risk of poverty .
To achieve these objectives it would also be appropriate to take action against all forms of precarious employment , including unwritten work contracts , those of less than 10 working hours per week and short fixed-term contracts . That is not to mention jobs in which minimal health and safety requirements are ignored and where there is consequently a high accident rate and a greater risk of exposure to disease and various hazards .
These types of contract , together with all the associated risks , are often targeted at women , who are penalised on account of their gender , their age , having a family or being immigrants .
The European Union should intervene by adopting legislative measures to secure gender equality and to reduce gender segregation in the labour market .
The Member States should , in turn , increase controls so as to reduce the number of cases of abuse against women , combat undeclared work and take dissuasive action against employers .
I welcome the fact that the European Parliament initiated this important report on precarious women workers .
It is primarily women who work in precarious employment , who often do not even enjoy compulsory minimum social standards for workers .
Women tend to take poorly paid jobs where they can reconcile work and family and consequently , they are forced to relinquish social guarantees and agree to poor working conditions .
Social protection is an essential part of flexicurity .
Therefore , in order to solve these problems , it is very important to encourage the Member States and social partners to align their legislative and contractual rules on working conditions .
The Member States must reduce the double burden of work on women , one of the reasons for women 's over-representation in precarious employment .
It is very important to grant all employees equal access to social services and benefits , including maternity leave , healthcare and retirement pensions , as well as to education and training , regardless of their employment conditions .
I congratulate the rapporteur on having drawn attention to an aspect of the employment world that still results in excessive gender differences .
The economic and financial crisis has undoubtedly worsened conditions for precarious workers , especially women , who bear most of the burden of precarious work .
This is confirmed by recent data showing that in 55 % of companies , only women do part-time work .
It is also calculated that 31.5 % of women work part-time , compared with 8.3 % of men , and precarious work carries a higher injury rate and a greater risk of disease and exposure to hazards .
In short , this is a situation of inequality to which the European Union cannot remain indifferent .
I voted in favour of the report because I agree with the need to combat this problem and to call on the Member States and social partners to align , to a large extent , their legislative and contractual rules .
I also hope that the Commission and the Member States will enhance their monitoring of minimum health and safety requirements in the workplace .
Much remains to be done before we can guarantee women fair access to the labour market .
Within the European Union , a merely descriptive term such as ' precarious women workers ' still contains two forms of discrimination , both of them very serious .
The first concerns the issue of women 's work , which has been addressed from a modern , sustainable viewpoint in another dossier in this part-session .
The second concerns the two-tier labour market found in many Member States , in which some workers enjoy rights and protection , while others are at the mercy of circumstances usually beyond their control .
If we look at the data objectively , it seems increasingly evident that in the future , regular employment will also involve accepting greater risks than has been the case until now .
Such change should , however , be managed to avoid speculation to the detriment of the weakest individuals in contractual terms , particularly those who find themselves in disadvantaged situations .
The European institutions have a duty to avoid discrimination and to allow everyone to freely attain their own occupational targets , in line with their abilities , aptitudes and inclinations .
I take this opportunity to point out that further research on precarious work by women would be useful for planning action aimed at removing obstacles , without being too invasive .
I voted in favour of combating precarious work , which has been a growing feature of the economic crisis .
This will help eradicate more effectively the lack of job security , the low level of wages , in most cases , not declared for tax purposes , the lack of social protection for people employed on a casual basis , as well as a working environment devoid of minimum health and safety standards and of protection for workers against accidents .
At the same time , these measures will help us fight more effectively against gender-related discrimination , which is predominant in the area of precarious work where women , in particular , are the victims of these subhuman working conditions .
The abusive treatment of domestic workers , who are mainly women , wage discrimination against women and the exploitation of migrant women who are neither aware of nor able to defend their rights are just some of the many reasons for voting in favour of these measures aimed at tackling an outrageous socio-economic situation .
I believe that Member States must campaign to be able to offer women jobs and the option of unionised protection of entitlements such as decent pay , maternity leave , fair and regular working hours and a non-discriminatory working environment .
I think that Member States must penalise the imposition of obstacles to trade union participation and also offer low threshold advisory services for women who cannot receive support from a works council , such as women employed in private households and in agriculture .
in writing . - I support this report , which highlights that precarious work disproportionately affects women workers .
Indeed , this is further evidence for the need to enhance maternity and paternity leave provisions to enable women and men to strike a balance between work and family commitments .
Precarious work refers to a type of non-standard employment mainly characterised by little or no job security , low level of payment , lack of social protection rights , no protection against discrimination and a work environment without minimum safety and health standards .
According to the latest available data , 31.5 % of employed women work part-time compared with only 8.3 % of employed men . Precarious work is not only a major cause of the gender pay gap between women and men , but also creates an obstacle to career prospects leading to better jobs and professional development , trapping many in low paid insecure work .
Indeed , often , women from less developed countries come to the EU and work in low skilled jobs , or even illegal employment .
Precarious work forms prey on the weakest sections of our societies , denying people dignity in work and the chance to build a decent life for themselves and their families .
Precarious work is not a gender issue , although it can be particularly high amongst women , and any view that tries to reduce it to a gender issue is simplistic .
As I have already argued on several other occasions , inflexible models of labour law are proven to have failed .
The example of the United States shows that flexibility is not synonymous with insecurity , but rather with a dynamic job market ..
More flexibility does not mean more precariousness ; far from it , in fact .
Following the crisis , we will realise that the models that we were accustomed to have failed and that if we really want to create jobs , the labour market will have to start looking at atypical contracts , whether they relate to part-time work , casual or temporary shift work , working from home , or telecommuting , as normal ways of working , without losing in security what we will gain in dynamism and flexibility .
In this way , I believe that women may be the main beneficiaries of more flexible systems , whereby the combination of their professional and family lives or motherhood does not take as much of a toll as it did in more traditional forms of work .
The current economic and financial crisis has increased the problem of poor female workers who often find themselves in a particularly vulnerable position in terms of work , as they have to juggle work with family commitments .
I voted in favour of this report as I agree that there is a need to combat this problem , urging the Member States and their social partners to develop new and effective strategies on job insecurity , taking into account the principle of gender equality .
I would like to highlight the request in this resolution for the Commission to submit a proposal on the implementation of the principle of equal pay for men and women .
We voted in favour of this own-initiative report which highlights the aspect of gender in unstable employment , denounces various situations and insists upon a set of measures to combat discrimination against women .
Overall , it is positive , but it contains some contradictions and statements with which we disagree .
The most important positive proposals in the report are as follows :
It calls upon the Commission to support the Member States in developing a campaign for a step-by-step transformation of precarious female workers into regular workers ;
It asks the Commission and the Member States to develop strategies on precarious work in order to emphasise decent and green jobs and incorporate gender balance ;
It urges the Council and the Commission to identify the characteristics of precarious employment in the guidelines for the Member States ' employment policies and in the new gender equality strategy .
The day after the International Day for the Eradication of Poverty and social exclusion , I resolutely voted in favour of this report on precarious workers .
It is a fact : despite positive developments in terms of male / female parity and gender equality , women are still more vulnerable than men when it comes to employment .
Women hold precarious jobs much more often than men .
There are still numerous disparities between men and women in terms of potential jobs , quality of work , income and remuneration .
It is therefore paramount that the Commission should act to actively promote equal opportunities between men and women within the framework of employment policy , through a future strategy on gender equality , through the gradual transition from the status of precarious worker to regular worker , and through supporting national initiatives in this direction .
Women 's working lives and their career paths are often hampered by the stereotype of women as weaker , less resistant to stress and likely to become pregnant at any moment , and who , as a result , might take sick leave and other kinds of leave more often than men .
This also makes it more difficult for women to find work , and those who do have work are paid less than men who do the same jobs .
The economic crisis has exacerbated these problems and shown the extent to which women are being exploited in the labour market .
Short-term job contracts and part-time contracts with unpaid overtime are just some examples of practices which I consider unacceptable .
Therefore , it is essential to draw attention to the need to comply with labour law on an equal basis for all employees .
We should fight the way in which the difficult position people find themselves in is being exploited to force them to work in unscrupulous and unhealthy conditions - especially if we are talking about women who also have to fight against stereotypes .
I voted in favour of the report by Mrs Thomsen because I feel a revision of the legislation on working conditions for women involved in precarious work is now needed .
In most countries , there has been a change in the conditions that prevailed until some time ago , whereby many more women were engaged in precarious work .
It often happens that such women are less likely to be informed about their rights and end up being more exposed to the danger of losing any legal protection and being unfairly dismissed without any chance of appeal .
This situation must certainly be brought to an end with respect for equal dignity , which should be granted to workers of all kinds .
Men and women therefore need to be guaranteed equal access to training and occupational retraining opportunities .
This is particularly true for women , who require greater protection during pregnancy and breastfeeding and at the often critical time when they return to work .
In the context of work connected with Parliament 's Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , the report by the socialist Member , Mrs Britta Thomsen , is meant to be generous in terms of social progress .
As usual , however , this type of report is full of rather vague , blanket proposals that are actually unacceptable , and is rooted in strong leftist , ecological and pro-immigration connotations .
It is not possible , for example , to consider that the settlement of migrant women ought to be supported , especially when it is not actually specified whether they are legal or illegal immigrants .
If it is true that these women , or these men , are the first victims of globalisation and ultra-liberal neo-slavery , then the way to prevent their falling into all kinds of horrible traps ( ill-treatment , violence or sexual abuse ) is to make it possible for them to stay in their country of origin in the first place .
Therefore , immigration policy needs to be reversed so that those people who are tempted by economic exile are able to stay at home , by redefining restrictive international aid so as to enable these countries to become politically and economically stable .
in writing . - ( PT ) Precariousness affects not only working conditions and relations , but also the very stability and quality of life for workers .
Precariousness affects more women than men in Europe , thus exacerbating gender disparities at work , particularly in terms of social rights and wages .
This situation is even more severe in domestic work and work carried out by female migrant workers .
In this crisis , precarious workers were the first to be affected by job losses .
With the recession and the destruction of jobs with contracts , the structure of employment is becoming even more precarious .
This cycle needs to be reversed .
It is necessary to ensure gender equality and social rights in the workplace .
Combating precariousness and the double burden of work on women should be the EU 's most pressing objectives , and I therefore support this report , as it represents a step in that direction .
I voted in favour of the Thomsen report , which tackles the issue of precarious women workers , as I am concerned about women being particularly hit by the consequences of the economic crisis .
The crisis has had a greater impact on precarious jobs , which are largely done by women .
I support this motion for a resolution because we need to go further in combating direct and indirect discrimination on the grounds of gender .
There is currently an excessive proportion of women in precarious jobs , and they often have to combine those jobs with domestic responsibilities .
My support is based on my commitment to changing the current unfair situation in which women have fewer opportunities to access employment , the majority of them are in more precarious jobs , and they continue to earn less than men for doing the same job .
For all these reasons , I am voting in favour of this motion for a resolution , which , among other points , highlights the need to ensure gender equality and to reduce segregation on the basis of gender in the labour market , and asks the Member States to combat undeclared work so that it becomes formal employment .
I support the report on precarious women workers because I cannot conceive that in the 21st century , major differences persist in relation to women in the European Union with regard to employment opportunities , quality of work , income and equal pay for equal work or work of equal value .
Unfortunately , the over-representation of women in precarious work is a key contributing factor to the gender pay gap and I share the view that improving job quality for women will reduce this pay gap .
I also think that all precarious workers , including women workers , should have the right to education and vocational training and that access to high quality education , training and studies for girls and young women must be improved .
Finally , it is vital for the Commission to continue to support Member States in developing a campaign for the gradual transformation of precarious workers into regular workers .
in writing . - ( LV ) Unfortunately , the disparity between men 's and women 's pay manifests itself especially at a time of crisis .
We need to significantly expand the scope of this discussion and then to draw up specific proposals for regulating labour relationships for working women .
We must additionally introduce social guarantees particularly for single mothers , women with disabilities , and women working in heavy industry .
It is incumbent on society to send a strong signal in this way to employers that it is unacceptable to take advantage of opportunities to reduce pay or working hours on grounds of gender .
A separate EU fund must be formed to support single mothers should they lose their jobs and livelihoods .
In this respect , Mrs Thomsen 's initiative is very timely .
I fully support this report as the start of a new approach to solving the problems faced by women as regards work .
in writing . - ( DE ) These forms of employment are a problem predominantly experienced by women , as the incompatibility of a career and a family forces many women into these precarious work situations and makes poverty inevitable later in life .
In this regard , we must not overlook the fact that men are also affected by these forms of work , and there can be a risk of poverty even with full-time work .
The local social systems and social measures are , however , designed to cushion the hardworking local population if the need arises .
The report focuses far too much on women migrants , who often seem to find themselves in part-time work , and indirectly stipulates that the residence itself be supported .
Women are certainly particularly affected by the false promises of traffickers , the problems of globalisation and - in the case of illegal entry - of new forms of slave labour in companies .
Continuing to support imported poverty is not the solution .
It only increases the social problems and may permanently jeopardise social peace .
To reinforce this development is the wrong way to go .
Ultimately , it is only locally , in other words , in the countries of origin themselves , that something can be changed .
This reinforcement by the back door should be rejected in the strongest possible terms .
Companies have reacted to the current economic and financial crisis by cutting temporary jobs , such as fixed-term contract workers , and have hired personnel or employees on other kinds of non-permanent contract .
The resolution would have had my support if it had not encouraged employers to take specific steps to integrate migrant women .
I find all that discriminatory towards our female workers .
That is why I voted against the resolution .
The rapporteur defines the concept of ' precarious work ' as forms of employment with a low level of job security , low pay , a lack of social protection and employment-related benefits , a lack of protection from discrimination , limited prospects for advancement on the labour market or collective representation , or a working environment that fails to meet minimum safety and health standards .
The financial and economic crisis has made precarious work an even more visible and urgent problem .
Companies have made decisive cuts to temporary jobs and there is a fear that the jobs which have been lost will not be replaced .
Unfortunately , the situation has had the biggest impact on women , and the problem is most visible in the services industry ( hotels , catering , education , health , social work ) and agriculture .
Women employed in these sectors are not employed on a full-time basis , which means that their salaries and pensions are lower , they receive lower levels of social support and lack career advancement opportunities .
The latest research indicates that it is more difficult for women to find a job than for men .
Furthermore , there is still a huge gender pay gap ( the gap stands around 18 % , with women earning a fifth less per hour than men ) .
In view of the abovementioned problems , I voted in favour of the report , which proposes a solution to this difficult situation with regard to employment policy .
I voted in favour of the report by Mrs Thomsen .
During an economic downturn such as the one we are currently experiencing , certain groups of workers always pay the highest price .
Precarious workers are , in fact , facing this crisis without the safeguards that other workers can enjoy .
Furthermore , within this category , women are in an even more critical position .
The problem of precarious work is rife among women , especially in the services sector and agriculture , and effective measures are urgently needed to change this situation . The underlying reasons are varied .
The employment and pay gap between men and women is still far too large for us to claim that equality has been achieved , which is why certain effective measures , such as maternity leave , healthcare and old-age pensions , would be an effective way to halt the spread of precarious work .
However , the starting point for getting out of this situation of employment inequality is surely education and training for young women .
Lastly , more in-depth research is needed into the causes , reasons and costs of low qualifications .
Precarious jobs are an important factor in social instability that is deteriorating significantly at present , with high unemployment rates that are still rising in several countries , including mine , Portugal .
Traditionally , all forms of insecurity or volubility in employment hit female manual workers first and hardest , with lower wages , even for equal work , with higher unemployment rates and with greater job insecurity due to longstanding social factors , but also specifically because of motherhood .
The negative impact of this situation is not confined to the already severe discrimination to which women have always been subjected : rather , by hindering women 's equal access to the world of work , it affects their economic independence and their autonomy as individuals .
In this context , combating job insecurity , particularly for women , represents a very constructive contribution to social stability and gender equality , one of the fundamental values espoused by the European Union .
The current economic and financial crisis has also seen a rise in the number of precarious jobs being carried out , especially by women .
The permanent jobs which have been lost during the economic recession will certainly not be restored , but will be replaced by atypical and very atypical labour contracts .
This will result in a sharp deterioration in the level of working conditions .
Across the EU , 31.5 % of women work part time ( 30 hours or less per week ) , compared with just 8.3 % of men .
I believe that the sustainability of the pension system , loan facilities for self-help projects and job creation and alternative income creation schemes can improve conditions for precarious women workers .
I call on the European Commission and Member States to devise viable strategies on precarious work , with the focus on creating decent , green jobs and incorporating the principle of gender balance .
I urge every Member State to introduce clear measures to reduce the gender pay gap by 10 % by 2020 , including the pension gap , in order to improve living standards , fight poverty and boost economic growth .
I should like to offer my congratulations on the excellent work carried out by Mrs Thomsen .
All too often , women have to accept working conditions that are anything but decent .
A close watch therefore needs to be kept on the situation of female workers , particularly those who are pregnant or breastfeeding .
Women who return to work after maternity leave must have the assurance that they can actively rejoin the job market .
The Member States are also urged to be vigilant regarding any harmful treatment of women workers by employers .
The perpetrators of any abuse must be brought to justice as quickly as possible .
In addition , a new European employment strategy will need to be drawn up so that precariously employed women can be brought into social security and employment protection schemes .
Workers on low - undeclared or informal - wages , workers with no right to social protection or to work-related benefits , workers with no prospect of promotion on the labour market ...
The number of so-called precarious workers is increasing as a result of the present economic crisis .
There is a large gender divide among these workers : women are over-represented .
Conscious of the need to increase their protection , I supported the resolution by the European Parliament on precarious workers .
I call on the Member States to ensure that employers who subject their employees to abusive or harmful treatment are rapidly brought to justice .
Measures also need to be adopted to guarantee precarious workers the facility for trade union protection of rights such as a decent wage , maternity leave and fair and regular working hours .
I also trust that the Barcelona objectives for childcare will be implemented as quickly as possible and that obstacles which prevent women from working the number of hours they want , be it on a part-time or full-time basis , will be eliminated .
in writing . - This was a crucial report and I am glad the EP has adopted it , mainly because it points out the gendered nature of precarious employment and recalls the shift in the labour market from standard to non-standard types of employment , making it necessary to prevent non-standard types of employment from becoming precarious work ; considers that , in order to combat these problems , the Member States and social partners must be asked to align to a large extent their legislative and contractual rules on standard work and atypical work , so as to prevent the most convenient and least expensive forms of work from taking precedence , taking into account , however , the risks of a possible increase in undeclared work ; and urges the Council and the Commission to identify the characteristics of precarious employment in the guidelines for the Member States ' employment policies and in the new gender equality strategy .
Women are being hit harder by the current economic crisis precisely because they are a more sensitive category , in that their work is normally not confined to the workplace but also extends to the home and family .
Most precarious work is done by women , who therefore find themselves with no job security , on low pay and with less social protection and low qualifications .
In these circumstances , women who are ready to return to work after periods of absence due to illness or childbirth often find that they have no job .
Our delegation is highly sensitive to these problems and , I would add , to the very similar issues of women who are not employed but are self-employed .
Unfortunately , we could have endorsed this report in its entirety if it did not promote policies to integrate female workers from outside the European Union at the expense of European citizens .
That is why we voted against it .
I endorsed the report on precarious women workers .
The economic crisis has contributed to destabilisation of the labour market .
Employers have reduced employment or have employed temporary workers , offering them inferior financial terms .
The waves of redundancies , too , have meant that many people have found themselves outside the labour market .
The situation is particularly difficult for graduates , older people and women .
The crisis has exacerbated the gender inequalities that already exist in employment .
This has been particularly felt by women , who comprise the greatest percentage of workers engaged in what is known as precarious employment .
The earnings gap has become wider , and inequalities in social protection have become greater .
This situation has also hindered the professional development of women and has contributed to the consolidation of gender stereotypes in relation to work .
Therefore , women working in what is known as precarious employment deserve special protection .
Amongst other things , they should be covered by social insurance systems and legislation on job protection .
Also important is financial protection for women in the event of unemployment or maternity .
Women working in precarious employment should also have the option of unionised protection .
Furthermore , women working exclusively in private households should be guaranteed free access to advisory services in the area of social rights .
I would also like to draw attention to the necessity of regulating the legal situation of seasonal workers , who , in relation to the nature of their work , are more at risk from a variety of irregularities .
The most recent studies have indicated that 31 % of employed women work part time , compared with only 8.3 % of employed men .
Part-time workers have a lower income and , consequently , receive lower pensions than those in full-time work .
Within teams , they are at a disadvantage when it comes to team work , which also manifests itself when it comes to promotions to , or in the filling of , higher positions .
We find 36 % of men of graduate level or above in management positions , compared with only 15 % of women with the same level of education .
As regards lower income , it has to be mentioned that in Europe - not taking into account the number of hours worked or the different work contracts - the gap between men and women is , on average , 18 % .
in writing . - The ECR Group firmly and consistently believes that decisions relating to social policy and employment law should not be made at EU level but at Member State level by national and local governments .
We recognise that a minimum standard of treatment of workers in the workplace is important and are pleased that the European Parliament is raising awareness of the issue , but we feel that this standard should relate to both men and women and that specific recommendations relating to employment contracts and childcare , for example , do not fall within the EU 's sphere of responsibility .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Parliament 's position on the 2011 draft budget as modified by the Council - all sections - Draft amending budget No 3 / 2010 : Section III - Commission - BAM ( Banana Accompanying Measures ) ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on the following :
the report by Mrs Jędrzejewska and Mrs Trüpel , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the draft general budget of the European Union for the financial year 2011 - all sections and Letters of amendment Nos 1 / 2011 , 2 / 2011 and 3 / 2011 to the draft general budget of the European Union for the financial year 2011
( 12699 / 2010 - C7-0202 / 2010 - ; and
the report by Mr Surján , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the Council 's position on draft amending budget No 3 / 2010 of the European Union for the financial year 2010 , Section III - Commission - BAM ( Banana Accompanying Measures )
( 13472 / 2010 - C7-0263 / 2010 - .
We are meeting , today , to talk about the European Union budget for 2011 .
The year 2011 is an exceptional budgetary year , for several reasons .
Above all , 2011 is the fifth year of the multiannual financial framework for 2007-2013 , so we already know a good deal about how this multiannual framework is being put into effect , which parts have been a success and which have not , and many programmes are already at a very advanced stage in terms of their life cycle .
Meanwhile , much has happened in the European Union , for we have adopted the Treaty of Lisbon , which imposes or assigns new fields of competence to the European Union .
I will permit myself , here , to mention several of these , in particular , those which are expensive , namely the new fields of competence in the areas of policy for combating climate change and energy policy .
It also opens up new fields of competence for the European Union on the global stage , so we are talking , here , about the establishment of Union diplomacy , and there are new competences in terms of space research and in terms of sport and tourism .
Unfortunately , none of these new roles is accompanied by appropriate financial means .
It is somewhat true to say that the European Union has new ambitions and new plans but does not necessarily have the new financial resources needed to put these plans and ambitions into effect .
This , then , is what 2011 is like .
In the opinion of the European Parliament , the European Commission programmed operations wisely in its draft and allocated appropriate resources for 2011 .
The Council - we have already discussed this , here - has reduced those resources .
I would like , briefly , to present what happened in the Committee on Budgets during our reading .
As a reminder : the new Treaty of Lisbon also introduces a new budgetary procedure .
We no longer have two chances .
Neither the Council nor the European Parliament now have two readings .
We have only single readings , which is why both arms of the budgetary authority need particular effort and discipline , because , in fact , each of us has only one chance .
I repeat : we no longer have two readings .
We are going to vote tomorrow , and we are going to give attention to the position drawn up by the Committee on Budgets .
It is important to emphasise that what the Committee on Budgets has drafted is a position which respects the multiannual financial framework .
In contrast to previous years , the European Parliament will adopt its reading , which does not go beyond , in terms of planned amounts , the multiannual financial perspective .
This position is innovative , but is equally a position which includes and takes into account the concerns and the situation in which the Council finds itself .
The situation where , in Council , seven Member States rejected the Council 's position has not escaped Parliament 's notice .
We have listened to and taken into account the fears of certain Member States and of the Council as such .
We have taken careful note of the Council 's position , and therefore Parliament 's reading is disciplined and does not go beyond the multiannual financial framework .
On the other hand , however , we cannot , of course , remain indifferent in the face of the facts about which I spoke earlier , namely , that we have new areas for which the European Union has to take up responsibility , but that these areas do not have appropriate financial provision .
What is more , the Council has committed itself to a considerable number of measures related , for example , to bananas , with compensation for banana producers associated with the ITER and other programmes , which require new financial resources but which have not been provided with new financial resources .
Apparently , they are to be financed from current resources .
It is here that , as the European Parliament , we have doubts .
What we would also like to communicate in our reading is , above all , to emphasise once again the triangle of priorities , the triangle related to youth , education and mobility .
The European Parliament has been saying since March that this will be our list of priorities for 2011 and that we would like those budget lines which favour youth , education and mobility to be appropriately funded , so that resources will also be found for innovative undertakings in the field of mobility , youth and education .
The same concerns programmes related to research and innovation .
We know there are not sufficient means in the current financial framework , which is why we have made the painful - although , in our opinion , essential - cuts to the ITER programme .
I would very much like this reading of Parliament to be seen as disciplined , but also as a reading which enables the financing of the European Union 's commitments for 2011 .


Mr President , Mr Wathelet , Commissioner Lewandowski , ladies and gentlemen , we have just heard the rapporteur for the Commission 's budget talk about the major challenges that we face .
I will now speak as rapporteur for the Parliament 's budget and for the other , mainly smaller , institutions .
The political conflict that we have to deal with - and this applies not only to Parliament 's budget , but equally to the Commission 's budget , too - is as follows : with the Treaty of Lisbon , Parliament has gained fields of competence in connection with energy policy and foreign policy and the power of codecision with regard to agriculture .
We have more to say in respect of policy relating to sport and space .
To put it plainly , our competences have increased , and that is a good thing .
We have always fought for this as committed European parliamentarians .
However , at the same time , we have a situation in the Member States that has forced them into austerity measures and debt reduction policies , and therefore between these two major goals - on the one hand , we have new tasks and , on the other , we must show that we understand the pressure that the public budgets are under - we have to find a political line .
That is exactly what I have tried to do as rapporteur for Parliament 's budget , namely , to find a genuinely fair balance between the new competences , and thus our new work requirements and requirements for additional staff , and the need to send out a signal to the citizens of the European Union and to the governments that we also want to practice self-restraint and self-discipline .
The Bureau has put forward proposals , as that is its job , with regard to what costs should be increased in Parliament 's budget in order for it to be possible to work properly .
We have now taken the decisions in the Committee on Budgets concerning appropriations , which , at an amount in the region of EUR 25 million , is below that originally proposed by the Bureau .
That means that we intend to limit our travel costs , the amount allocated for studies , the funds for security here in this House and for information technology , and we will make fewer posts available for the library services .
We have a conflict and that relates to the question of how much money there should be in the near future for MEPs ' assistants .
The proposal is that , for 2011 , this money should be increased once again by EUR 1 500 .
I would like to say quite clearly that as a member of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , I do not support this proposal .
I think it is excessive at this point in time .
In the Committee on Budgets , the majority agreed that we need more information and that this money will initially be held in reserve , in other words , not released , but that more policy decisions will need to be taken with regard to whether we now want to release this money or whether we consider it to be a wiser policy not to make this money available for 2011 .
Moreover , it is very important to me - because , of course , we have a considerable interest in making our European institutions environmentally friendly and , as far as possible , changing our own behaviour - that we have called for a new , more environmentally friendly approach to mobility .
For example , there is to be a ticket for local public transport in Brussels , and that is to be negotiated further .
It would be extremely good if we could significantly limit our driver services , but this also means that here in this House in Strasbourg , we should make more bicycles available for the MEPs and staff , so that we can get around in an environmentally friendly manner here in Strasbourg as well .
A second point that is extremely important to me is the fact that we have tried to find a good balance with a majority in the Committee on Budgets .
We did not only consider our own interests as representatives of Parliament and increase our budget responsibly , but , of course , we also had to look at the other small institutions : the Committee of the Regions , the Economic and Social Committee , the Court of Auditors , the European Data Protection Supervisor as well as the European Ombudsman .
What we have done in this regard is to take a responsible position so that we have not only made more staff and resources available to ourselves , but that we have also , in a very targeted way , granted the Committee of the Regions and the Economic and Social Committee a certain increase in funds , albeit not everything they asked for , because , of course , they too have greater labour requirements on account of additional competences resulting from the Treaty of Lisbon .
Particularly in the case of a small institution like the European Data Protection Supervisor , which is very important in connection with many of the debates that we are conducting at the moment on how to deal with data protection in the digital world - and this important institution is still in the process of being established - it is right to accommodate it to the extent of granting it two new positions .
In this regard , ladies and gentlemen , we would make it clear that the Committee on Budgets tried to take a very responsible line between well-founded increases which we support , and which we also have to justify to the Council because we want to do a good job here , and an understanding of the fact that a certain degree of self-restraint is definitely called for at the present time .

Mr President , Mr Wathelet , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , my task is to settle a 2010 budgetary item , in so far as possible , and assess a motion for amendment , an amended budget .
This issue involves a promise made by the Commission some years ago to provide reasonable compensation for banana producing countries , and we must keep this promise .
The only slight problem with this is that when the Commission made this decision and this announcement , it did not discuss it with any of the branches of the budgetary authority at the appropriate levels , and has still not managed to come up with a proposal acceptable to all parties affected .
The sum involved is EUR 300 million , of which EUR 75 million would have to be paid from the 2010 budget .
The question is where it should come from .
And this is where the Council and Parliament still disagree , after two unsuccessful trialogues .
Unfortunately it has not been possible to reach anything close to an agreement , even though a compromise is definitely needed , because these payments would be made to countries in situations which , in all fairness , clearly need this compensation .
We cannot reach an agreement with the Council , however , because in our view , this is , in fact , a new task which is not included in the preliminary draft budget , and we invented an instrument called the flexibility instrument for precisely this type of situation .
This is what it is meant for , to resolve problems such as this one , and it has an appropriate legal framework as well as funds ready to be mobilised .
However , the Council was of the opinion that given the current state of affairs , Member States are not willing to mobilise this instrument , as it would require further payments , and national budgets are in no position to make them .
In Parliament , however , we held the view that our existing programmes which are already under way are not in a position to allow for funds to be taken away , and we failed to arrive at a compromise solution .
Therefore , to my greatest regret and with the support of the vast majority of the Committee on Budgets , I have to propose to Parliament that we , the Parliament , also reject amending budget No 6 , the Commission 's motion for compromise tabled before us , which has not been adopted by the Council .
Mr President , in this debate , I am also supposed to be given the floor on behalf of the Committee on Regional Development .
Let me combine these two speeches and say that I would like to pay tribute to the Commission , as it has done all that it could , in full compliance with the rules and upper limits specified in the 2011 budget .
We all know that the European Union is underfinanced .
The funds required to perform tasks should be increased .
However , we also need to know that we are short of funds , and we have to manage available funds in a better way .
In terms of regional development , it was very painful for us to see that the Council has also withdrawn or cut back regional development expenditure .
What we have seen is the greatest reduction in payment appropriations in the history of the past ten years .
In our view , it will be impossible to function like this .
Therefore , what will follow now is a reconciliation meeting , where positions will hopefully get closer , and we will also have an adequate budget for the banana producing countries . Thank you for your attention .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , this is the first budget under the Lisbon Treaty , as mentioned by the rapporteur , and it is provoking understandable interest due not so much to the figures in the budget but to the institutional dimension attached to the annual budgetary procedure .
We welcome , of course , Parliament restoring the general level of the draft budget both in commitments and in payments - i.e. the gap of almost EUR 8.62 million in commitments and around EUR 3.6 million in payments between the Parliament vote and the Council vote .

According to the revised forecast , we are almost sure that our programming was right , that the special cohesion funds are moving at cruising speed at this point of the financial perspective and the bills are to be paid next year , so we are restating our forecast for 2011 .
Having said that , I would also like to draw your attention to the need to restore the draft budget for the agricultural clearance of account .
Maintaining the cut would effectively leave part of the forecast for agricultural expenditure uncovered .
We also welcome the amendments by Parliamentary committees in this respect .
The line taken by Parliament , as indicated by rapporteur Jędrzejewska , is very clear .
This is on horizontal amendments and political priorities placed in the forecast in heading 3b on youth and youth mobility .
Other amendments above the draft budget are also proposed and some of them could be implemented if there were a legal base .
We will send our letter of executability on both these amendments and also on the pilot projects and parliamentary preparatory actions that were voted in parliamentary committee .
We regret that a significant number of reserves have been inserted by the Parliament .
Both the size of the reserves on salaries ( EUR 75 million , of which EUR 41 million are not related to the 1.85 % salary adjustment ) and the number of conditions attached to them - sometimes not even related to staff issues - are worrying .
We are doing our best to meet the conditions and the reserves could be lifted at the latest during the conciliation .
Finally , the Commission appreciates Parliament 's approach not to go above the ceilings of the multiannual financial framework .
This has been done at the cost of some cuts for ITER , for example , where we need more money and not less , and for external actions were we need more money and not less .
I see this as an invitation to debate and it will be settled at the moment of conciliation of the global package .
I refer also on this occasion to amending budget No 3 , already discussed by rapporteur Surján .
This is about banana accompanying measures and so far , the Parliament rapporteur has reconfirmed the position of Parliament which is very distant from the position of the Council .
The Council is for redeployment , Parliament is for the greater use of flexibility instruments , but here again , the credibility of our institutions vis-à-vis the ACP countries is at stake .
We should therefore look for compromise in the coming conciliation process .
As usual , the draft budget will be accompanied or is already accompanied , apart from the amending budget for this year and the amending budget for bananas next year , with an amending letter on the External Action Service , an amending letter on the new supervisory agencies which are already politically agreed , and tomorrow , the Commission will adopt and transmit to Parliament an amending letter which is the usual updating of estimates for agriculture and fisheries agreements .
Finally , I know that the institutional dimension should play a big role in the forthcoming conciliation .
We owe it to our citizens to compromise and to prove that the Lisbon Treaty is working to their advantage in clearing up differences using the complex machinery of the European Union .
So I am going to play the role of honest broker in anticipation of the final agreement .

Mr President , Mr Wathelet , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by expressing my thanks for the work done by the general rapporteur on the budget .
Although , in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , we have exercised moderation and we are aware that the appropriations under heading 4 are increasing substantially above the average , we consider them to be insufficient for guaranteeing a consistent , visible and effective foreign policy that is in line with the ambitions introduced by the Treaty of Lisbon .
We are also surprised that the Council is expressing surprise at some of the tactical cuts being proposed by Parliament , given the significance of the cuts , both in terms of compromise appropriations and in terms of payment appropriations , which the Council itself has introduced .
I would like to thank the Committee on Budgets , represented here by its Chair , for putting the appropriations for the new positions in the European External Action Service in reserve .
Naturally , Mr President , this does not mean that we should not have a positive and constructive attitude , but obviously , in the conciliation process , Parliament has to be firm , very firm , in demanding its priorities , with the objective and aim of having the capacity to produce a budget for 2011 , just as the President-in-Office of the Council has just said .
Mr President , funds that have been made available for development cooperation must actually serve development purposes , so that we can help cushion the blows to poor countries from the financial and economic crisis for which they were not to blame .
If we ensure that they are integrated into the global economy , they will become a new market and thus , part of the solution .
Development funds - funds under the Development Cooperation Instrument ( DCI ) - are intended for this purpose ; for combating poverty and not for the EU 's cooperation with industrialised countries .
Neither should the release of funds for the reform of banana production - Banana Accompanying Measures ( BAM ) - be at the expense of current development programmes .
In addition , amounts for strengthening democracy and human rights under the European Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights ( EIDHR ) must be maintained .
The recent flooding in Pakistan has demonstrated once again that a rapid , effective reaction is called for - and not by dipping into the budget as an emergency measure , but instead by means of a structural amount for humanitarian aid .
The EU must be able to act promptly and be able to continue to offer a contribution .
Speaking on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , I would like to draw attention to the following matters .
The first of these is the level of errors which occur during budgeting and realisation .
Two areas which are particularly important are external action and structural funds .
Another matter which , for us , is crucially important , is the sums which are allocated in the traditional way using a criterion based on evaluation of the effects of funds used .
This second aspect is very often lacking when budgetary decisions are being made .
The third area is the harmonised budget , for example , the cohesion fund and trans-European transport networks .
It seems that , in shaping the budget , we are using too little European methodology and too much national fragmentation of the budget .
The final factor related to the budget is a request to take account of such information as the national reports on realisation of budgetary objectives for the last year .
At present , fewer than half of the Member States submit these reports , and the reports which are submitted are prepared using very different methodologies .

Mr President , Mr Wathelet , Commissioner , with regard to the 2011 budget , the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs is delighted that the Committee on Budgets has restored the appropriations for the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
We think this is absolutely crucial in this period of crisis , and we call on the Council to follow Parliament 's sensible approach in view of the current climate .
We also call for particular attention to be paid to the rate at which appropriations for the European Social Fund are implemented , or else the fund will be unable to fulfil its objectives .
We also call for more resources to be devoted to social dialogue , because the experience of today 's restructuring processes has taught us that , where there is social dialogue , things are more harmonious and better solutions can be found .
This is an important issue .
Lastly , we are delighted that the Committee on Budgets has endorsed the EURES first job initiative , since this is a real contribution by the European Parliament to the Youth on the Move flagship initiative , and it is also a tool to aid social innovation , which we need to develop .

Mr President , Mr Wathelet , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety regarding the budget , I will not be telling anyone here present anything new .
Nevertheless , I would like to point out once again that the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety is responsible for less than 1 % of the budget as a whole , less than 1 % of all environmental protection actions , biodiversity actions and actions in the fight against climate change .
It is responsible for the whole area of public health , for food and feed safety , and for veterinary measures , as well as for the extremely important work of five European agencies .
1 % !
Well , in that case , it is certainly not possible to talk of excessive quantities of money .
This small amount of money is therefore desperately needed for carrying out our work .
It will therefore be no surprise to anyone that we are unable to accept the Council 's cuts .
We need the resources .
Mr President , Mr Wathelet , Commissioner , I would like to endorse the words of the previous speaker .
As the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , we are responsible for the narrow area of customs , internal market and consumer protection .
We have tried very hard to pay careful attention to the figures and to put in only what is really necessary .
However , in times of crisis , money is , of course , needed for consumer protection , customs , training customs officers , etc .
We are therefore of the opinion that the old figures must be reinstated .
We would like to thank the Committee on Budgets for the excellent cooperation we have enjoyed so far and we hope that this will continue .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development . - Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur for her diligent work on the budget for 2011 .
Let me go straight to one particular point of concern for the agriculture budget , namely , the clearance of accounts line .
As a committee , we have re-tabled an amendment and are calling on Parliament to fully support this amendment .
The Council have used creative accounting to find EUR 420 million .
If we do not get our amendment through , we will face a huge problem next year in the budget and there will be cuts across all of the budget lines in agriculture .
We cannot allow that to happen as a Parliament and we must call for your support right across the political groups for this amendment .
I want to thank the Committee on Budgets for their understanding and support for the Agriculture Committee 's amendments on the Dairy Fund , on our funding for the school milk and fruit scheme , for the bee populations , and the deprived persons programme .
I hope the Commission is right in its optimism on dairy markets .
I am concerned about volatility .
Mr President , as budget rapporteur for the Committee on Culture and Education , I am proud to be able to say that we in Parliament have managed to do what the Commission has not been able to do and what the Council did not want to do , namely , to take note of the obligations in the new Europe 2020 strategy and follow that up with financial support for achieving the goals set in the strategy .
It is vital that we invest in education and lifelong learning in order to create the ' new skills for new jobs ' - a central part of the strategy .
We would therefore also like to see the Council support the position on the 2011 budget that we in Parliament are expecting to adopt tomorrow .
This , of course , includes , in particular , the extra EUR 18 million for the lifelong learning programme .
This will enable more than 3 500 European students to go on an Erasmus exchange .
We want to increase the number of students in vocational training who can get traineeships .
We want to get more adults into EU-funded further training .
Then there is EUR 10 million for the People programme , which is intended to increase the mobility of doctoral candidates and PhD students , provide the opportunity for closer cooperation with industry and modernise the EU 's universities , and money for communication .
We would appreciate the Council 's support for this .
Mr President , I would briefly like to report on the contribution that the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs has made to the budgetary debate , of which this House is aware .
I will make four points .
The first point concerns Europol , as our committee has restored its budget , given the cuts proposed by the Council , and we have also proposed an increase of EUR 500 000 so that it can tackle the responsibilities that have arisen as a result of the entry into force of the second version of the Terrorist Finance Tracking Programme .
Secondly , we have asked for the appropriations in reserve to be released and for the proposed increase to be made available to Europol .
We have also decided to put the appropriations destined for the second-generation Schengen Information System to be put in reserve , on the condition that they are release once we obtain the necessary information on the steps that have to be taken in the future .
As we consider them to be of the utmost importance to the Area of Freedom , Security and Justice , we have also proposed re-establishing the appropriations for the three funds aimed at immigration and integration : the European External Borders Fund , the European Return Fund and the European Fund for the Integration of Third Country Nationals .
Finally , we have also re-established the budget planned for the agency Eurojust , whose functions have recently been expanded , as it is an essential instrument for developing judicial cooperation in Europe .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur for finding a balanced position .
I think that the proposal on the 2011 budget , which we will vote on tomorrow , maintains a perfect balance between budget saving and economic stimulation and satisfies the European Parliament priorities that have been raised repeatedly .
I understand Member States ' aim to cut costs by trying to reduce their budget deficit as much as possible , but many of the cuts proposed by the Council are unfounded .
We must not forget that the European Union budget objectives are different .
EU budget money is directed to our future investments .
How we overcome the crisis will be dependent on that money being properly distributed and used .
Energy , innovations , scientific research , education and mobility are the foundations for our economic growth and the creation of new jobs .
Therefore , we must not only ensure the continuity of effective programmes already in existence , but also suitable financing for new policy areas included in the Treaty of Lisbon .
I call on my colleagues to approve the draft budget .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on International Trade . - Mr President , the Lisbon Treaty has given the European Parliament new powers in the field of international trade agreements and the Committee on International Trade intends to put these new powers to good use .
A flexibility instrument in the Banana Accompanying Measures will help producing countries face new challenges and will benefit EU consumers and the least-developed countries .
Trade-related assistance , such as EPAs and Aid for Trade , will stimulate growth through trade not only with the EU , but also trade within the regions .
To conclude , I will mention our focus on the parliamentary dimension of the WTO and external business interests in India , ASEAN and China .
Relations with fast-growing countries through such centres will benefit our economies in general , and SMEs in particular .
Mr President , the Committee on Transport and Tourism , which has been very reasonable in its proposals during this crisis period , would point out that transport and tourism easily generate more than 10 % of the Union 's GDP and are essential sectors of high European value-added growth .
Three points , in particular , deserve to be emphasised , and we would like to see them supported .
Firstly , the financing of agencies .
Indeed , why legislate without having upstream criteria or downstream operational implementation instruments ?
These amendments are aimed at providing agencies with the resources they need to carry out their mandate and , hence , Europe 's mandates .
Secondly , tourism , for which the Union is the world 's number one destination , became an actual competence with the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , but it has no budget heading of its own .
To just continue with two existing preparatory actions is not enough .
We want us to enhance our action , at least symbolically , by supporting new pilot projects , in particular , concerning industrial and cultural tourism .
Lastly , the Icelandic volcano eruption showed us the importance of implementing a single European interface for information and ticket reservations for all modes of transport , and this is the subject of our last request .
Mr President , thank you for the floor .
The Council takes away EUR 4 billion and invokes the economic crisis .
What do they solve with these funds ?
Surely not the crisis .
What this can achieve , however , is to ruin solidarity between Member States and make deployed programmes impossible .
Mr President , Minister , it is not worth it .
Therefore , in the opinion of our Committee , in chapter 1B of the 2011 budget , we have to return to the proposals of the Commission , I mean the European Commission , as they are based on Member State forecasts .
Member States should not play with two contradictory solutions . Thank you for your attention .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to ask why no opinion has been presented by the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy .
That is where the biggest cuts are being made .
Why is no speaker designated here ?
That is a good question , Mr Rübig .
This report did not make provision for an opinion from the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy .
Here , I have the list of all the committees that had to issue an opinion and I do not see the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy on that list .
In any case , we will find out , Mr Rübig .
Mr President , an optimum budgetary policy is not one that budgets more , but one that budgets well , or intelligently , as the Commissioner said in his communication .
I like the way that the European Commission has drawn up the 2011 budget , but there is room for improvement .
I do not like and have never liked the way that the Council tackles European budgets .
Making cuts across the board to any project that comes from the Commission or Parliament is not a budgetary technique but a genuine example of financial butchery .
We would , incidentally , like to ask the representative of the Council whether or not he heard Commissioner Lewandowski talking about the need for payment appropriations .
My group believes it is possible to strike a balance between budgetary austerity and European impetus .
It is clear that the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament does not believe it is possible to strike that balance and , therefore , it is tabling amendments that would break the budgetary ceilings and make a battle with the Council inevitable .
I therefore ask the House not to be party to this strategy and to fully support that of the rapporteur , which has already gained majority support in the Committee on Budgets last week .
I would like to say a big thank you to the rapporteur , Mrs Jędrzejewska .
She has done an excellent job and , in the main , we are , in fact , in agreement in the Committee on Budgets , even though there are some areas - and I will come back to this - where we in the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament have a slightly different view .
We are well aware of the crisis situation in the Member States ' finances .
In spite of this , we essentially defend the EU 's budget , even though we are now keeping to very low levels , particularly when it comes to new policy commitments for next year , where Parliament , too , is keeping its increase below a rate of 1 % .
This is very modest .
As regards payments , the rate of increase is higher and that is also reasonable .
To now try to keep back structural fund payments would directly affect those countries with the greatest problems in terms of jobs and growth .
We need to remember that countries such as Greece , Ireland , Portugal , Spain and Latvia are all net receivers of the EU 's budgetary resources .
Cutting the budget will not benefit them .
We must not forget that .
Firstly , then , we are being restrained .
Viewed over the last 20 years , the EU 's budget has actually increased more slowly than those of the Member States .
That is something that we should not forget either .
Secondly , we Social Democrats do not accept the view that austerity measures are the only way to deal with the crisis .
We are therefore fighting for an increase , especially in category 1a , which includes investments , research and development and labour market initiatives .
There must be an increase here .
However , we are not in complete agreement with the Council and the Commission with regard to the ITER project .
We are in favour of this project , but it must not be the only priority when it comes to research and development .
It must not be allowed to supersede everything else .
Therefore , if we are to proceed with ITER , we will need to carry out reviews and more money will be needed .
Thirdly , and just as importantly , we need to maintain solidarity during this crisis .
If the hardest hit by cuts in the structural funds are those who really need support , then the policy is unacceptable .
Fourthly , we also believe that a certain increase is justified on account of the Treaty of Lisbon .
The EU will have a number of new tasks in relation to the External Action Service , new financial institutions , energy and the climate .
We cannot assign new tasks to the EU and then not pay for them .
Finally , I would like to mention the foreign policy budget , which is clearly underfunded .
If we are to be able to afford to provide aid to Palestine and find the necessary funds for enlargement , we need more money .
Therefore , it was also important to us Social Democrats to tie in the 2011 budget with a debate that has a more long-term perspective : about own resources , the budget ceilings for 2012 and 2013 , and the financing of the new financial support mechanism .
In order to achieve this , I welcome the Commissioner 's mention of flexibility as a possible solution .
I am absolutely certain that we will not succeed in these budget negotiations if we cannot in some way either review the budget ceilings or utilise the flexibility instrument .
I believe that this is absolutely necessary .
Mr President , Mr Wathelet , Commissioner , the axe of cutbacks is swinging through the public budgets in most of the Member States .
So , should we not rein in the EU budget ?
Yes we should , and that is also what we are doing to some extent .
That is the common theme set out in Parliament 's proposal for next year 's budget .
We have kept below the ceilings set in the multiannual financial framework , but this will only be possible by making cuts in definite priorities and in international commitments .
Otherwise , we will not be able to get sufficient appropriations for research , energy and aid for Palestine .
In specific terms , we have had to make cuts in appropriations for the ITER Fusion project , in the common foreign and security policy , and in aid for banana-producing countries and cooperation with newly industrialised nations .
I think this reflects the fact that the multiannual financial framework is too restrictive , and I would like once again today to express my regret that the Commission has not , as promised , provided a genuine mid-term review of the framework .
We need to review the financial perspective up to 2013 . Otherwise , we will run into problems .
The Commission has just given us a communication on the budget review in which it sets out the lines for several years to come , but it does not explain how we will be able to make ends meet in 2011 , 2012 and 2013 .
On behalf of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , I would like to thank Mrs Jędrzejewska for her expert management of the vote on the budget .
We are happy with the result .
We would have liked to have seen a few different figures in parts of the agriculture budget .
We did not want EUR 300 million for a dairy fund .
We should also help to sort out the accounting clearance problem .
We voted wrongly in this regard .
There are also a few places in Parliament 's budget where we would also have liked to have seen savings , but , all in all , we are happy with what we have in front of us now , and I look forward to constructive negotiations with the Council .
Mr President , Minister , Commissioner , I , too , should like to commend the rapporteurs and , in particular , Mrs Jędrzejewska and Mrs Trüpel .
I think that Mrs Trüpel has done a tremendous job , a truly outstanding job , enabling even budget veterans , those who have been drafting budgets for years in this House , to work under new conditions - those of the Treaty of Lisbon - with a single reading .
In any case , an excellent job has been done - thank you .
This has also been a marathon in which our group chairs - there is only one of them left in the Chamber now - all took part at some point .
At times , we were a little afraid that things would turn out badly , but fortunately , that was not at all the case , thanks to our rapporteurs and to our President .
It may be unorthodox , but I should like to commend his work also .
We have benefited from the fact that the group chairs wish to table with us an ambitious budget and , above all , to forge a link with the follow-up , with what will come afterwards , in the Special Committee on the policy challenges and budgetary resources for a sustainable European Union after 2013 ( SURE ) , and in the context of the forthcoming budgetary perspective , because , clearly , the 2011 budget is one thing , but what comes afterwards is far more significant .
I am delighted that together , we , the group chairs and the Committee on Budgets , have reached an agreement .
We will see !
The fact remains that , for the moment , we have a parliamentary position , and having heard what Mr Wathelet had to say about the Council 's views , I obviously have some concerns about what awaits us in conciliation .
It will not be easy because , between the requests made by the Council and those made by Parliament , we will struggle to come to an agreement .
I am counting on you to help us in this matter and to come up with a truly ambitious budget .
Those in the Council who are criticising , for example , the increase in payment appropriations , are being unfair to this budget .
These are past commitments ; this is a question of credibility : when we pay what we said we would pay , we are simply doing what we ought to do , even if it goes beyond the payment appropriations .
I think we should be careful not to miss the point here .
While we will support the resolution tomorrow , I think there are some inconsistencies in this budget , and I would like to highlight what I consider to be two of the main ones .
A few months ago , we all voted on this major resolution on the 2020 programme , in which we decided to include items such as the greening of the economy , support for renewable energies , green technologies and so on , and everything that creates work and jobs .
It was from this point of view that , in order to formalise our intentions , we tabled an amendment specifically to ensure that sustainable development criteria are taken out of the LIFE programme but included in all the other areas .
I believe that that amendment will be rejected tomorrow .
Nevertheless , I invite you to support our amendment so that sustainable development criteria are about action and not just talk .
I now come to the second contradiction : the International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor ( ITER ) .
ITER 's budget has been reduced by 45 million .
That is something , at least .
Above all , however , there were attempts to take that money from agricultural policy ; fortunately , it was not taken from there , but from research , which is not much better .
Here again , I am referring to what Ban Ki-moon was saying to us this morning .
He called on us Europeans to be pioneers in the field of renewable energies , to strongly promote new types of energy and not those of the past , not those that earn money first and foremost for shareholders but fail to help European consumers or future generations of Europeans , who are going to have to continue to manage the issue of waste .
This all or nothing strategy with regard to ITER - one which will ultimately cost EUR 1.5 billion - is , in my view , a big mistake , and I believe that we are not doing what we said we would do in the 2020 resolution .

Lastly , to conclude , there are a few timetabling issues : we also have economic governance , the winding-up of the Council 's task force , and the Commission 's proposals ; a great deal of work will be required to link up this budget with future budgets and the financial perspective .
This budget debate and the whole series of debates which we are beginning is a great test for the European elite .
We have given Europe the Treaty of Lisbon , and this treaty gives the citizens more of Europe .
I would like to say very clearly that we must not say we want more Europe while not giving more money for this .
This is the point from which I would like to begin .
We cannot say honestly that we want more Europe but that we do not want to pay for more Europe .
Europe costs , and if we look at the structure of expenditure on the European budget in the structure of expenditure of the biggest contributors , we see that spending on Europe is not a major cost .
I would like to raise yet another matter , as a representative of Poland and as a representative of Central and Eastern Europe : all funds which go towards the development of our region , which is a huge consumer of goods developed and produced in Western Europe , and all money invested in the new countries of Europe , is money invested in the future of Europe .
A wealthier Central and Eastern Europe and greater wealth in the new countries of Europe will also bring benefits to those countries of Western Europe which we hugely respect and which are net contributors to the European Union budget .
In this debate , too , we need more European solidarity .
Mr President , I would like to be completely frank in this debate .
This is not a discussion between accountants , but a matter of plans and choices for the future .
The view of the governments is very simple : they are all submitting to the new Brussels Consensus .
At a national level , budgets are subject to a single watchword : austerity .
At a European level , the result of this is very simple : the residual budget .
I would like to say to the Council that the crisis is not over yet , but in the meantime , social measures are indeed all being withdrawn at a national level .
The crisis is not over , but our national budgets all point to salaries being frozen or reduced , reductions in pensions and increases in the most unfair tax of all : VAT .
In this context , the governments are refusing to give one more euro to the European budget .
Their proposal is EUR 3 billion less than the one that we are here to discuss today .
However , we should be aware that the proposal that we are here to discuss is also a timid one that lacks any courage .
In reality , what we needed was a European budget that could compensate for policies at national level , with clear investment aimed at job creation .
We needed a European budget that counteracted the negative effects of budgetary policies at national level .
This was not an option .
The governments are transferring new competences to Europe without transferring resources , thus cutting the links , and yet they are able to propose increases which can only be explained by their being in the pocket of lobbies .
Such is the case with the EUR 350 million in funding proposed for the Institution of Nuclear Fusion , an investment which is seriously dubious in the current climate .
The real rationale at stake is , however , this one . At national level , budgetary discipline is based on stupid penalties like those that the Franco-German communiqué is attempting to state and ratify today .
At European level , it is a residual and mediocre budget that is chronically underfunded .
At this juncture , it is therefore extremely important to discuss the European Union 's own resources and the need for a tax on financial transactions at European level , which would allow a modicum of justice in the economy .
Europe is now desperate .
This is the Europe where general strikes are taking place in Greece , Spain and France , even on this very day .
Portugal and Italy will also see strikes next month .
We owe Europe , the Europe that is fighting and desperate , a response based on justice , investment and job creation .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , this Parliament has joined the European Commission in demanding an increase of almost 6 % for the 2011 budget at a time when national governments are proposing significant cuts to their own budgets .
Those who defend the increase argue that extra funding is required to cover the new competences arising from the Lisbon Treaty .
In fact , I do not remember having heard - or anybody mentioning at the time of ratification - that there would be any cost associated with Lisbon , or what this cost would be .
Not even today do we have a clear idea about what the implementation of the Lisbon Treaty will cost the taxpayer .
It is also alleged that austerity is not the right answer in times of crisis , and that it is necessary to spend more on education , renewable energy , etc .
Looking at the underspend for the past few years , it is clear that the EU does not succeed in producing an efficient budget .
This failure is linked to the irregularities identified by the European Court of Auditors every year .
Yet again , the biggest increase that is being proposed - a 17 % increase - goes to the Cohesion Funds , the area where the auditors report the highest number of irregularities .
If I find it stunning that in times of crisis , this EU is looking to increase its own budget , I find it more difficult to explain that the European Parliament wants to double its own entertainment budget .
Are we saying that the UK is axing child benefits and university funding , postponing school-building schemes and making other painful cuts just to fund more champagne and oysters for the European Parliament ?
Is it reasonable for the UK to make military spending cuts while its net contribution to the European Union will increase from around GBP 6 billion to GBP 8 billion in the next couple of years ?
This is simply unacceptable for the British people .
( Applause from the EFD Group )
( NL ) Mr President , when I hear the remarks on the 2011 budget by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament in particular , the humiliating feeling comes over me that I do not want to be part of this European Parliament .
Whilst the people at home are uncertain about their jobs and incomes , and are waiting for inspiring politicians to economise where possible and invest where absolutely necessary , the Commission and Parliament have actually managed almost across the board to increase expenditure on all kinds of useless and unnecessary hobbies .
Whilst Commissioner Barroso is calling on Member States to economise , his Commission and the European Parliament are increasing the budget for 2011 .
You cannot take this seriously any more ; yet it is happening .
This House seems not to realise what really preoccupies the citizens back home .
With a single positive exception , it is one grim , grey , costly being .
Ah , some in this Chamber are thinking , it is only that strange Party for Freedom ( PVV ) that is talking - and it is true , Mr President , that we hold up the mirror and say , ' Is it necessary to squander our citizens ' money on expensive official cars , including for private use ?
Is it necessary to plough money into celebrations whilst Europe is in the midst of a deep economic crisis ?
Is it necessary to create an expensive External Action Service when all the Member States are perfectly capable of doing that themselves ?
Is it necessary to keep pointless expensive committees alive and send yet more money to Yemen and the Palestinian territories ? '
It is only the PVV .
Yet make no mistake : the PVV no longer stands alone in Europe .
We fight for the citizen , and want to be a voice in this costly circus .
I am proud of my country and its citizens and shall continue to speak out , because it has to be said , and because I want to .
Therefore , we shall be voting against the 2011 budget .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

( NL ) Mr President , we can tell that the Dutch Party for Freedom ( PVV ) is an anti-European party from Mr Hartong 's argument and from the party 's amendments .
The PVV also proclaims itself a party that fights crime and wants to send people back to their homeland .
My question to Mr Hartong is : how can you do that if you set Europol 's entire budget to zero , if you economise the Schengen Information System out of existence , and if you completely cancel the EUR 113 million from the European Return Fund ?
( NL ) Mr President , many thanks for this question by my fellow Member .
As Mr Gerbrandy also knows , counter-terrorism and related policy is a matter for the Member States , and we believe that it does not fall within the competence of the European Union .
In addition , as I am sure my esteemed fellow Member is also aware , there has been a huge incidence of fraud within Europol in recent years , which we discussed recently in this House , and this strikes me as reason enough to bring police policy , too , back within the fold of the Member States .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( DE ) Mr President , I , too , have a question for Mr Hartong .
I would very much like to know whether , on account of this criticism of the EU finances , his party , which is , of course , currently crucial in the Dutch Parliament in terms of supporting the government , wants the country of the Netherlands , which is also a net contributor , to reduce the net amount it pays ?
( NL ) That is a very interesting question , and this is also a subject on which there will be a great deal more discussion in this House .
The new government in the Netherlands has indeed made reducing the contribution to the European Union a priority , and I am both delighted about and grateful for this .
In addition , we shall certainly be providing input to the discussion on this House 's multiannual financial framework .
Therefore , you can be assured that we shall be very critical of further increases in the budgets for 2011 and subsequent years .

( PT ) Mr President , Mr Wathelet , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the 2011 budget which Parliament is proposing is ambitious , intelligent and respects the commitments which it has taken on in a rigorous and realistic way .
I am well aware that this intelligent ambition is possible , since the EU budget continues to amount to about 1 % of gross national income .
This budget also clearly demonstrates the need to revise the multiannual financial framework , given the tight margins for its items , and particularly for items 1A , 3B and 4 .
It is also clear that a debate on the need for new resources for the Union budget is urgently required .
The implementation of policies and programmes agreed by the EU institutions is assured , against the will of the Council , which is proposing swingeing and arbitrary cuts in both payment and commitment appropriations that are not in accordance with financial and budgetary management .
Worst of all , they call into question the implementation of initiatives and investments which constitute gains and added value for the EU .
It is just as well - and congratulations to the rapporteur - that we are making a priority of policies concerning young people , education and mobility .
We have increased funding for the lifelong learning programme , the PESSOA programme , the programme for the mobility of researchers , the Erasmus Mundus programme , and the Competitiveness and innovation framework programme .
As for the mobility of youth employment , I would like to emphasise the pilot project in which I was personally involved : ' Your First Job Abroad ' .
Moreover , I cannot neglect to stress Parliament 's objective of legislative excellence , which was combined with accuracy , as evidenced by the cut of EUR 25 million in this budget compared with the initial proposal before the meeting with the Bureau .
Mr President , first of all , I should like to thank the rapporteurs for the work they have done on the budget .
Every budget is difficult , but against the backdrop of cuts in Member States , perhaps this budget is more difficult than normal .
Indeed , the coalition government in the UK will tomorrow announce savage cuts of around GBP 83 billion which will affect every single person in the UK .
We believe that is too quick , too soon and too much .
We all , however , know we have to be careful with EU spending and therefore we need to make sure that the EU spends its money wisely .
We also need to ensure that the EU and the European Parliament are able to carry out their responsibilities and that we are able to fund our priorities - priorities such as the Structural Funds and research and development which benefit individuals , communities and SMEs right across the EU .
All these things will also help us grow our way out of deficit and debt .
These items should not be seen as unnecessary spending , but as investments in our future .
Whilst Member States want to cut their way out of the crisis , we believe we can help create a different strategy : a strategy based on growing our way out of difficulties such as debt , deficit and growing unemployment .
Because we need to find funding for these priorities , we need , of course , to monitor unnecessary spending and administration costs .
When extra spending is justified , we should support it .
Let us remember that some of the extra expenditure the EU now has is the result of decisions supported by Member States , such as the External Action Service and the creation of three new financial governance agencies .
Where spending is unnecessary , we should oppose it .
This is true for the general budget , as well as the budget of the European Parliament .
The rapporteur has already given some examples of areas in which we have made efforts to make savings in Parliament 's budget .
I will just give one : releasing the reserve on the second tranche of EUR 1 500 per Member per month .
We need to get the full costs involved in employing extra staff before we consider releasing the reserve , and I would hope Members would support that view .
I would also hope that when they vote tomorrow , Members would look at every single amendment carefully to ensure we have the right balance between investment and carrying out our responsibilities as a Parliament , and careful public spending .
I am sure every Member would want to ensure that the EU adds value to Member State spending , as well as to individuals and communities .
Finally , I would hope that in the conciliation meetings , the Council will recognise that it needs to look not just at cuts , but also at investments and growth for jobs right across the EU , which we desperately need .
( SV ) I would like to thank the rapporteur , who has done an excellent job .
I would also like to thank the rapporteur for the Committee on Budgets , who led the negotiations extremely well .
These are difficult economic times we are experiencing at the moment , a fact to which my fellow Members have borne testimony .
On behalf of my group , I was responsible for what were termed ' other parts of the budget ' .
In difficult economic times , it is easy to end up with a symbolic debate on Parliament 's own costs and cost increases .
It is easily interpreted as populistic , but as my fellow Member from the United Kingdom pointed out , while assistant costs and the costs of the President 's representation are certainly not especially large if we consider the big picture and the EU budget , they do have a symbolic significance .
We should probably look at our own costs and refrain from increasing them during difficult economic times .
With regard to the draft budget in general , I would like to express my criticism of the Council .
I understand that the Council wanted to make certain cuts in this year 's budget .
It is completely logical for us not to want a 6 % increase , for instance , but , at the same time , it is not particularly consistent of us to make cuts in research and development and innovation when , as recently as last spring , we agreed , together , on the Europe 2020 strategy , in which these areas were the key focus .
Thus , the Council 's priorities for the 2011 budget seem to be somewhat illogical .
Finally , with regard to the debate about own resources , there are many of us in the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe who very much welcome this debate .
It is necessary .
We are currently having a kind of arm wrestling match over the financing of the budget , which is not particularly constructive .
It is good that we can now discuss other models for safeguarding the future EU budget .
( FR ) Mr President , the 2011 budget is the first Union budget under the new provisions of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Our rapporteurs have done some very good work on behalf of the European institutions , for which I thank them .
Our Parliament has managed to resist the pressures to impose budgetary austerity at the expense of our priorities , particularly in the area of sustainable development .
We welcome some of the amendments that have been approved .
As a Corsican Member , I therefore welcome the fact that European funds are henceforth available to the threatened languages in Europe , regardless of their status within their Member State .
We believe , also , that this EU budget raises debates which are essential for the future of Europe .
The vote in favour of the 2011 budget is , as far as we are concerned , a first step .
Parliament 's work is only just beginning .
Firstly , we must make our new powers work .
The Commission and the Heads of State have received interesting signals in this respect , notably concerning the ITER project .
Secondly , we must initiate a discussion , and consequently establish a balance of power , for our resources to be increased on the occasion of the forthcoming multiannual financial framework for 2014-2020 .
We need the Union to have its own resources such as a tax on financial transactions or the introduction of a European carbon tax .
The 2011 budget therefore introduces debates explicitly , even if they are only written in symbolically .
Through this budget , Parliament has taken the measure of its new responsibilities and is preparing for debates which will determine the future of the Union .
Mr President , the 2011 EU budget is the first to be prepared under the Lisbon Treaty , but it is not the first in the age of austerity .
The global financial crisis has revealed the deep structural weaknesses of the European development model , based on high taxes , high fiscal redistribution , inflexible labour markets and unnecessarily extended welfare provisions .
Now it is time to rethink and restructure fiscality , not only at the national level , but also at the European one .
The 2011 EU budget shows some signs of austerity but does not go far enough in structural change .
This is related to the fact that many people think that quantity is quality , namely , the bigger the spending , the better its impact on the European economy and society .
Moreover , they demand additional funds because the Lisbon Treaty and the Europe 2020 strategy imposed new mandates on the Community .
But there is a fundamental misunderstanding in this concept .
The EU budget is small compared to national ones - and rightfully so .
It does not need to grow in order to perform its functions .
What matters most is the structure of the budget and the effectiveness of spending .
Sharp focus on innovation , R & D , higher education , selected areas of energy transport , agriculture and rural development will do .
Our budget is completely dissimilar to national budgets , which have very little discretionary spending .
We do have a lot of discretion .
The EU budget should be regarded as a capital budget , rather than a current one .
It should focus only on investments in the common European future .
That is why our group feels strongly that the EU budget does not need to grow .
It never substitutes the national budgets representing national sovereignty .
There is no need for an EU-wide tax .
Taxes at the EU level would not substitute , but inevitably supplement , national taxation , increasing further the tax disadvantages of the European area compared to the rest of the world .
The ECR says no to bond issuance as well .
Debt securities imply debt and would open the door to deficits building up debt .
We have enough debt at the national level and even more unfunded liabilities .
We do not need additional layers of debt which would destroy the future of European youth and make Europe 's terminal decline irreversible .
The ECR agrees with the priorities of the 2011 budget as stated by the rapporteur - youth , education and mobility - but , if we take these goals seriously , it logically follows that what our young people need is definitely not a greater fiscal burden in the age of adverse demographics , but more solidarity and investment in our common future .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , this budget , just like the others , is determined by the limits of an extremely tight multiannual financial framework which , in practice , derails any possible economic and social cohesion .
An urgent mid-term review of this financial framework is therefore needed , as others have said here .
However , the proposed budget again falls short of the amount agreed in the multiannual financial framework .
Faced with the ever-worsening crisis , unemployment and living conditions for millions of people , all of us are thus once again aware what the much-vaunted European solidarity really means for some .
Either the budget is a tool for solidarity , reducing inequalities , promoting economic and social cohesion , employment and social progress , and thus serving the interests of workers and the people , or rather it is a tool for inequality , furthering neoliberal causes , job insecurity , unemployment , foreign interventionism and war , and thus an affront to the interests of workers and the people .
This is also the message pervading the growing struggles throughout Europe .
At the very outset , the smallness of this budget compromises its redistributive role , makes it devoid of justice , and exacerbates the pernicious effects of the policies that the EU has been pursuing .
Hence , we would like to say that there is an alternative to this budget , and one that is not only possible , but also increasingly necessary .
To this end , the various proposals that we have made include the creation of a European programme for employment and sustainable development , affecting 1 % of EU gross domestic product , with additional capital from the Member States .
The aim of this would be to achieve real convergence , promoting the potential of each country , the sustainable use of its resources , investment in production and the creation of jobs with rights .
( NL ) Madam President , the economic crisis has forced us to economise , as is very clear from the Member States ' budgets .
The European Parliament , on the other hand , is opting to increase the European Union budget for 2011 .
There is no justification for the fact that the rapporteurs at a high political level are still being accused of proposing excessively low amounts of money .
In addition , Parliament has been expressing its wish for the European Union to be more independent in the collection of its own resources .
The principle of Member States financing the European Union is thus under fire .
The Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament is proposing a financial transaction tax ( FTT ) , the proceeds of which would go to the EU budget .
However , an EU tax would be undesirable .
If a tax on banks were to be introduced , the proceeds would have to go towards paying off the high levels of public debt in Member States .
After all , it is they who have had to spend large amounts of money on bailing out the banks .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the EU budget for 2011 represents a challenge for everyone : Parliament , the Council and the Commission .
Since the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , the European Parliament has had more responsibility and more legislative work .
First of all , I would point out that the EU budget currently amounts to a little over 1 % of GNI .
I would like to comment on three points in particular .
Firstly , the EU 2011 budget has set priorities , which need to be strengthened in light of the economic problems throughout Europe following the structural crisis of recent years .
Above all , the reduction in the current level of unemployment in Europe must remain at the centre of our efforts , for example , through investment in the economy , industry , tourism and energy and climate policy , and by safeguarding existing jobs and creating new ones .
In this regard , I am thinking , in particular , of the priorities of youth , education and mobility .
We must give our attention to programmes like the lifelong learning programme or the Youth in Action programme .
They support the EU strategy for economic recovery and the EU 2020 strategy .
With better education - particularly education that provides them with qualifications - considerably better opportunities on the labour market will open up to young people .
Erasmus not only facilitates the acquisition of languages , but also mobility - which is essential in an age of globalisation .
However , with regard to mobility , young people are also required to take responsibility , and this programme ought to be utilised a lot more .
Secondly , the main goal of the common agricultural policy must continue to be to maintain market stability and food security .
Last but not least , my third point is that money is tight in these difficult economic times .
As I have said many times before , we need to streamline bureaucracy in every possible area , and we need to find synergies with the Member States and utilise them .
( FR ) Madam President , Ministers , Commissioner , by adopting these amendments to the draft budget for 2011 , the Committee on Budgets wanted to act responsibly .
We understand , Minister , the positions of governments .
In all the countries , brave and unpopular policies are being implemented to reduce deficits which have become unacceptable .
The European Parliament has lent its support to these policies .
In a context such as this , we cannot ask Member States to increase their taxes or their debt to fund a significant increase in the European budget .
Thus , for the first time in 20 years , the European Parliament will not vote for any amendment that exceeds the ceilings of the current financial perspective .
Similarly , where the Council has reached a symbolic increase of 0.2 % of commitment appropriations , the Committee on Budgets proposes 0.8 % in current euros , that is , a reduction in volume .
As for payments , Minister , the European Parliament will listen carefully to the Council whose clear message has been understood .
In return , the European Parliament expects a similar sense of responsibility on the part of the Council .
The Treaty of Lisbon confers new or greater powers on the European Union : a common energy policy , a common foreign and security policy , a common immigration policy , a common space policy , etc .
Would it be responsible to have the citizens believe that these policies are to be implemented without devoting a single euro to them before the second half of this decade ?
The ambitious Europe 2020 programme was adopted unanimously last July by the European Council .
Is it responsible to turn up six months later without the slightest idea about how it will be funded ?
We observe that the financing of the European budget by levies on national budgets has led today to a political and financial deadlock .
Would it be responsible to refuse to develop this system further ?
In our view , negotiations on the 2011 budget , the first budget under the provisions of the Treaty of Lisbon , should also be accompanied by a political agreement to guarantee the future funding of the Union 's policies , agreement on a review of the financial perspectives from 2012 to supplement the funding of projects already under way , such as ITER or Galileo , and to start to fund new powers from the Treaty of Lisbon and the priorities of Europe 2020 , along with agreement to open the debate on the reform of own resources .
Parliament called for this reform three years ago .
We are pleased that the Commission is taking some timid first steps in putting on the table some of the possible options .
Let us agree to work on this together , between the three institutions with the help of the national parliaments .
We need an agreement on the procedure and a timetable within this global agreement which , like the Council , we are advocating passionately .
( BG ) As my fellow Members have already mentioned , the European Union 's 2011 budget is being approved using a new procedure on which the European Parliament and Council must find a common consensus .
The European Parliament fully recognises this particular point .
During the discussions in the Committee on Budgets , we adopted a very responsible attitude and we did not do what is the most normal thing for every single member of every parliament to do , which is to ask for more resources , as we then come into conflict with the representatives of the executive .
On the contrary , we recognised that in the climate of an economic recession where national budgets are under the constant pressure of restrictions , the European Union 's budget must set an example on this .
The appeal from Member States , which reflects that from European citizens , is for every opportunity to be found for prudence and greater efficiency when spending public resources .
We found every opportunity to increase efficiency .
The outcome of this is what we proposed .
For the first time ever , the European Parliament is being so responsible right from the start of the budget debate .
At the same time , I expect that the Council will also assess its positions once again .
We must not forget that there are limits to increased efficiency .
A reduction in resources means a reduction in political ambitions .
What kind of signal is the Council giving by proposing a drastic reduction in resources in paragraph 1a ?
These are the resources specifically intended for innovation and smart growth , which also provides the basis for all the national programmes for exiting the recession and for the Europe 2020 strategy .
How can these objectives be achieved with the budget being reduced ?
This means in practical terms that we are rejecting a number of Europe 's priorities .
When are we honest with European citizens ?
When the Council officially announces new policies , grants European institutions new functions or when it is not agreed for resources to be reduced ?
During recent years , the European budget has been an increasingly smaller part of the EU 's economy .
At the same time , there has been an increase in the number of functions invested in the European Union .
Consequently , this raises the issue that the budget is a basic instrument for achieving certain political objectives .
It is not an end in itself .
The European budget provides added value to taxpayers .
It achieves much more than can be achieved with the same resources if they are spent by 27 Member States .
A direct connection cannot be made between European and national budgets .
The current reduction in expenditure in national budgets is a consequence of their increase last year .
This did not happen with the European budget , which is much more stable .
( DE ) Madam President , I would like , in particular , to thank the two rapporteurs .
As many fellow Members have already said , it would seem that we are using the equation ' more money equals better policies ' .
However , I believe that precisely the opposite is true , in other words , that better policies justify more money .
It needs to be the case that the money we make available is spent in an efficient way .
Regarding that as an essential criterion , together with the corresponding controls , will also lead to success .
There is no point in us financing sacred cows such as the agricultural budget and structural and cohesion policy if we do not , at the same time , reform and modernise them .
Many of my fellow Members have said - and I absolutely agree with them - that we need to focus on the areas of research and development , renewable energies , energy security and educational mobility .
With regard to the subject of discipline , allow me to return once again to the agreement reached in Deauville , because discipline is something that we must also expect from the Member States .
The news service AFP quoted a French representative : ' There are Ayatollahs in Germany who take a Prussian hard line on such questions ' , he said , referring to the unyielding position of the German Government .
Personally , I doubt that the French representative of Europe has such a savoir vivre belief that money that we do not have should be given out freely and future generations be made to pay for debts incurred today .
I cannot believe that that is what the Member States want to do , and it is also high time we demonstrated that in the relevant budget negotiations by showing the discipline that we called for and displayed in May .
Madam President , congratulations to the rapporteurs in what are very trying and difficult financial circumstances , as we have heard in the debate this afternoon .
At a time when the British Government is proposing the most wide-ranging budget cuts in a generation we , as Conservatives , have been calling for a freeze on European spending .
We believe that the European Union budget must be used to add genuine value in areas such as securing economic growth now , and recovery in the future , stability in the EU and around the world , reducing global poverty and fighting the shared challenge of climate change .
Furthermore , we have tabled amendments to the budget resolution where we want clarification in three specific areas : on the costs , for example , of Parliament 's external offices in the Member States ; disquiet about non-governmental organisations ' funding , on which we would like a report from the European Commission ; and last , but not least , the generous pension arrangements in the Staff Regulations , including those for retiring Commissioners .
These are issues on which we want clarification in the months ahead .
With regard to the broader view , we have had a press release from the European Commission this afternoon .
Firstly , we believe that this is not an opportune moment to think about additional own resources in the midst of the worst financial crisis in the last 70 years .
Second , Mr Commissioner , while saying ' yes ' , we need more flexibility , and ' yes ' , we want to have more emphasis on the results and the inputs , how is that compatible with calling for a 10-year financial perspective when we see the results of a mid-term review are entirely fruitless in this kind of exercise that we are going through ?
We cannot set figures in stone ten years ahead when we do not even know what the European economy is going to look like in two years .
Lastly , as far as my country is concerned , our net contribution is rising by 60 % in the next two years , but we have had no concomitant change in the CAP .
Why should it be any different this year ?
We should be calling for a net cap on our contribution until we have a fair system for the EU budget .
( EL ) Madam President , we know that the EU budget is the main tool used to implement political orientations and priorities .
We also know that the nature of the budget is dictated in essence by the financial framework 2007-2013 .
Thus , from a political point of view , it is an inflexible tool .
However , what we fail to grasp - if I may say so - is the following absurdity : throughout the biggest of financial crises , to which families and workers , small and medium-sized enterprises and young people have fallen victim , all the proposals made , from the Commission through to the Council , are confined to incentives for private sector companies .
All these years , surely it is the dogmatism of the so-called free market and the ambitious Lisbon strategy which have been to blame for acute unemployment and the increase in poverty and underemployment ?
Where have we got all these years by putting the focus on equipment and a strategic approach to international regulations , which is maintained in the proposed budget ?
If the existing model is a failure , why not propose bold social change ?
Finally , I should like to draw your attention to the problem of the people who went missing in Cyprus following the Turkish invasion and events between 1963 and 1967 which led to the partitioning of the island .
We welcome the fact that the European Parliament has again approved an appropriation of EUR 3 million for the Committee on Missing Persons in Cyprus .
This will be a matter for both Turkish Cypriots and Greek Cypriots .
However , I must stress that Turkey needs to allow the fate of our missing persons to be cleared up in a systematic and dedicated manner and to provide all the information which is classified as military secrets .
( NL ) Madam President , I represent in this House the population that makes proportionally the highest net contribution of taxpayers ' money to the European Union .
Each Fleming makes a net contribution of approximately EUR 290 per annum to safeguard the functioning of the European institutions .
We Flemings are the champions among European taxpayers .
Therefore , I consider it particularly unacceptable that , as early as the first paragraphs , the present report wags a finger at people who dare to ask questions - justified questions - about the magnitude of the European Union 's contribution and about the benefit of much of the European Union 's expenditure .
It is anything but certain that taxpayers ' money is spent any more efficiently at European level than at levels closer to the taxpayer ; indeed , the reverse is true .
The way in which the EU administrative colossus is still being enlarged is also unacceptable as far as I am concerned , particularly now that princely salaries and allowances are being paid in all those European institutions .
This is not to mention the European subsidies ; for example EUR 1 billion per annum for NGOs , to whom scarcely any efficiency criteria apply .
All the EU Member States face having to make huge fiscal efforts and economies .
We might expect much greater efforts on the part of the European Union , but evidently we consider ourselves a cut above the riffraff .
This is yet another missed opportunity for Parliament and the European Union .

( DE ) Madam President , with regard to what Mr Vanhecke said , I am tempted to say what a low insurance premium this is for Flemish EU citizens , because the EU guarantees peace , freedom , prosperity and hopefully also respect and tolerance for everyone in the European Union .
We are debating the 2011 budget at a time when we are consolidating public budgets .
Even though the structure of the European budget is not , of course , at all comparable with the structures of the national budgets , we also need to be restrained , and we must nevertheless talk about areas of focus for the future .
This is indeed where the balancing act lies .
The refusal of the Commission and the Council to carry out a review and revision would de facto result in a late entry into force of the budgetary aspects of the Treaty of Lisbon .
At a time of globalisation when it is a question of the economic and political survival of the European Union , this is not an adequate response to questions concerning the future .
In the conciliation , we will finally have the opportunity , I hope , to talk sensibly and equally about added value and subsidiarity , about positive and negative priorities and , at the same time , about the urgent political requirements .
Alongside this , we also need to discuss adjustment of the budgetary interinstitutional agreement ( IIA ) .
We need to agree on a procedure for how we will , in future , discuss and decide on the multiannual financial framework together .
We need more flexibility on the basis of points 21 and 23 of the IIA .
Furthermore - my apologies Commission - if your document states that the utilisation of the EU budget for the stability mechanism represents an innovative use of the EU budget , I would say that , in principle , this represents a circumvention of Parliament .
That is something that we will also have to work on .
I have a final and very important comment to make to the Council .
You are complaining that we have made reductions in connection with ITER .
However , we want a reliable multiannual solution for ITER , but you should not complain about current cuts while the management structures of ITER are poor .
This needs to be sorted out first and then we will find a sensible solution , but not one that is divided into small portions and distributed over three years .
( ES ) Madam President , we implement new policies , we accept new challenges , we make commitments to third countries , but when the moment of truth comes , you do not want to fund them with fresh money .
It seems that the instructions from the Council and the Commission are to look after the new priorities but cut the previous ones .
We do not agree with this attitude .
Moreover , I believe that it can only have two explanations : either there is a lack of responsibility for the actual decisions that have been made , or we could believe that there is an anti-European feeling that is more or less disguised .
To those in the first category , I would say that when one accepts a commitment , one should then fulfil it .
We cannot , therefore , agree to the most recent need being dealt with 100 % while we forget about those which are apparently less current .
As for those whose sole objective is to cut the European Union budget , I would ask them to think twice .
I know that some people are doing this because they do not believe in European integration .
In fact , some people , as we have unfortunately seen in this House , do not like the idea of building anything together .
They prefer to work for themselves , without caring about their neighbours .
However , for now , they are in a minority .
In any case , the Conciliation Committee will have to take a decision , and we agree on the fundamental issues .
We , too , want to finance the international thermonuclear experimental reactor ( ITER ) .
The question is , how ?
Do we fund the new priorities by cutting the previous ones , as the Council and Commission want us to do , or do we do it properly ?
We reached an agreement and found EUR 1.8 billion for the European Economic Recovery Plan .
Why do we now have to cut the framework research programme in order to fund the ITER ?
Let us be consistent .
We cannot announce the Europe 2020 strategy amidst a great deal of hype , seeking sustainable growth from an economic , social and environmental point of view and attempting to achieve what the Lisbon strategy failed to achieve , and then immediately go on to cut , for example , research expenditure , in order to fund other research expenditure .
They are justifying this to us by saying that we are in an era of cuts .
However , the thing is that they cut the budget every year , and the current financial framework was adopted in 2005 when we were in a period of economic boom !
That is why we are arguing over a few hundred million euro : because of their lack of ambition in 2005 and because we are in a period of crisis .
They should not tell us that the treasuries of the Member States are going to go bankrupt due to the efforts that we are asking for .
I just want to point out that we are talking about a budgetary effort equivalent to 0.003 % of the Union 's gross national product .
I think that is quite acceptable .
( FI ) Madam President , Commissioner , while this budget has been going through the process of being drafted , we have heard from several quarters that the European Union should be tightening its belt in view of the current economic maelstrom .
We cannot , however , content ourselves with a recession budget , in which we would have to go back on our common commitments , and possibly our international commitments too .
What is especially worrying about the Council 's cuts has been the fact that they are targeted , among other things , at research and development , as mentioned previously .
Just because the Member States want to see economic growth and less public debt , that does not entitle us to let our priorities go to waste .
While the storm rages , we need to be able to look to the future more determinedly .
This has proven to be a good formula in my own country , Finland , for example .
The Lisbon objectives mentioned the figure of 3 % of GDP as the target for research and development .
At present , it stands at around 1.9 % in the EU as a whole .
An increase of 1 % has been estimated to create up to several million jobs .
We thus have every reason to try to achieve this very important and ambitious target .
In my view , the 2011 budget , which is being put to the vote tomorrow , shows that the Committee on Budgets thinks it important that we also try in future to create growth via the regions .
That is why the Council 's cuts in regional development are completely untenable .
I would hope that the Council also appreciates the importance of regional policy and its strong link to the Europe 2020 strategy .
( CS ) I would like to make three comments on the preparation of the European budget for next year .
In my opinion , we must try to take the following action .
First , the European Parliament must take into account the real economic situation in the Member States - the fact that , in most states of the European Union , the economy is either declining or stagnating , and that in only a few countries is it growing .
We must bear this fact in mind , and we therefore cannot ask for an increase in European spending in a situation where resources are scarce .
Second , the European Parliament must continue the tradition of balanced management of European budgets .
It is good that we have balanced budgets , and that we do not have to face the necessity of bailing out our debts like almost all the Member States .
Third , the European Parliament should discuss the budget in such a way that we can proceed to approve it as usual at the final plenary session before Christmas .
The certainty of the approved budget is important for economic stability in Europe , and we should be able to support it in this way .

( IT ) Madam President , Mr Wathelet , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would first of all like to thank Mrs Jędrzejewska and the other Members for the excellent work they have done in recent months , which has made it possible to define a position on the 2011 budget - first , the Commission 's budget and , tomorrow , Parliament 's .
In my view , the starting point for European action on the budget must be the concept of European added value , which , as you know , means that Europe 's spending must generate clear , visible benefits for the Union and its citizens .
In that respect , it should be emphasised that the introduction of new policies and the enhancement of powers already recognised throughout the Union , such as the results of the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , have made it plainer than ever that an adequate budget is needed .
I therefore believe that the European budget should remain large enough to achieve results that could not be accomplished by means of any other spending at national or local level .
That is even more important at a time of crisis like now , when the Member States are committed to the difficult task of keeping spending under control and balancing their own budgets , and when the Committee on Budgets has given ample proof of its careful and responsible policy by keeping within the limits of the multiannual financial framework for the first time in 20 years .
Parliament has decided to follow the Commission 's initial position in many respects , while also providing for a number of increases to finance its own priorities proposed since March 2010 , such as youth , mobility , research and innovation .
It has therefore eliminated the cuts proposed by the Council , which were often applied indiscriminately and even in key budget lines , as in the case of the accounting clearance under heading 2 , revealing a lack of clear , reasoned political decision making underpinning the proposal .
I also believe the budget for the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) needs to be kept at its current level , particularly in view of the next revision of the CAP , due after 2013 , which will require an adequate level of funding in line , therefore , with the amount provided in the current budget .
Madam President , I do not know what really happened , but I would like to speak as a draftsperson for the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy ( ITRE ) .
I am very happy to offer the PSE Group time because this is a rare case when the European Socialists , the ITRE Committee and the Committee on Budgets unanimously agreed .
So I can speak as whatever .
The unanimous agreement is there .
Regarding Chapter 1a and Chapter 5 on R & D management , we all think that it is just not acceptable to have the cut Council introduced compared to the Commission draft proposal .
Cuts are simply not acceptable in the fields of economic recovery and economic stimulus , any policies regarding entrepreneurs and SME policies on the Digital Agenda , innovation policies , R & D policies , space policies and programmes like ITER .
The budget has to be in line with the fine words of our treaty and of our policies like EU 2020 , the great Innovation Union , digital access to all , the Next Generation Network , and so forth .
Our words have to be in line with the numbers provided in the budget .
So the budget has to be in line with the challenges of the global world in the 21st century .
We can stop Europe , but we cannot stop the world developing and there is therefore unanimous agreement in our committee - first , to ask for the budget to be restored to the Commission proposal - which was already a compromise because we would have needed more - and then , to find additional resources for the new policies under the Lisbon Treaty , namely the space policy and ITER .
The show must go on .
We are prepared , in the conciliation procedure , to find a compromise which is best for European citizens living in the 21st century .
( NL ) Madam President , my party does not see any need for the budget for 2011 to be any larger than the one for 2010 ; it is not necessary .
What we do want , however , is for the funds to be spent much more shrewdly , in a way that enables us to really achieve European added value .
Unfortunately , the Council has not done so .
On the contrary , it has maintained the very areas where the future does not lie - agriculture and cohesion - and is economising on knowledge , innovation , sustainability and energy : the very investments that will determine our competitive position in the future .
I am not surprised , therefore , that no less than seven Member States voted against the Council common position .
As you all know , the budget is cast in stone and we , Parliament , have virtually no flexibility to shuffle things between chapters .
The Council , too , has already complained about this .
It is also very regrettable that the review of the current financial perspective is only ready today , much too late to introduce that flexibility .
The result of all this is that , as far as I am concerned , Parliament has no choice .
We do have to increase the necessary investments in knowledge , innovation , sustainability and energy , resulting in a larger budget ; but the Council leaves us no choice .
Finally , Madam President , we need to be given our own resources , as that is the only way of inducing the Council to change its mind .
( PL ) We are talking about the new European Union budget in the context of the crisis of public finances in very many Member States and in the context of very serious cuts in national budgets , so it is not strange that we are also looking for such cuts in the Union budget .
I would just like to draw attention to the fact that the most effective and the strongest anti-crisis instrument which we have available is the common market .
A sustainable common market can be achieved faster by using investments in the area of cohesion policy and with structural investments .
Therefore , please do not seek cuts in those areas where we are not dealing either with social aid policy or with the squandering of money but with investments which are helping us to gain all the benefits from the common market , a market which we enlarged in 2004 and 2007 .
There is one more thing .
We are talking , today , about the new budget in the context of building diplomatic institutions .
Please do not expect that MEPs from Central Europe will lend unconditional support to an increase in spending on the External Action Service in a situation when their interests and their countries are not going to be equally represented in these new institutions .

( DE ) Madam President , Mr Wathelet , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in the 2011 budget , the most important thing is public opinion in the Member States , and we must give the Council credit for that - you have done very well in this regard .
You presented a figure of minus 2.77 % , but that is pure nonsense to the national parliaments that are unfamiliar with this .
In other words , you have made cuts where there was too much money on the line anyway , and afterwards the European Parliament , which is trying in good faith to cancel these cuts , becomes the villain , so to speak , and gets the blame for this .
That is all rather ingenious , but much too transparent for you to be able to succeed in this .
As a member of the Committee on Budgetary Control , I cannot see any sign that the Council is interested in an EU budget that is better in the long term .
Where then is our joint monitoring and where is our joint budgetary control ?
As far as the Council is concerned , that is not working out .
I would like to request - and here I am appealing to my fellow Members in particular , because tomorrow we will also be talking about the reserves - for us to refine our control mechanisms .
My concern here is , above all , the administrative budget , simply because the focus is always very heavily on this in the Member States , too .
Since 2007 , we have had screening of staff in the area of administration and in the area of coordination .
We must continue to carry out this screening .
We have once again created a reserve for this .
The Commission has 100 official director-general posts - 100 since the summer .
According to its own benchmark , however , it is only permitted to have 87 .
Another reserve will serve to demand that the Commission go back to its own figure of 87 .
We have said that we need better monitoring of the implementation of EU law in the Member States , because compliance with the law is a cornerstone of the European Union .
There is also a reserve for this .
We need to ask ourselves what will become of the Directorate-General for Development with the establishment of the External Action Service , and what will happen to the EuropeAid Cooperation Office ?
Many people are sitting around there , and if we are not careful , just as many people will still be sitting in the delegations from the Commission as from the External Action Service .
So far , we have only achieved an increase in efficiency in the External Action Service of 1 % , whereas the target is 10 % .
Here , too , we would have a rewarding joint task , which I warmly invite the Council to carry out .

( DE ) Madam President , Mr Wathelet , Commissioner , I believe that we are all agreed , even the gentlemen and the few ladies among the Eurosceptic to anti-Europe fractions of this House , that the EU performs important tasks and that the performance of these tasks represents European added value , because the nation states either cannot perform them or the final beneficiaries would not receive this money from the nation states .
The latter scenario is due , in particular , to the fact that the Member States would not invest savings , but would have to use them to reduce debt , whereas the European budget is largely an investor .
Thus , if we want to achieve the goals that are set here every week , we need an ambitious budget , and that means not less money , but more money in future .
In this connection , I believe it is important to emphasise that the national budgets and the European budget are complementary to one another .
The Council and the Member States behave as if money that goes into the European budget more or less disappears into a large black hole .
That is not the case ; it is invested in goals that we have previously agreed on here .
We therefore also need , as Mr Böge proposes , a critical examination of the medium-term financial programme .
This , of course , can only serve to show that the Council cannot say ' yes ' to the Treaty of Lisbon while , at the same time , putting forward one or other project for financing and then saying : but you will not get any money for its implementation .
If it is not possible , then we will resort to the necessary deletions of the budget lines that Parliament does not regard as priorities .
Ladies and gentlemen , we will have this discussion again and again while the EU does not have sufficient funds of its own .
What is important - no , essential - is that these own resources do not impose an additional burden on normal wage earners .
As a Social Democrat , I am in favour of the introduction of a financial transaction tax , because in general , this will not affect normal wage earners and it will help to put the brakes on the financial market .
We firmly believe that those who triggered a crisis , the like of which we have never seen before , and the costs of which we all have to pay out of the public budgets of our own Member States , should be called on to compensate for these losses .
( CS ) All levels of government , starting with local authorities , must save .
All European governments , without exception , are being forced to reduce state spending .
This applies not only to the much-discussed situation in Greece , which has managed to reduce its budget deficit for the first six months of this year by 46 % , but also to the Czech Republic , Germany , Ireland and all the others .
Incidentally , the European Commission itself frequently says to the Member States : ' Tame your public finances quickly ! '
I therefore consider it quite unreasonable that , at a time of persistent economic crisis , the European Commission has proposed once again to increase the European budget for 2011 .
After all , Europe must save too .
For obvious reasons , of course , there is no agreement on where to make savings .
In my opinion , it should not be in regional policy , but rather in European administration , promotional costs and costs relating to the Brussels bureaucracy , which come to almost 7 % .
It is administrative expenses which traditionally lead to most disagreement , and in this respect , unfortunately , my perception is different from the majority in Parliament .
( FR ) Madam President , to act on the decision by Parliament , last week , to refuse to grant budgetary discharge to the European Police College ( CEPOL ) for 2008 , Parliament will now strengthen its position by freezing part of CEPOL 's budget .
We shall endeavour to ensure that the reserve proposed by the Committee on Budgets reaches its target .
In other words , we shall endeavour to ensure that a portion of the CEPOL budget is unfrozen depending on the answers that the agency provides to our requests in the demand for discharge .
Our vote on Wednesday is therefore a further tool available to Parliament to oblige the College to provide proof of its reliability .
I would like to point out at this juncture the 610 % increase , in the period 2000-2010 , in additional contributions to decentralised agencies .
The contributions have thus increased from EUR 95 to 579 million , even though staff numbers of those agencies increased by around 271 % .
In 2000 , the agencies employed 1 219 persons and today , they employ 4 794 individuals .
While Europe is facing budgetary constraints absorbed at national level , the rationalisation of agencies in terms of powers , effectiveness and evaluation of their remits should be broached and Parliament must bring forward proposals .
The question , today , is whether CEPOL , under current circumstances , should continue to exist .
As politicians , we must define the European rules so that the budget allocated to the Community agencies is spent as effectively as possible .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it is very important to make a success of this budget procedure , not just because it is the first budget under the Treaty of Lisbon , with a new procedure and new functions for the European Union , but especially because it comes at a crucial time for the future of Europe , affected as it has been by a severe crisis .
Faced with the crisis , many governments think of an economic governance model based entirely on stability mechanisms , which means cutting their national budgets and perhaps also the European budget .
We , on the other hand , think that a stronger European budget , supported by own resources and also a financial transaction tax , is a precondition for effective European economic governance and for greater discipline in national budgets .
We must therefore decide which way to go , and to that end , the amendments that the President-in-Office of the Council has considered inappropriate are , in fact , extremely important .
However , the greatest disagreements concern the figures , of course .
In this respect , I would urge the Council to make up its mind , because it cannot want to keep strictly to the margins and , at the same time , expect Parliament not to bring its own priorities into play .
The Treaty of Lisbon is quite clear on this : the Council is paramount as regards the quantity of spending , whereas Parliament has the last word on the quality of spending .
Thinking about heading 4 , we are not against increasing funding for the common foreign and security policy ( CFSP ) or for the Industrialised Countries Instrument ( ICI + ) , but we do not want it to be at the expense of our priorities : first Palestine and then development cooperation .
The Council therefore has three options to choose from : it can accept Parliament 's priorities , or it can agree to a revision of the margins , or it can accept greater flexibility of the budget and in the budget , in the knowledge that Parliament will stand united in defence of its prerogatives and priorities .
( PT ) Madam President , Minister , Commissioner , the economic recovery of Europe can only be achieved through an ambitious budget that strengthens key areas like education , young people , and scientific research and innovation .
I am pleased with Parliament 's 2011 draft budget , which is being discussed today , as it dwells precisely on the stated priorities , and I congratulate the rapporteur on this .
For the first time , Parliament is on an equal footing with the Council on these matters .
This is the first budget following the Treaty of Lisbon .
For this reason , and due to the crisis that Europe is experiencing , it is important that the reconciliation process is successful .
It is vital that the EU is given a budget for the implementation of priority areas and the new powers that were bestowed upon it by the treaty , such as energy , space and foreign policy .
It is important to fight for our convictions ; for a budget that is visionary in a time of crisis .
Parliament 's proposal reflects this ambition .
Only by strengthening these areas , such as science and innovation , and by contributing to economic growth and to more and better jobs can we make Europe a more attractive place to live and work .
( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , as our debate again shows , we are all in agreement on one thing : the more Europe enlarges , the greater the powers entrusted to it , the more it displays its ambitions and the fewer resources it has to bring them to fruition .
So everyone agrees on the diagnosis , but clearly we are not in agreement about what we need to do to extricate ourselves from this financial deadlock .
As what was short-term has lasted , the Union budget has become a prisoner of national contributions , which make up almost 75 % of its resources .
Today , if we decided to raise the expenditure ceiling to the maximum threshold allowed by the treaties , this would mean an additional levy of more than 5 billion for countries like France and Germany .
Everyone here clearly agrees that this is not possible .
It is not a question of stepping up discipline , as it is the people and , principally , the poorest people who pay the highest price for the consequences of these national austerity policies .
Considering that the financial sector bears the main responsibility for the crisis and explosion in public debt , the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament proposes that a line of ' own resources ' should be created funded by a financial transactions tax ; this proposal was rejected within the Committee on Budgets by the right , which may make up for it tomorrow and bring its actions into line with the numerous statements they have made to the media in favour of this measure .
It is a little more than two years since the fall of Lehman Brothers , and Parliament must not pass up an historic opportunity to create the foundations for a new development model , based on more lasting resources and certainly ones that are more just in terms of redistribution of wealth and solidarity .
For the first budget voted on under the Treaty of Lisbon , this would send a strong political signal from our Parliament , which does not intend to make do with using its new codecision powers to manage penury , that is , to choose which of Peter or Paul is to go without clothing .
Giving oneself the means , starting tomorrow , to increase the size of the Union budget , is to give oneself the means to pursue ambitious economic recovery , research , industrial , and employment policies .
Let us not fail to grasp this opportunity that European citizens expect of us and which , in any case , the financial operators are expecting of us .

( EL ) Madam President , Mr Wathelet , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we all agree that , in the current economic crisis , the present multiannual financial framework has repeatedly proven to be inadequate when it comes to financing numerous important political priorities .
Negotiations on the 2011 budget are being conducted at a particularly difficult time .
On the one hand , several Member States are pressing for cuts , due to the economic crisis while , on the other , there are already significant shortfalls in important budget sectors , such as growth , employment and foreign relations .
The economic and social crisis has hit the whole of Europe and the only possible response , therefore , is a European response , via a Community budget which has all the necessary means at its disposal .
That is why we socialists tabled proposals for a more ambitious approach than that taken by the Council in terms of commitments , especially on employment , innovation and research .
Commitments are an expression of the level of the EU 's political ambition .
Its budget is a budget which supports investment .
It cannot be seen as a burden on national budgets ; on the contrary , it represents added value to the budgets of the Member States .
It is an expression of solidarity between the Member States , especially in times of crisis , when the EU budget can play a decisive role in combating the economic situation throughout the European Union , especially in the Member States facing the biggest difficulties .
( SK ) I am the head of a regional authority in my own country .
As a result of the economic crisis , we have 25 % less in the regional budget than last year .
We should not therefore wonder at the voices from the regions talking of the need to cut the European Union budget as well .
However , we all surely know that the funding of many policies is cheaper and more effective if we avoid fragmenting our forces and if we finance them from a common European budget , and not from the budgets of the Member States .
These are the resources we are looking for .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Treaty of Lisbon has an impact on the work of several European institutions .
Already in negotiations on the budget procedure for 2010 , we agreed that we would preferentially use the reserve in heading 5 for financing costs arising from the Treaty of Lisbon .
As the main rapporteur for the European Union budget for 2010 for the other institutions , I asked the Council in the trialogues on 30 June to take a stance over the amending budget relating to the consequences of the Treaty of Lisbon for the European Economic and Social Committee and for the Committee on the Regions .
The Council has so far failed to take a position on this budget .
This approach is creating serious problems in respect of the fulfilment of roles for which the institutions are responsible .
The solution , unfortunately not until some future date , could be to revise the financial instruments , as the same approach which applies to the budget must also apply to the amending budgets .


Madam President , Mr Wathelet , Commissioner , Mr Lewandowski , during this parliamentary term , I have been rapporteur for the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs with regard to the budget and I can tell you that I cannot fully understand some of the speeches that I have just heard .
Of course , as Members of the European Parliament , we consider ourselves to be in a position of solidarity with the Member States , which are having to cope with and announce significant backward steps in their budgets .
We are , naturally , prepared also to go along this difficult route of announcing these decisions .
However , if you look at the budget for the new European agencies , for example , then you will discover that you cannot make savings because , on the contrary , we have additional expenditure to cope with .
With regard to the second point relating to European statistics , the Council has been trying for years to brush these aside to a certain extent and to avoid them .
Today , we can see that putting more money into European statistics would have been a sound investment .
I am not saying that to put the blame on you alone .
However , I do believe that in the next few weeks , we need a debate that goes through the individual subject-specific points and does not attach importance to the percentage points of savings in Europe , because ultimately , it needs to be our goal that the people of Europe benefit jointly from a common budgetary policy of the Member States and the European Union .
We await your proposals in this regard .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this House is preparing to vote on the first budget of the Lisbon era .
This powerful instrument that the treaty has placed at our disposal coincides with the worst economic situation that Europe has seen since 1929 .
We have to make sure that this dire economic crisis does not turn into an even more dreadful political crisis .
If the trialogue were not successful and the amounts available in the 2011 budget were the 2010 amounts divided into twelfths , the distribution and operation of the structural funds would become quite complicated , and the European External Action Service would even be in danger of not getting off the ground .
All that should make us think .
We welcome the important work done by the rapporteur , Mrs Jędrzejewska , to whom we are grateful , not least for her efforts to focus the European Union 's resources on youth , research and innovation .
We must never forget , however , how important it is for us , first of all , to set an example of healthy , disciplined management of our finances , as far as possible avoiding waste and perhaps even structural duplication , which our citizens would not understand and which would certainly not benefit the future Europe .
Madam President , the report says ' the EU budget should in no way be perceived as a burden to national budgets . '
For countries like the UK that are forced to endure cuts in expenditure at home , any increase in the EU budget would be inappropriate , let alone the original 5.9 % increase proposed .
A money terms cut or a freeze would probably be more appropriate .
The United Kingdom has had a double dose of the bitter pill .
We have seen our rebate reduced by a third in the last year alone , making us even more of a net contributor than we were .
It has been said that while the EU has been a net contributor , the new member countries have been net recipients , for which , of course , their peoples cannot be blamed .
In light of that undeniable fact , would it not be madness to continue to pursue expansion to include even poorer , and undeniably burdensome , countries like Turkey which are not , by any stretch of the imagination , even European ?
( SL ) I understand that the budget has to be adopted and I also understand the argument that it must not be inflated and that it has to be reasonable .
However , what I do not understand is why , at this point in time , after the Treaty of Lisbon has been ratified , the Council has failed to make more of an effort to coordinate the budget , i.e. budget items , with Parliament .
I can also understand that cuts have to be made in some areas of our common policy , but I do not understand why education and mobility , in particular , have to be the victims of cuts to what is known as soft policy .
As you know , the Erasmus programme began life in 1987 , when 3 000 students took part in the programme .
By 2012 , however , that number will have risen to 3 million and , for 2020 , we are planning some 15 million student exchange opportunities .
What mobility allows us to do is strengthen the European dimension and , in turn , improve the quality of education systems and knowledge in general .
So how can we achieve the major objectives we set ourselves in the Europe 2020 strategy while simultaneously cutting funding in these areas ?






Member of the Commission . - Madam President , just a short response to Ms Andreasen , Mr Hartong , Mr Belder , Mr Vanhecke , Mr Fajmon , Mr Vlasák and Mr Brons - the latter being in opposition to Parliament 's position on the budget and the proposal of the Commission .
Ninety six per cent of the modest increase for 2011 is concentrated in the area conducive to growth and jobs .
These are bills to be paid , a sort of legal obligation .
What is more , it is filling the gap in investment , a shortage in the credit market at national level where investment is the first to be cut .
Therefore , I think there is added value in these very modest increases and the measure of responsibilities , considering the project is EUR 4 billion below the ceiling agreed in 2005-2006 for the year 2011 .
What should be known is that 6 % out of the total is administrative expenditure out of a budget equal to 1 % of GDP .
That means that 94 % is delivered to the beneficiaries .
That should be known when discussing the future of the European budget .
I am inviting both branches of the budgetary power to come closer in the coming weeks as we enter conciliation and prove that the Lisbon Treaty is a compromise machinery .
Madam President , it is impossible to reply to all the questions put to the Council .
I am simply going to reiterate a certain number of principles that I had come to raise here in the debate when we presented the Council 's budget .
It should be stated again that all the appropriations adopted by the Council are based on the implementation of the 2010 budget , and that , for all lines , in fact , provision has been made for a number of amendments by way of letters of amendment within the framework of the implementation of the 2011 budget .
We are living through difficult times , where growth in budgets is limited and , as you are aware , the increase of 2.91 % , which was agreed on within the Council , was won by a very , very small majority .
The scope for additional or other kinds of majority is virtually non-existent .
We should therefore be able to keep the opportunity open , over the year , to develop the budget by letters of amendments , in the course of its implementation .
Heading 1b has often been mentioned .
I remind you that the Council pledged , in a statement , to ensure that the development of the implementation of budget 1b was evaluated , and that is why we wish to stick to this and to witness this reality and its implementation .
However , as I said in my introduction , the debate on the 2011 budget will not be linked solely to the 2011 budget as such .
The other elements linked to the budget will be subject to debate .
We are going to have a discussion on the budget review .
Evidently , all the questions raised within the budget review , and particularly those concerning own resources , will be the focus of debates that we must have together .
Another item within the budget review , the question of flexibility , for example , will be a topic that we must debate .
I hope that , by ensuring that we have this global debate , we shall be able to show that the 2011 budget , on the basis of this new Lisbon procedure , will be a success , and I simply remind you that if we fail to reach an agreement on the 2011 budget , the perspectives for additional spending for 2011 will be even smaller and will not match what the Council is proposing today .
We should be well aware of all these elements to ensure that this first Lisbon-procedure 2011 budget is a success , one that we shall achieve together .
I would like to emphasise something which could summarise the things that have been said by those who have spoken in detail about subjects in areas in which they specialise .
Above all , the reading of the 2011 budget , a budget which the European Parliament will adopt tomorrow , is a very disciplined reading .
For the first time for many years , the European Parliament is not proposing anything more than what was planned as far back as in 2006 in the multiannual financial framework .
It should be stressed that this is a somewhat exceptional situation and a sign of our discipline as the European Parliament .
We understand , too , the Council 's doubts .
I would like to stress that the European Union budget is not a budget of the same kind as the national budgets .
It is a budget which is directed towards investment and it is an anti-crisis tool .
It is worth taking advantage of the opportunity it represents .
I would also like to point out that , of course , as general rapporteur , I hope we will be able , by working together , to adopt the 2011 budget successfully and efficiently , and I hope we will adopt it in such a way as to be able to implement Union policy from the beginning of January in accordance with what was decided in 2006 and in accordance with what we have been working on , too , for the whole of this year .
The Council should take note of those matters to which we have given additional emphasis in our reading of the budget .
It is questionable whether we should add new roles and new ambitions if there is not a readiness to accept new financial obligations .
As far as the Council is concerned , I appeal to its President , who is present today , for the Council to note the good will of the European Parliament in our reading .
I hope that during the Belgian Presidency , the Council will manage to obtain greater support for the original idea of the European Commission concerning the 2011 budget and its proposals .
What all this is about , and what the European Parliament is proposing , has not simply been pulled out of a hat , but is the effect of our earlier work , and I think that much of the Council 's scepticism is , in fact , the result of the fact that the Council adopted its reading in a written procedure , because it is much easier to be negative in writing than during oral discussion .
I am hoping for open and direct dialogue which will allow us to adopt a reasonable and sensible budget for 2011 .

Madam President , Mr Wathelet , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank all of those in this House who have contributed to the debate , and I would also like to thank my colleagues in the Committee on Budgets once again for their willingness to compromise , which , for Parliament 's budget and for the other institutions , enabled us to agree on a very responsible line between the new financing needs that we gained through the Treaty of Lisbon along with new competences and a targeted self-restraint .
I would like to point out once again that I believe it is right for us to have indicated our willingness to put our expenditure under the microscope , but that we , of course , should ask for what we need to meet our new requirements with complete self-assurance and fight for it so that we will also have the necessary funding .
I would like to add a political message , if I may .
After the vote that will take place tomorrow , we will be at the start of a three-week consultation period with the Council , during which we will hopefully come to an agreement .
It is , of course , the first time that we have had this new procedure following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , but I believe that all of us , right down to the real anti-Europe fractions and sceptics , have to be clear in our own minds once again , in the face of all of the criticism , including specific targeted criticism , that the European Union makes us stronger .
Every one of us and all of the Member States benefit as a result of the fact that we have the European Union , particularly in view of the changes to the challenges at global level .
It is clear to everyone that each individual Member State would be weaker on its own in view of the global situation .
That needs to be our common starting point , which is why it is right to fight for more resources in the European Union and , together , to consider very carefully what the major financing needs are , how we can make our budget more sustainable and how it can be more social and more future-oriented .
I hope that , as Parliament , we can come to an agreement with the Council using such an approach and that , as a result , European citizens can also benefit .
I would like to hand over a banana to each of those who carried the burden of this work .
First of all to our leading rapporteurs , the project owners of the 2011 budget , but I would also give a banana with love to the Council , in the hope that eating it would not only give them satisfaction and enjoyment , but also an appropriate willingness to compromise , so that we can finally get over this banana issue .
Janusz Lewandowski also deserves a beautiful large banana for presenting a 2011 budget which comes much closer to Parliament 's way of thinking .
It was not by accident that we spent five years together .
Thank you , Commissioner !
The speakers who have given a very clear outline of Parliament 's position also deserve our gratitude .
This was not a completely unanimous position , but it did have a main stream .
We would like a better and more effective budget , so that we do not have to spend several months or half-years disputing issues such as whether or not we can afford to spend EUR 75 million on compensating banana producing countries .
I believe that the essence of our debate is that in our view , as stated in the 2010 budget , the European budget is a means for handling the crisis , and not some kind of a reason for the crisis .
This is where we should be in agreement , and I ask the Council to notice the pledge implied here .
It implies the intention of Parliament to cooperate with the Commission in prompting Member States to more productive work .
Such work should actually be directed at achieving the objectives , increasing production and the number of jobs .
If this is the case , it will be worth maintaining the budget of the European Union at an appropriate level .
Thank you for your attention . Enjoy your bananas !
Madam President , I would like to point out a problem with the allocation of speaking time in this debate .
Mrs Herczog pointed out that the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy did not receive any speaking time .
The reason for that is that they tabled their proposals for the budget in another form , rather than actually tabling a formal opinion .
It is not reasonable that this should lead to this committee being punished for choosing a more effective way of working than tabling a formal opinion .
There has also been some confusion between those two parts of the debate - this 2011 debate and the budget review now coming up .
As you may have seen , of the last five speakers in the previous debate , four were S & D speakers .
In the coming debate , we will only have one S & D speaker but I think half a dozen EPP speakers .
There has been some kind of confusion between the secretariat , the President and the political groups .
I do not know who made the mistakes - perhaps we did - but let us just have a look at this for the future so that we can have a more reasonable allocation of speaking time in those debates .
Thank you for your comments .
We have made every effort to check the position with regard to the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy ( ITRE ) and there was no formal opinion , but obviously your point will be noted .
So far as speaking time is concerned , that is clearly a matter for the political groups to sort out and allocate .
The debate is closed .
The votes will take place on Wednesday .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The 2011 budgetary procedure has got under way with a disappointing proposal from the Commission .
However , the rapporteur , Mrs Jędrzejewska , promised us that she would be ambitious and fight to achieve a budget which will protect Parliament 's policy priorities , especially policies targeted at young people .
The Council has now presented its position , showing its total lack of ambition or , more accurately , its populist approach which , on the one hand , presents ambitious strategies such as Europe 2020 , while , at the same time , refusing to allocate sufficient funds to ensure that this strategy has any chance of being achieved .
However , we are dealing with Parliament 's position today .
We see here how it , too , lacks any ambitious vision for the 2011 budget .
We are , admittedly , in a recession .
However , we cannot emerge from it with a mediocre draft , but with imagination , political courage and by providing ourselves with the wherewithal to bring about real change .
The effectiveness of the European Union is completely dependent on its budget .
I support these proposals for the 2011 budget because the important policy areas and the individual opinions have been taken into account .
It must be clear that the EU will not be able to fulfil its extensive tasks in future with fewer financial resources .
As a representative of farmers , I am absolutely opposed to money being taken away from agriculture .
Financial recoveries should be used to provide planning certainty for our farmers instead of reallocating them to other policy areas .
Currently , funds are to be taken from agriculture and used to finance the nuclear research project ITER .
This example shows that the financing of large-scale research projects is dependent on recoveries from other areas , the amount of which is difficult to determine in advance .
It should not be the case that no long-term and carefully considered plans are made for the financing of European research .
Agricultural policy also has long-term considerations and plans and this type of security is something we must pass on to agricultural undertakings .
As the weakest link in the food chain , farms need the security to be able to make plans in order to be able to exist .
Ring-fencing of the financial resources provided for this is necessary in order to strengthen the competitiveness of agriculture in the EU .
Investments in agricultural research and green technology are investments in the future and they will create new jobs .
The school fruit scheme , which started at the beginning of the 2009 academic year , is a specific European initiative and its positive and direct results for our citizens must be highlighted .
Supporting funding for this scheme is an effective way for us to invest in the health of young Europeans .
In fact , the increase in obesity among children is quite alarming in Europe .
Despite the increase in the cost of living , fruit should remain a staple part of children 's diet throughout the European Union .
Improving the nutritional value of their diet also offers protection against cardiovascular disease , cancer and diabetes .
The EU school fruit scheme exemplifies a Europe which is close to its citizens and takes up the daily challenges of its citizens and I wish it a long life .
Budget review ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the Commission statement on the budget review .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the 2011 budget is the first budget that this Parliament is called on to negotiate and vote on using its new powers under the Treaty of Lisbon .
It is the first in which we have desisted from calling for any increase in the global volume proposed by the Commission , instead preferring a realistic and political approach .
A realistic approach insofar as our Member States have been called upon to make unprecedented efforts in stabilising and reducing their public finances .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) is the first to call upon them to do so .
The reduction in public expenditure is , effectively , the prerequisite if our economies are to become more competitive and face up to international competition under favourable conditions .
It is therefore not a question of our asking of the twenty-seven , for this budgetary year , expenditure which does not fit within the efforts made by our fellow citizens within their own national framework .
However , our approach is also political insofar as we believe that the 2011 budget cannot be disassociated from the more general financial context of the years to come and , in particular , from the perspective of the next 2014-2020 financial cycle .
Ladies and gentlemen , if there is an objective that our Parliament must aim for in the course of this legislature , it is to ensure that European policies are funded in a manner commensurate with what is at stake .
It is not necessarily a question of asking for more money but rather to ensure that the tasks assigned to the European Union can be achieved with adequate funding .
Our States can even economise , reduce their contribution to the Community budget , if they are prepared for Europe to change its financial system , as it is now obsolete , and take advantage of own resources .
A euro spent at European level is , indeed , more profitable , more productive than a euro spent at national level , because a European euro does not have a deficit to cover .
At national level , the euro is now worth only half or less in some countries .
At national level too , this euro which has not already been reduced comes back in the shape of cohesion funds , funds for rural development and for promoting innovation .
I request that the Council gives serious consideration to this new approach to European finance .
I am grateful to Commissioner Lewandowski for already having opened this debate with our ministers of finance .
Europeans have the right to know what their public authorities spend , whether these be local , regional , national or European .
Member States must be ready to lift this gauntlet .
President of the Council , Ministers , you have in your own hands the key to unlocking these debates and negotiations so that all the Member States can move forward , so that the euro that is at the level of Brussels can return to the level of the citizens in the Member States and be much more productive and create new jobs at a European level .
I beg you , the opportunity is still there .
As a Christmas present , you must tell us that the own funds and own resources of Europe are starting to be the subject of serious discussion and serious negotiation under your Presidency .
I assure you that we shall be talking of this matter for many years to come if we manage to achieve this .

Madam President , Mr Wathelet , Commissioner , I should like to speak without going back over the debate we have had up to now .
We debated a 2011 budget under the constraints with which we are familiar , that is , those of a deep crisis affecting all of Europe with public deficits at national level which could lead to two hypotheses .
Either these public deficits at national level pose a constraint on the European deficit , or these deficits at national level must give a new direction and a new lease of life at the level of Europe .
That is the question .
I am asking you , Commissioner , to try , above all , when we debate the budgetary review , when we are about to start to talk about the budgetary perspectives for post-2013 , not to remain completely absorbed by this context of crisis , unless you are going to tell me and tell all European citizens that , in effect , Europe will remain in the crisis for a long time .
Our entire problem really concerns how to manage the crisis and reduce our deficits and debt , and also how to prepare for extricating ourselves from the crisis .
That is where the question of the budget comes in .
We can only get out of the crisis , and Joseph Daul made this point just now , if the European budget , on account of being European , is able to provide us with the resources to recover what we are lacking today ; that is growth , job creation , innovation , research .
That is what is at stake and it is in these terms that we should debate the budget and not do what we are too often prone to do , that is , constantly harp on about the issue of the crisis and the issue of deficits , and the Council really excels at that .
I observed that at Deauville , the German Chancellor and the French President even announced in anticipation a reform of the treaties , without having had any kind of discussion with Mr Van Rompuy , so as to punish all those States which failed to respect budgetary discipline in the future .
That is where we have got to in the Council today , while Parliament is only asking for one thing , in particular of the Commission , and that is to try to move the European project forward , which happens through the budget .
So , you have noted a certain number of issues on which we are entirely in agreement .
There is a need for greater flexibility .
Evidently , we must manage together to find the capacity to have a much more flexible budget because it is a necessity ; Europe 's capacity for reaction is at stake .
It is also , of course , a question of setting priorities and organising the European budget efficiently .
We are all doubtless in agreement that it is a necessity .
However , where we must be clear with one another is on the need for a timetable , on the need for us to set our objectives together .
Commissioner , we cannot leave matters as empty words and promises , written texts which are extremely interesting and with which I agree almost 100 % .
Now we are going to have to get down to the practical matters and , in particular , to an essential issue that we have been skirting round , that of own resources .
What do we need to do in order to have own resources tomorrow for Europe , or rather for all the citizens of Europe , so that we are all put back on the path to growth and on an even firmer path for the Europe of tomorrow to take ?
We await your ambitious proposals , Commissioner .
Madam President , I would just like to say that I think the Commission has produced a good document , except that it is 15 months too late .
Otherwise , the fact that the mid-term review should have been done 15 months ago is a small detail , and therefore it does not need to be mentioned again .
Indeed , whenever there are negotiations , they sell us a mid-term review , which comes at the end of the term .
This is unacceptable and must not happen in future .
Secondly , the vital point of this text concerns own resources .
Why ?
For that is the basis of the European Union .
The founding fathers of the EU created a European Union based on own resources , that is to say , on tariffs , taxes on imported agricultural products and VAT .
That is what happened .
National contributions started because of the British rebate .
That is the reality .
We must therefore return to these own resources as the basis of financing .
We must do so now because that is the only chance we have to take Europe forward .
We must also do so for democratic reasons .
In a democracy , one thing is necessary : that the people pay their individual revenue directly to Europe and that they can therefore contribute and control the functioning of the European Union through those resources .
My second point , Madam President , in fact concerns the things that are being said here : that we must reduce the EU budget and contributions at European level in order to improve public finances - that is hogwash .
The reality is that fiscal deficits - budget deficits in Europe - have now reached EUR 868 billion , or 7 % of the European Union 's GDP .
Even if we pursue the idea of curbing spending at European level and freezing the European budget completely , those EUR 868 billion would be reduced to EUR 860 billion .
That , in fact , is the reality .
The opposite should actually be done : transfer responsibilities from national to European level so as to reduce costs for Member States .
Defence , research , diplomacy , infrastructure - these are areas in which the European Union can perform better and which can help reduce budget deficits .
So this is the approach you must now take with your colleagues , President of the Council : progress must be made on the matter of own resources because otherwise , you will not have an agreement for the 2011 budget .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I thank the Commissioner for the budget review , which is now finally here .
What is crucial in the budget review is that we are going to look critically at whether the resources of the EU have achieved what we think .
There is a lot of money going to agriculture and cohesion funds ; have these sums been delivering on the targets that we aimed for ?
I must say that the budget review is a bit sparse on these kinds of questions .
But let us look to the future .
I very much welcome your attitude , Commissioner , when you say we have to look at the goals we are aiming for in the 2020 strategy - i.e. goals on innovation , on climate , on poverty eradication , on employment .
These targets should be given a central place and these targets should also be used for the budget review .
That means something for our agricultural policies and for our cohesion policies , and here we expect some good and ambitious reforms from the Commission to make sure that agricultural policies and cohesion policies really deliver on poverty eradication , greenhouse gas reduction , innovation and unemployment .
That is again , I think , very important .
I turn to some crucial ideas that you address such as some new ideas on private investors .
I have to say that this issue of private investors has been addressed before , but we know from the ITER experience and from the GALILEO experience that they are not there , so we have to make sure that we are not building on them if they are not forthcoming .
As for the European Investment Bank , yes , try to include the EIB , but the democratic accountability of the Investment Bank is crucial .
How can we make sure that their investments are also delivering ?
Finally , on own resources .
The financial transaction tax is mentioned again , but we know from the ECOFIN this week that the financial transaction tax is not supported by the Commission ; it is not even on the Barroso list for the G20 .
Still , however , it is in this document , stating that maybe these kinds of incomes can be used .
What is the position of the Commission on the financial transaction tax , because the Commission is vague and inconsistent here ?
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , in presenting the mid-term review for the multiannual financial framework , the European Commission is bringing news which I believe will be a cause for concern for all Europeans , but more specifically for the British people .
While there is a modest approach to limit common agricultural policy expenditure , there is a more radical attempt to eliminate the British rebate .
But , worse still , there is a clear intention to create a new own resource .
Like a thief , the European Union now wants to directly plunder the pockets of the British taxpayer .
Be it carbon tax , a bank levy or whatever , it is certain that the taxpayers will be taking more pain .
When people see the EU taking their money , they will increasingly resent the EU waste and lack of transparency .
The elimination of the rebate and the creation of a new European tax - let us call it by its correct name - will not require a change in the treaty .
However , the agreement reached between the German Chancellor and the French President about imposing political sanctions to ensure financial stability will require those changes .
If the EU wants more power , it must ask the consent of the governed .
If EU politicians want a new treaty , they must first give the people a referendum .
Now there is a chance for ' cast-iron Dave ' to make good on his reneged promise to hold an EU referendum .
I will believe that when I see it .

( ES ) Mr President , it would have been interesting if , instead of leaving the Chamber , Mr Verhofstadt had also read the European Commission documents .
One of them explains , precisely , that this budget review has been delayed because there was an agreement with Parliament to conduct it once the Treaty of Lisbon entered into force .
Honestly !
I would like to thank the Commissioner for the communication that he has presented to us , which is a good intellectual exercise on how the financial perspectives have worked so far and how the subsequent ones should work .
I would also like to thank you for highlighting the weak points of these financial perspectives , in particular , the scandalous inability of the current financial framework to respond to unexpected needs .
I would like to remind you that the only response that there has been so far when we have encountered an unexpected need has been to take money from agriculture to fund other things .
This cannot continue to happen in the future .
However , Commissioner , although I recognise the difficulty of your current position of offering a review , which cannot , under any circumstances , be confused with a revision , and while I recognise that you have really done an excellent job , I cannot resist the temptation to read out loud the memorandum accompanying the statement that was presented :
' The EU budget review : Frequently Asked Questions ' .
' What is the communication on the budget review ? '
' What is it not ? '
' Why a budget review ? '
( ES ) Three very elegant questions to explain the inexplicable : the fact that in this communication , unfortunately , there are no figures .
( NL ) Mr President , I can still remember that we always used to look rather pityingly on the multiannual plans in the Soviet Union , but if I am not mistaken , they lasted for only five years , whilst we now have very inflexible multiannual budgets with a term of seven years .
As I see it , one of the main problems at the moment - and this was confirmed by Commissioner Lewandowski 's words on the subject - is that we are focusing too much on feasibility .
After all , this only benefits vested interests .
Of course , we have unanimity , and there lies a major problem .
Yet the only things currently served by the EU budget are vested interests : vested interests in agriculture , in fisheries , in the cohesion aspect , and also in ' old ' industry , if I may call it that .
Vested interests pose a risk to the dynamic economy we want to see in Europe .
I see Europe , and the budget in particular , as a very large crude oil tanker .
It is hard to change its course , but we now have the opportunity to take it out of the water and into the dockyard .
Let us seize that opportunity and take a look at whether we cannot convert that large tanker into a couple of much smaller speedboats .
Finally , with regard to own resources , these are important not only because Europe then has its own resources , but also to enable us to now combat the perverse effect of Member States ' contributions .
Member States are interested in just one thing , which is how much money they can scrape back from the European budget , and that would be combated by a system of own resources .
( HU ) The Commissioner has just said that the budget is policy expressed in figures .
We are all familiar with this saying , but dear Commissioner , where are the figures in this material ?
This is what is completely missing .
So now I do not know what we are talking about , after all .
Mid-term revision .
This has also been covered by others before me .
Well , we are in the third quarter and I do not know when we will get this revision over with .
However , I would like to ask a question here .
This is also for the Council .
Perhaps it will get to them through the translation .
What I would like to say is that we should complete this revision , or whatever we want to call it , this year .
In 2011 , there will be no point in still fussing about what we wanted to do in 2008 , or what we should have done in 2008 .
I think we should get on with the next budget framework , which we have already started to some extent .
There is serious work going on in Parliament , just like , I think , in the other partner institutions .
This work should involve brave reforms .
The issue of own resources was raised here .
It is really an impossible situation that we are the only parliament in the world that creates a budget and does not feel the burden of it when facing the voters , as it is not us who take away those funds from citizens , but the intermediaries , the national governments .
Do we have to be concerned about the sovereignty of Member States , that the European Parliament itself takes away from citizens and brings here its own expenditures , the joint European expenditures ?
I know this is a difficult issue .
The issue of sovereignty is very important .
And there is yet another issue which is very important , Mr President , namely that what we spend should comply with the considerations of subsidiarity , and we should not want to move over here , to a European level , any issues which are up to the Member States . Thank you for your attention .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I acknowledge , on the one hand , the efforts of the Commission to enhance this review debate through this communication and , on the other , I will openly admit that , at the time and also today , we had a different idea about the review proposals based on the joint declaration of 2006 .
If we follow the content of this communication , it will mean that there will be no review until 2014 .
However , that means - as I also said previously - that essential elements of the Lisbon policy based on the new treaty , at least parts relating to the budget , will be postponed until after 2014 .
The question then arises as to whether we can afford to do this , particularly in the context of globalisation , where the ability of the European Union to act on a political level as well as an economic one is under discussion , and whether we can accept responsibility for this .
I have the impression that the Commission in office at that time , and Mr Prodi , were too ambitious in their proposals and the current Commission is too cautious .
Of course , when we come to take the next step , it is important first to focus on better legislation in order to promote growth and employment , simplification , efficiency and a reduction of the costs involved in implementing programmes before we ask for more money .
This , incidentally , also applies to research , where we have deficits and where there are still yellow / red cards from the Court of Auditors .
New financial instruments are also needed , as well as a discussion about what we will do , for example , with large-scale innovation , industrial and research projects such as ITER or Galileo or with energy projects .
Will we say ' yes ' or ' no ' to these ?
If we say ' yes ' to them , should they then also be appropriately - and in a different way to previously - financed to completion through the European budget via the overall multiannual financial programme ?
In view of a sometimes misleading discussion at the level of the Member States , allow me also to say something about our own resources .
It is entirely legitimate and in accordance with the treaty - yes , the treaty requires it in fact - for us to concern ourselves with our own resources , because the treaty states that , without prejudice to other revenue , we shall finance ourselves first of all from our own resources .
We should all take part in this debate .
( NL ) Mr President , the mid-term review of the multiannual financial framework with which the Commission is presenting us today is at once disappointing and encouraging .
The document is disappointing in the sense that it does not open up any prospect of a revision of the multiannual framework for 2010-2012 .
Yet the 2011 budget has shown this to be untenable .
Indeed , the financial framework takes account of neither the new tasks under the Treaty of Lisbon nor the EU 2020 objectives .
This is indeed untenable .
At the very least , scope for greater flexibility must be introduced .
Fortunately , the Commission is also advocating this .
This increased flexibility should apply from as soon as 2012 .
The document is encouraging , on the other hand , in that the Commission is opening the debate on own resources at long last .
This may be the big debate in the next few years ; a difficult but unavoidable one .
The treaty states that the EU budget must be financed from own resources .
Currently , 80 % of it is financed by transfers from national budgets .
These are not European own resources , but instead form part of national budgetary expenditure .
They weigh down on the national deficits that the European Stability and Growth Pact seeks to reduce , and so Member States attempt to reduce these transfers .
At the same time , they expect more from Europe , as is evident from the Treaty of Lisbon and the EU 2020 strategy .
We must break through this contradiction .
This can be done only by having recourse to genuine own resources .
These must also make it possible to reduce Member States ' contributions and to increase EU resources .
As possible own resources , the Commission rightly points to new taxes that are directly linked to policy areas developed mainly at European level .
I would cite the examples of climate policy and the regulation of the financial sector .
It is to be hoped that the European Council and the Council will also grasp the need to now open the debate on own resources as a matter of urgency with a view to the financial perspective from 2014 onwards .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I am very pleased that we have this document before us at last .
It is good that it has come into being and that it has now been submitted to us .
Of course , one can always complain that this could have been done earlier and so forth .
I think that , above all , we should at this moment commend one particular feature of the document , which is the fact that it raises taboo issues .
We should not at this moment be treating any questions which are in any way related to the budget as taboo , and we should be talking about everything , including about own resources .
This is most definitely to be commended .
I would also like to issue a warning about a certain danger related to the discussion about new own resources .
As we know , this is a very difficult discussion , a discussion which may easily block all other talks about what the European Union budget should be like and what we have already learned from the current financial framework .
We should not allow ourselves to be manoeuvred into a dead-end street .
We should broaden the horizons of our discussion and not get stuck on the subject of own resources , which will , in fact , make it impossible for us to find a solution .
I would like to emphasise that the income side of the European Union budget should be stable and predictable .
We should always remember the great achievement of the European Union budget , which is the fact that it is balanced .
It is a budget which does not bring us into debt .
This value should continue to be a guiding principle .
I would also like to emphasise that new own resources should make the European Union 's income stable and predictable and , in addition , should not bring us into debt .
I think we should give thought to this and remember that the current income of the European Union , based as it is on the gross national product of individual Member States , is not so bad a system that we have to reject it .
The new system should , in my opinion , be a combination of new and old .
We should , to a large extent , be thinking about reform , but , in addition , we should not reject a priori what is a good tradition .
In other words , both continuation and change - the one does not preclude the other .
We should begin with what is already working successfully and not reject this , so that we do not get bogged down with a discussion only about own resources , and that we think , in fact , about how to construct the new financial framework .
Mr President , a review of budgets is always necessary .
It applies to families , to the European Union , and it even applied to Fagin in Oliver Twist .
When his little enterprise of picking a pocket or two was not working out , he said , ' I think we have got to think it out again ' .
It is good that we are thinking it out again here as well .
Particularly , we can do a lot to make what we are trying to do more acceptable to the Member States and the citizens .
Firstly , the target of reducing red tape by 25 % - and hopefully more - is very desirable and very sellable .
Secondly , we need to stop scoring own goals .
Unfortunately , I am in agreement with some of the Eurosceptics who said that increasing the entertainment budget was not a sensible thing to do .
It was grist to the mill to the Eurosceptics and I think it disappointed Euro-enthusiasts .
Thirdly - and very importantly - the whole question of creating own resources is most desirable .
I think our President , Mr Daul , said it very well when he said that a euro spent at European level is better value than a euro spent at Member State level .
I think we should be going along that line and particularly encouraging venture capitalists looking at euro project bonds to finance the various projects we need .
We have an R & D target of 3 % .
This is absolutely vital for Europe if we are to be competitive and create the jobs we need .
We also need to keep a strongly funded CAP - pillar one to ensure that the rural society is not denuded of people , and pillar two to ensure the delivery of public goods .
As well as that , the renewable energy targets and CO2 emissions cannot be compromised on - nor , of course , cohesion policy , which has been very successful .
If we can achieve all that , we will eventually have a 4 % increase in GDP and 5.6 million extra jobs by 2020 .
( DE ) Mr President , in the Committee on Regional Development , we also had great expectations of the budget review .
After all , the European structural and cohesion policy is a success story , particularly in recent years .
The contribution of the Cohesion Fund to overcoming the crisis is considerable , particularly in the poorest regions .
The horizontal approach in connection with the objective of competitiveness and employment is producing encouraging results .
Never have EU funds been utilised more efficiently , never have we brought more small and medium-sized enterprises into international networks , and never have the regions been better prepared to utilise the European programmes .
The use and absorption of EU funds gives a very clear and encouraging signal here .
With this progress , even the irregularities in connection with the use of the Structural Funds could be significantly reduced .
The Court of Auditors , scientists and the regions inform us of these matters , but , unfortunately , not the Commission or the Member States .
They are noticeably unforthcoming .
There has not been a genuine mid-term review of the budget in relation to the Structural Funds .
I very much regret that , because the tail wind of a budget review would have provided good reasons for continuing with structural policy .
Of course , there is a need to adjust the content to the 2020 goals .
The resources must be used more efficiently in many areas .
However , the goal structures and cooperation with the Member States and the regions have more than proved their worth .
We have missed an opportunity here also to prove this by carrying out a genuine review of the budget .
However , ladies and gentlemen , Parliament has a good memory .
When we talk about the future financial perspective , we will bring up the successes of regional policy .
When we talk about the reliability of the policy , we will defend the long planning periods for the structural funds .
When we talk about future budget reviews , we will call for these to be mandatory , because regular budgetary reviews also contribute to transparency .
We must take that more seriously in future .
( PT ) Mr President , Commission , ladies and gentlemen , we are all well aware of the political challenges that we are facing : globalisation , combating climate change , the ageing population and energy security , among others .
All this is happening alongside a crisis that is showing no sign of passing .
We want to maintain a strong social state , which will also enhance our competitiveness .
We have devised a strategy for all of this : the Europe 2020 strategy .
However , this strategy needs funding .
We should identify the amount required for each of the policies in order to implement this strategy effectively , so that we will know the total sum needed .
Of course , I am advocating a bottom-up method , based on addition .
Then , once we know what is required , we need to define precisely what resources we should have .
Approximately 80 % of the Community budget comes from national budgets , and we have to reduce this dependence in order to respect the treaties themselves .
However , this strategy , the Europe 2020 strategy , should begin now , and so I would like to ask why the multiannual financial framework is not being revised at present so that it complies with this strategy , to which we have all already given our backing ?
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , I will say right at the outset that I think it is a good document that we have before us here .
It is balanced , as Mr Lewandowski has always promised us - balanced with a large number of suggestions and ideas for how we can , and should , continue to work .
However , it is not what we as budget specialists in the Committee on Budgets expected .
To be honest , we thought there would be an analysis of the current financial framework , and the real optimists even believed that we might also get a small revision for the remaining period of the current financial perspective .
However , what we have before us now is purely a glance into the future .
Almost every other section mentions how we should do things better in future with regard to our budget , whether in relation to our priorities , how to achieve the goals of the Europe 2020 strategy , better cooperation with our neighbours , better European infrastructure or our future agricultural policy and cohesion policy .
This paper even presents ideas with regard to the future structure of our budget and the length of the next financial period .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( FR ) Mr President , in Geneva in December 2009 , the EU concluded banana agreements with Latin American countries , significantly lowering tariffs .
Following these agreements , the EU established compensatory measures for ACP countries to the tune of EUR 190 million , if I am not mistaken .
After 2009 , new agreements were concluded between the EU and Central American countries , further lowering tariffs for those countries .
The accompanying measures that are anticipated in the amending budget do not take these new agreements into account .
The ACP countries , however , have estimated the necessary accompanying measures at far more than EUR 190 million .
In my view , the amended decision should take account of the ACP countries ' request .
As I , myself , am elected by a constituency that produces bananas , I will be paying special attention to this decision on the amending budget .
Mr President , I think it is too early to summarise whether the document is good or bad , but it is good that we have a document because it was a long time in the process of being created .
I want to make my comments on the agriculture part in particular , because I am the rapporteur for the budget for next year .
I would have some concerns about the language used in the section about agricultural policy .
For example , ' a more radical reform ' , and I quote the document ' would suggest moving away from income support and market measures and giving priority to environmental and climate change objectives rather than the economic and social dimensions of the CAP ' .
There is also a suggestion here that we have now a culture of dependency because of direct payments to farmers .
We have a culture of reality that farmers are not getting enough from the marketplace to give them a decent income .
Farming comes way below the average and that has got to be addressed in any future direction in which we reform the common agricultural policy , but I welcome the document .
( BG ) I , too , wish to thank the Commission for presenting this document .
I think that it will provide a subject for much discussion in future .
It contains quite a few issues about which , I am sure , there will be lively debate in Parliament .
I would like to touch on three of them , each in turn .
The first concerns the question whether all the European Union 's policies can come under the general Europe 2020 umbrella .
We know that many policies which are important to the European Union derive from it .
However , I do not think that the sustainable growth section is the best place for agricultural policy , for instance , or that the inclusive growth section is the best place for the cohesion policy .
I believe that they are somewhat broader and it will be slightly difficult for them to come under the objectives set by Europe 2020 .
Secondly , I would like to dwell on the principles involved .
One of them that is shared is the principle of solidarity , which is undoubtedly very important .
However , we need to look at resources , including the Cohesion Fund , not only as a form of solidarity , but also as a means of greater convergence .
We know that it has an extremely important economic impact , which is not only moral , but is also actually linked to economic results .
The final matter relates to own resources .
In this case , consideration is also given to the granting of loans by the European Union , guaranteeing loans with the European budget and funding large projects .
I think that it may be difficult for us to talk about borrowing funds without us being clear about our own resources , including those derived from cooperation with financial institutions like the European Investment Bank or about the reuse of unused funds from the European budget instead of them being returned to Member States .
( FR ) Mr President , a word on this communication from the Commission .
I regret the fact that , particularly in the area of expenditure , we have been rather timid in this communication .
You know that the Committee on Budgets asks that we do not just undertake a budget review , but rather a proper mid-term review , not for the fun of it , but simply to analyse the structure of budgetary spending and to draw conclusions on certain aspects of that spending .
You know , as I do , that it is necessary to refocus on certain aspects of spending in the area of cohesion policy , to focus on large industrial projects such as ITER or others relating to Galileo , and also to protect resources earmarked for agricultural policy .
On the other hand , I found the Commission interesting and a little more daring in the area of revenue .
Indeed , I think we cannot talk about the EU budget today without opening the debate both on own resources and communitisation , or without mentioning certain areas of expenditure .
I believe this is an absolutely essential and fundamental subject for the future of the European Union .
I therefore hope that together we can find ways to fund our priorities better - be they youth , education , or any of the other priorities I have just mentioned - because together , we need to identify those areas of high value-added spending , so as to avoid repeating what is unfortunately happening right now with the External Action Service .
( ES ) Mr President , the truth is that , as many of my fellow Members have already said , we were eagerly awaiting the Commission 's communication .
Mrs Haug said quite rightly that many of us were optimistic when awaiting the results of this communication , and we genuinely expected that they would bring a revision of the current financial framework to the table .
In this respect , I must say that the document that you are presenting to us has been quite a disappointment to me , because the reason why we allowed you to wait to present this document until the Treaty of Lisbon and the Europe 2020 strategy entered into force was because we wanted something more specific .
The truth is that this generalised document could quite easily have been tabled in 2007 or 2008 , so I do not know why we have had to wait .
In any case , it is always important to highlight something positive , and I think that we all agree that you should finally bring the own resources debate to the table .
You have already seen that Parliament is asking for this , and we hope that the Council , which is listening to this debate , will join us in doing so : we will then be able to highlight that as a positive element .
( FR ) Mr President , whether this is a glass-half-empty or glass-half-full situation , this document still contains useful insights , and what matters most to me is what we do with it - what Parliament will do with this document .
I think it contains some interesting things , as we have said today , and as others have said very well before me .
The issue of own resources is obviously the most important thing we need to discuss .
I also agree on the relevance of using these insights specifically to nurture the option of the Europe 2020 strategy , but I insist that there is more than just the 2020 document .
We clearly need to work on it but , of course , there is also the agricultural policy and the question of transport networks , and there are two other documents with which we must concern ourselves as well .
In particular , I am thinking of the report by the task force on economic governance chaired by Mr Van Rompuy , which has also highlighted a number of issues related to budgetary coordination .

Finally , based on what you propose , we will also have to work on all the opportunities that will be presented to us , and I am thinking in particular of another report : the famous report by Mr Monti - A New Strategy for the Single Market - which presents the other side of budgetary policies , in other words , everything relating to fiscal cooperation .
I do not think we can isolate this debate on the Commission 's proposals from all the other questions raised in other European institutions because , ultimately , they are different phases of the same debate .
( PL ) We have a very interesting document before us and it should be said that , for a rather long time , we had been expecting a document which would not contain any figures , and here the Commission has kept its word .
We have received a document which does , in fact , contain certain elements of a programme and certain declarations .
As the European Parliament , we should , indeed , look at what the Commission is saying today .
For example , something which is very important today for us MEPs is discussion on the subject of the relationship between the 2020 strategy , which has already been spoken of today , and EU policies .
If , in its document , the Commission gives the possibility of organising the budget around the 2020 strategy , then in fact , this declaration means that the possibility exists of incorporating the majority of EU policies into the 2020 strategy .
We read this in the text - it is written there plainly .
Reorganisation of the structure of the budget essentially means a reorganisation of EU policies .
The declaration that cohesion policy is to be the main carrier of the 2020 strategy is also a declaration which pleases us , and we will certainly try to translate those statements and declarations into the language of specific decisions .
( EL ) Mr President , I , too , should like to say that this is an interesting document .
It illustrates the Commission 's interest and the European Parliament would be well advised to use this document .
I should also like to say that two issues worth noting are the use of own resources and the question of agricultural policy .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I must thank the Commissioner because the document actually exists .
This time , we are talking about something on paper and not - as has happened on several occasions - just words that have been spoken but not yet turned into a tangible document .
Even so , as happens whenever one makes an initial assessment of a document , one finds both positive and negative aspects in it .
Partly I see the glass half full , because it talks about own resources , a subject that this Parliament was hoping would be dealt with some time ago so as to reduce the Member States ' contributions and increase the chance of making the major investments that Europe needs .
On the new multiannual financial framework , it talks about a term of five plus five years , but I fear there will be another mid-term review because , if the next review is anything like the last one , for which we had to wait for such a long time , it will certainly not be a positive move .
However , it also talks about a connection with the Europe 2020 strategy , and that is something I agree with , as it is one of the stated priorities of this House .
On the other hand , however , I also see the glass half empty , because with regard to the common agricultural policy , it makes plenty of references to the public goods and services that agriculture must produce for people but very few to primary agricultural production and the competitiveness of the sector .
( PL ) Ladies and gentlemen , the budget review was the cause of great anxiety , but the way in which it was presented by the Commissioner was so clever that we have become more calm and content .
This does not mean that the Commissioner has not presented many problems to which we now have to give our consideration .
For example , how can we balance expenditure with income ?
Should we cut the first and increase the second ?
Perhaps we should ask the question as to how to increase the effectiveness of EU resources and how to spend them more intelligently .
We need to begin the move from financing traditional infrastructure to financing research infrastructure .
However , there must be a certain balance which takes into account the different levels of development of different Member States .
We know that every euro spent from the EU budget is more profitable than a euro from a national budget .
However , let us remember that every euro paid into the EU budget also gives significant benefits and a return to the one who paid it , and not only to the one who receives that euro from the EU budget .
It is an important observation that net contributors also receive significant benefits from the resources which they have paid into the EU budget .
Mr Lewandowski , you were always such a good parliamentarian defending the budget on our side .
We hope that the experience you gained here will not be used against Parliament , but rather in order to make consensus with Parliament and we trust you in that sense .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is Question Time ( B7-0552 / 2010 ) .
The following questions are addressed to the Commission .
Part one
Subject : Basel III criteria and European banks
On 12 September 2010 , the Basel Committee announced that new criteria had been drawn up to strengthen the stability of the financial system .
These criteria provide , inter alia , for an increase in the percentage of common equity in relation to risk-weighted assets .
Does the Commission consider that the need for Basel III is a result of the recent financial crisis or will the accord offset the structural weaknesses which Basel II was unable to rectify ?
What impact will Basel III have on the provision of liquidity by European banks to the market ?
Does the Commission consider that Basel III will accelerate mergers between banks ?
Does it consider that the new conditions will place smaller banks in an even more disadvantageous position in relation to the big banking groups ?
Should these criteria be the subject of broader consultation during the G20 summit with a view to establishing fair competition for financial activities on the world market ?
Mr President , good evening to each and every one of you .
I have just this minute arrived from Luxembourg , Mr President , where the Council of Economic and Finance Ministers met and reached unanimous agreement on the draft directive on hedge funds and private equity .
I am mentioning this now before Parliament because this draft document , which will remain a draft until you have debated it here yourselves , owes much to the European Parliament , to the work of your rapporteur , Mr Gauzès , and to the many amendments tabled and included for the Council of Ministers ' final vote , particularly those related to the financial supervision package which , too , owes a great deal to the European Parliament 's contribution .
Naturally , we will now work together with Parliament in order to finalise the agreement on the regulation of hedge funds and private equity .
This is the first time that this sector will be subject to European regulation , and I would like to thank you already for the part you have played in this draft directive .
Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou asked me about the discussions that are under way in Basel and which are connected with the issue of regulation that I have just mentioned .
Banking reform is a very important issue and , once again , I welcome Parliament 's commitment , shown by the excellent work of Mr Karas ; we talked about that here two weeks ago .
You will be asked to give your opinion on the proposed Capital Requirements Directive 4 that will be presented in spring 2011 to implement the Basel III accord in Europe .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is an understatement to say that we have encountered and are still facing an unprecedented financial crisis that is not over yet .
According to the International Monetary Fund , bank losses attributed to the crisis amounted to EUR 2 300 billion at the end of 2010 , of which half has come from European banks .
This crisis , which began in the financial sector , has plunged the European economy into severe recession .
European GDP shrank by 5.7 % , or EUR 700 billion this year alone .
We need to restore confidence and stability in the banking sector , and ensure that credit continues to fuel the real economy , business , employment and growth .
The European Union and Member States adopted an unprecedented set of emergency measures that were , at that time , not so long ago , funded by the taxpayer .
The Commission thus approved 4 100 billion of State aid amounting to 35 % of the European GDP .
Combined with fiscal policies designed to bring Europe out of recession , these support measures have fuelled the deficit and public debt .
Ladies and gentlemen , it was the citizens , the taxpayers , who paid once - will they pay a second time ?
I do not think so , and I hope not , because that would not be fair .
Our policy is foresight , because prevention is always cheaper than cure .
We need to prevent the crisis and its disastrous effects from occurring a second time , and it is precisely in order to carry that need for foresight and prevention over into our prudential policies that we will be introducing the Basel III regulations in Europe .
It is in the same spirit that we want to provide Europe with a prevention framework for resolving banking crises , which , again , will be based on Parliament 's opinions .
I am thinking , in particular , of the work undertaken by Mrs Ferreira .
The G20 , in its decision of 2 April 2009 , made the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision responsible for making in-depth improvements to the Basel II regulations where necessary , in order to strengthen banks ' resilience and improve financial stability .
EU leaders expressed their support for this goal on 19 and 20 March 2009 .
The Basel III regulations were drawn up in the Basel Committee by experts from the regulatory and supervisory authorities of the 27 major international banking markets , with the Commission 's very active participation on behalf of all Member States of the European Union .
The analysis made by our Commission and the Basel Committee shows that the new regulations will strengthen financial stability , limit pro-cyclicality and lead to significant economic and social benefits for a wide range of stakeholders , thanks to the expected reduction in the frequency of banking crises and the risks they entail .
In particular , this reform will benefit borrowers , companies and individuals , but also creditors , governments , small and medium-sized enterprises and our citizens in general .
Admittedly , these benefits will only become apparent over time because of the gradual introduction of the new regulations and the transitional clauses announced by the Group of Governors and Heads of Supervision on 12 September 2010 .
The same applies to liquidity requirements .
Liquidity regulations are subject to an observation period until 2015 .
Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou asked me if the new rules will accelerate mergers between banks ; that is not the aim of the reform , but if some banks failed to comply with these new regulations on time and therefore had to merge with their competitors or even their partners , that would lead to greater protection for their depositors and creditors , and to increased financial stability .
I also understand your concern that the new regulations will disproportionately affect smaller banks .
The quantitative study carried out by the Committee of European Banking Supervisors on the impact of Basel III on the banking sector has shown that small banks , Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou , would , in fact , be less affected by the new regulations than the top 50 banking groups of the European Union .
This is mainly due to small banks ' higher level of initial capitalisation and their simpler business model .
Finally , the Commission attaches great importance to establishing fair competition at international level .
At this stage , I do not consider it advisable for the G20 to open another major debate on all the regulations defined in the context of Basel III because these were the result of lengthy , balanced discussions .
On the other hand , the political governance of the G20 and the Financial Stability Board are a tool for Europe , enabling it to ensure that everyone will effectively implement the Basel accord properly and on time .
That is what I can say in answer to your very important question .
( EL ) Mr President , I agree that Commissioner Barnier has given a very comprehensive reply .
He referred to every single question , which is not always the case with the Commission 's replies .
I should like , if I may Commissioner , to ask you a supplementary question about the liquidity of the banks under Basel III .
Do you believe that liquidity will not be directly affected , because the market is already suffering from the banks ' lack of liquidity and the measures will be applied gradually ?
Why does the Commission believe that it will not affect liquidity at a time when the market is in such dire need of it ?
( DE ) Commissioner Barnier , I would be very interested to know what effect Basel II is having on the US market , where a lot - hundreds - of small banks have now gone bankrupt .
What impact has it had on the large banks ?
What is the situation with Basel III in the US ?
Will this be implemented here at the same time as it is in Europe or will the US implement it before us ?
What is the timetable for implementation of Basel II and Basel III in respect of the US ?
( PL ) Commissioner , I would like to thank you for this information , which is important in that it presents the financial situation in Europe and the financial situation of banks , and these things are dealt with on a daily basis by the European Commission .
Fortunately , we are observing a certain improvement in this matter .
My question is a very brief one : you said that in the spring of 2011 , the European Commission will announce new proposals .
Would you like to say a little more about what the essential features of these proposals will be ?
Mr President , Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou asked me about liquidity .
I want to reiterate that the financial crisis has shown that banks with excess liquidity have refrained from lending on the interbank market because they have very prudently accumulated liquidity for their own potential needs .
Furthermore , this problem has been exacerbated due to a lack of understanding of the financial robustness of other institutions .
In my opinion , the new liquidity requirements will help to solve the problem of insufficient liquidity in the markets both by improving risk management of the banks ' liquidity and by strengthening their cash reserves .
The transitional arrangements planned by the Basel Committee foresee that the new liquidity coverage ratio will only become mandatory , Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou , from 2015 , which I believe should allow sufficient time for banks to comply and limit any undesirable impact on markets during the transition period .
Mr Rübig , you mentioned Basel II .
May I remind us all that , in the case of the United States , which you mentioned , Basel II has not yet been implemented , nor has Basel 2.5 , I might add .
During my first visit to the United States , on 9 and 10 May 2010 , I also made a deal , or rather reached an agreement , with the American Secretary of the Treasury - with whom I shall be meeting again next week - to ensure that the United States will implement Basel 2.5 in mid-2011 .
Mr Rubig , your question is very important because it gives us an opportunity to state that we have international commitments .
The Americans have played an important part in drawing up the Basel standards .
They are closely involved in the process and therefore it would be incomprehensible ... let me say this in a more positive way .
It would be quite normal for these joint decisions to be implemented jointly , in parallel .
I am very mindful of this parallelism with the United States ; moreover , I am going to make sure of it in a few days , during my second visit .
With regard to the impact of Basel III on both major and smaller banks , generally speaking , we will proceed very carefully with macro- and micro-economic impact studies , without improvising , and I will use all flexibility margins in order to develop good measures and good decisions that are as well-gauged as possible .
Mr Zemke asked me about timing .
What we are going to do , Mr Zemke , in spring 2011 , is draw up legislative texts , a draft directive , called the Capital Requirements Directive 4 ( CRD 4 ) ; after we have carried out all the impact studies , an assessment of the Basel measures , the macro- and micro-economic impact study , and assessments of the other measures of which I am mindful and - I talked about this earlier - which involve external or internal supervision , this directive will properly implement a risk prevention system in banks , followed by a transatlantic assessment .
I need a few months to carry out a thorough job : listen to Parliament , listen to the financial services stakeholders , take the right steps and make good proposals .
All of this will take place in spring 2011 , with CRD 4 and these legislative texts .
Subject : EU-Africa summit / food security
In connection with World Food Day on 16 October 2009 , the FAO has recently indicated that the situation remains unsatisfactory despite a slight improvement regarding the number of those suffering from chronic hunger in the world ( 925 million this year , compared with 1.023 billion in 2009 ) .
The lack of food security is threatening to undermine MDG objective 1 , particularly in sub-Saharan Africa .
In the run-up to the next EU-Africa summit ( Tripoli , 29 and 30 November ) , many of those concerned are anxious that the strategic partnership should place greater emphasis on food security , including issues relating to access to food , infrastructures , land ownership and adjustment to climate change .
Does the Commission consider it necessary to introduce a new specific partnership for food security under the joint Africa-EU strategy ?
Does it intend to step up coordination on horizontal issues in the context of existing partnerships , this being necessary to achieve food security in Africa ?
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the question addresses very important issues .
Ensuring that every citizen has access to nutritious food is a main aim of development cooperation .
Reducing the proportion of hungry people by half is therefore , rightly , the first of eight Millennium Development Goals that the global community promised to reach by 2015 .
Food security will also remain a top priority for the European Union in its relations with Africa , where many countries are off track in reaching this MDG 1 , where more than 70 % of the population live in rural areas , and where some 90 % of agricultural production is carried out by smallholders on family farms .
Food security was already a priority of the first EU-Africa action plan , within the partnership on the MDGs , and we will propose to maintain this as a priority area for the next action plan that is currently being drafted .
We will also ensure that cross-sectoral aspects with direct links to food security , such as research , trade and regional integration , are given appropriate relevance in this next action plan .
The European Union 's focus on food security goes hand in hand with the importance that African leaders themselves have attached to agriculture and food security .
The comprehensive Africa Agricultural Development programme is the common framework for action in this area and we will continue to support this .
Having said that , I believe that we have enough mechanisms at this stage to care about nutritious food supply and that it is not necessary to introduce a new specific partnership for food security in the joint Africa-EU strategy .
As I have said , this dimension is already covered by the partnership on the MDGs , among others .
( ES ) Mr President , thank you very much , Commissioner , for your answer , which will be very useful with a view to the European Union-Africa summit .
I would like to ask you whether you can give us any additional information on what types of debates took place at the high-level meeting held in New York on the Millennium Development Goals in relation to food security , and whether the Food and Agricultural Organisation 's Committee on World Food Security has received the necessary impetus to coordinate the global effort to combat hunger .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , the Commission set up the Reflex mechanism for vulnerable countries about a year ago , in August 2009 , earmarking EUR 500 million for the purpose of combating the impact of the global economic crisis on the more fragile African countries over the period from 2009 to 2010 .
Has this programme been evaluated by the Commission in order to establish if this money was ultimately put to good use ?
I would remind the House that this programme is for smallholder farmers who are given fertiliser and seed for sowing so that they can increase their farm output in the long term and achieve food security in the medium term .

( FR ) Over and above the figures cited by our estimable colleague , Mr Guerrero Salom , out of the 829 million inhabitants of Sub-Saharan Africa , about 240 million are starving , that is to say , 30 % of the population .
Yet , when we know that food and agricultural production increased 2.6 fold in the second half of the 20th century , it becomes clear that it advanced more in 50 years than it did in the 10 000 years before .
In light of this , I believe that it is irresponsible to continue growing cotton as primary produce , for example , in Burkina Faso , when 49 % of the population is starving .
Should development policies , Commissioner , not place food production back at the centre of development policy priorities ?


Vice-President of the Commission . - As the Honourable Member pointed out , Regulation ( EC ) No 1371 / 2007 on rail passenger rights , Regulation ( EC ) No 261 / 2004 on air passenger rights - and let me also add Regulation ( EC ) No 1107 / 2006 on the rights of disabled persons and persons with reduced mobility when travelling by air - recognise certain minimum , common rights for citizens when they travel by rail or by air .
The correct application of these regulations must be ensured by the national enforcement bodies designated in the Member States .
These bodies in particular have to take all reasonable measures to ensure that the rights of passengers are fully respected .
The Commission 's task is to ensure that EU law is correctly implemented and enforced by the Member States by constantly monitoring their activity .
National enforcement bodies have no legal obligation to report under the sole terms of the regulations .
They answer the Commission 's request in line with the general principle of loyal cooperation between the Member States and the EU institutions enshrined in the treaty .
Concerning the volcanic ash crisis , the Commission has reacted quickly and has done its utmost to ensure that , in accordance with the conclusions of the Extraordinary Council held on 4 May 2010 , the rules on air passenger rights are applied and enforced in a uniform and harmonised way everywhere in the EU .
In order to reach this aim , the Commission has prepared and agreed informal interpretative guidelines with national authorities and has kept close contacts with them and all stakeholders .
( FR ) Commissioner , you will readily appreciate that the adoption of regulations on the rights of passengers travelling by air , rail and , recently , by sea , rightfully sparked hope among European citizens of finally finding rapid financial solutions to delays , cancellations and other serious setbacks .
These citizens are even more disappointed to learn that thousands of complaints have not yet been followed up , for example , in the wake of the volcanic eruption in Iceland that you mentioned .
Indeed , Member States are not providing the operational and effective regulatory services which would force companies to implement these regulations and penalise them financially for a failure to do so .
For example , in Belgium , the economic regulatory service has not imposed a single penalty on any airline since 1 February 2006 , which goes to show that this situation is not solving consumers ' problems .
( HU ) I have a brief question .
What do you think about the various transport sectors , about the differences in their handling of passenger rights ?
My question is , does the Commissioner or the Commission have any plans for a uniform management of passenger rights and a uniform control of their enforcement in the various transport sectors ?
The situation with the volcano showed that some European Union countries , especially the new ones , have no alternative .
They have no rail connections with western Europe , including your own country , Commissioner , and my country .
Did this situation speed up work on the Rail Baltica project ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - The current state of play is that , following the rejection by Parliament , the Commission decided on 30 June 2010 to withdraw the proposal .
Since the directive now also covers self-employed drivers , it is for Member States to demonstrate how they comply with their legal obligations and enforce the rules for self-employed drivers .
The Commission has requested information from Member States concerning the transposition and implementation of the directive with regard to self-employed drivers .
The Commission will decide on any necessary action once the responses are available and have been analysed .
Thank you for your response .
I was just wondering if you have any proposals or guidelines that you are going to put to Member States in order to suggest how they will monitor the working time of self-employed drivers , particularly the time they spend cleaning or maintaining their vehicles or doing paperwork related to the job in hand , which I believe will be extremely difficult to monitor .
Also , will you be looking at the socio-economic impact on owner-drivers given that their driving time will now be significantly decreased ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - The Commission agrees that the number of road deaths annually EU-wide still remains unacceptably high .
In 2009 , around 35 000 people died on the roads of the EU which corresponds to the size of a small town .
However , the Commission does not agree with the opinion of the honourable Member that the third European Road Safety Action programme 2001-2009 has failed .
Also , the initial target was not met .
It led to the strong mobilisation of all parties involved .
During this period , 78 000 lives were saved in the European Union and in all , 2 million victims were saved .
Beyond the figures , the benefit in terms of pain and of personal and family tragedies avoided is incalculable .
In the recently adopted ' policy orientations for road safety 2011-2020 ' , the Commission proposed to continue with the target of halving the number of road deaths within the European Union , starting from the results obtained in 2010 .
To achieve this target , greater efficiency will be required from EU and national road safety policies .
This involves a strong political commitment by all Member States , in particular , those with poor safety records which should be reflected in the development of comprehensive national road safety strategies drawing on practices which have been shown to be successful elsewhere .
It will also require special efforts to reduce road accidents in areas where progress has been slower , such as motorcyclists ' safety or the safety of rural roads .
Technological developments , in particular , so-called intelligent transport systems , will also play an important role .
As regards the specific issue of the prevention of road accidents involving children , in particular in school buses , it should be noted that very significant progress has been achieved during the past decade with a decrease of 70 % in the number of fatalities involving children younger than 15 years of age .
The Commission is fully aware , however , of the need to ensure a high level of protection of children who are a particularly vulnerable category of users .
( EL ) Thank you , Commissioner , for your reply .
I shall , nonetheless , ask my question , Commissioner , because every day , millions of pupils travel to and from school in vehicles used as school buses .
We are literally talking about the flower of European youth .
As such , I believe that we really should adopt stricter technical safety standards for these vehicles , stricter and more frequent inspections to ensure that these standards are being applied and , of course , stricter checks on the professional skills of the drivers of these buses .
I believe , Commissioner , that the Commission should consider an initiative in this direction .
I am sure that it would be very well received by European public opinion because , as I said earlier , we are talking about a very vulnerable group which touches the hearts and minds of all European citizens .
( GA ) I do not agree with the Commissioner at all that things are satisfactory .
As he acknowledged , 35 000 people died in 2009 .
That is the outcome of the Strategy for Safety on European Union Roads between 2000 and 2010 , 15 000 more people than the reduced target set by the Commission .
I ask the Commissioner whether he or the Commission has any plan or any new ideas for improving matters ?
Current efforts are not working .
We are failing .
( RO ) The figure of 35 000 deaths caused by road accidents is equivalent to the population of a small European town disappearing every year , which I regard as an extremely serious matter .
Pedestrians , cyclists and motorcyclists account for 57 % of road accident victims .
I believe that teaching about this is something particularly lacking in children 's general schooling ( because there was also a question here referring to schoolchildren ) .
This is why I am asking you what measures the Commission is taking to educate those who are at risk in traffic .
I have a very specific question to the Commissioner from the perspective of school buses .
Would the Commission consider a proposal that there should only be one child per seat and that all children under 15 should wear seat belts on school buses ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - Probably the numbers are a little different on my papers , but , of course , I can happily reply to Mr Paleckis 's question .
Maritime transport in the Baltic Sea has increased significantly over recent years , as a result of rapid economic growth .
At the same time , the European Union has one of the most advanced regulatory frameworks on maritime safety in the world today .
The third maritime safety package adopted by Parliament and the Council in 2009 is a significant improvement of the EU 's vessel traffic monitoring and information system .
It covers all the seas surrounding Europe and introduces strict inspections on ships visiting EU ports , also known as port state control .
It contains specific measures for the Baltic Sea , such as requirements for safe winter navigation and reinforced ice standards for ships .
The Commission works closely with all the EU Baltic States to ensure the smooth implementation of these new measures .
The European Maritime Safety Agency ( EMSA ) also provides technical support .
If an accident were to happen , EMSA has standby pollution response vessels and equipment permanently located in the Baltic .
This is in addition to the pollution response measures already put in place by the Baltic States .
The Commission also maintains a continuous dialogue with the Russian Federation to ensure that safety rules are applied coherently in the Baltic Sea .
In this framework , the Commission is about to launch a pilot project with the Russian administration on monitoring maritime traffic in the Baltic Sea .
A recently adopted EU strategy in the Baltic Sea region also addresses safety and security .
I would , of course , like to respond to this interesting proposal to reduce maritime transport in the Baltic Sea , but any restriction on maritime transport before its introduction has to be carefully considered and be in line with the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Seas and with other internationally agreed conventions .
The International Maritime Organisation already recognises the Baltic as a particularly sensitive sea area and this status brings with it particular maritime traffic requirements to reduce the risk of accidents and to protect the marine environment .
I would also like to point out that maritime transport is a relatively environmentally friendly mode of transport .
Additional restrictions to commercial transport in the Baltic Sea could potentially promote other less environmentally friendly modes of transport with increased emissions as a consequence .
I was glad that the Commissioner mentioned the cooperation with Russia .
As regards the standards for environmental improvements for ships , which countries , in your opinion , are leading in this area and which are not among the best ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - It is very difficult to make a difference and I do not have any evidence to say that one country is better than another .
In general , Baltic Sea countries are all very sensitive about environmental issues and maritime transport issues as well .
You know that the Nordic countries initiated - and were the main drivers behind - a special decision to reduce sulphur in ship emissions , so I really do not have any evidence to single one country out from another .
Commissioner , you are a model Commissioner in that your answers are accurate , helpful and brief .
That is very appropriate at Question Time .
Subject : CAP after 2013 - distribution of direct aid
Taking the view that the hectare basis for aid is inadequate for ensuring a fair distribution of direct aid under the CAP after 2013 , the European Parliament has called on the Commission to propose additional objective criteria and assess their potential impact , bearing in mind the complexity of the agricultural sector and the differences between the Member States ( Lyon report on the future of the CAP after 2013 ) .
Will the Commission say what specific measures it has taken in this connection ?
What criteria is it considering for direct aid distribution ?
Subject : Measures to prevent soil erosion under the CAP post-2013
An increasing number of disasters are occurring in central , eastern and southern Europe owing to hydrogeological disturbances .
In its resolution of 5 May 2010 on agriculture in the Union and climate change ( 2009 / 2157 ( INI ) ) , Parliament stressed that the ' next reform of the CAP ' should include ' protecting the soil from water and wind erosion by ensuring organic matter content ' .
Can the Commission state what measures it intends to take in the context of the new CAP to promote initiatives aimed at preventing soil erosion ?
Subject : New framework for the EU common agricultural policy 2014-2020
Without a significant increase in targeted subsidies for Bulgaria , the agriculture sector there could collapse .
This is especially serious in times of crisis .
Bulgaria and Romania , which , in 2007 , were the last countries to join the EU , receive just 40 % of the amount granted in agricultural subsidies to established Member States such as Germany , France and others .
The 100 % alignment of subsidies under the treaty on the accession of those countries to the EU is only due to take place in 2016 .
Does the Commission intend to accelerate the increase in the level of subsidies granted to Bulgaria during the negotiations on the new framework for the common agricultural policy for the period 2014-2020 which are currently in progress and , if so , will the criteria be modified ?
Subject : Taking account of biodiversity in the reform of the CAP
In its report of 21 September 2010 ( P7 _ TA ( 2010 ) 0325 ) , Parliament clearly denounced the failure of the European strategy for halting the loss of biodiversity by 2010 .
Increasingly intensive farming , growing use of pesticides and fertilisers , the increasing size of agricultural holdings , the development of monoculture : agricultural biodiversity is particularly affected and is in an alarming state .
We have to act , and act fast .
As the report points out , a cross-sector approach is needed : the protection and restoration of our natural capital is not solely a matter for environmental policies .
These considerations must be integrated into all of the EU 's policies : the way we see the agriculture of tomorrow is decisive .
Sustainable use of agricultural biodiversity calls for a firm commitment to an ecologically sustainable future .
We need to take advantage of the CAP reform to reverse the trend and ensure that biodiversity is protected and restored .
Bioconditionality is a major element in this change .
In light of the failure of efforts to halt the loss of biodiversity by 2010 , could the Commission state what criteria on protection of biodiversity will be integrated into the CAP after 2013 . Would it be possible to use this new policy to restore agricultural biodiversity ?
Subject : Fair distribution of CAP payments
In George Lyon 's report on the future of the common agricultural policy after 2013 , which was adopted on 8 July 2010 , Parliament called for ' a fair distribution of CAP payments ' and insisted ' that it should be fair to farmers in both new and old Member States ' .
What steps is the Commission taking and what solutions does it intend to put forward with a view to acting on this call for CAP payments to be fairly distributed between the old and new Member States ?
I am now going to answer five questions , which are grouped together and cover the same theme .
The total amount of direct payments in European Union Member States reflects their agricultural production and the average level of aid over an historical period .
Due to the fact that their historical references have been used to determine direct payments , this direct aid is not distributed equally among Member States , among regions or among the various categories of farmers .
The EU-12 , that is to say , the 12 most recent EU Members , is in the process of phasing in funding , in other words , progressively implementing direct payments .
In the EU-10 , direct payments will reach 100 % of European Union level in 2013 .
As for the last two Member States to have joined , Bulgaria and Romania , who are treated equally , they will begin to progressively implement direct payments in 2016 , having started at 25 % of these payment levels in 2007 .
Nevertheless , all Member States of the EU-12 , that is to say , all the new Member States , also have the opportunity to top up EU direct payments with national subsidies within the limits clearly set out by the regulation and the accession treaties .
As prompted by the Council during the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) health check in 2008 and during the CAP reform in 2003 , the Commission is involved in looking at ways of developing the direct payment system , especially regarding the issue of different levels of payment among Member States .
For the post-2013 period , the Commission will study and assess the various options for reforming the direct payment system .
The changes that must be made to the direct payment system and , more specifically , to the way in which the payments are distributed , in order to ensure fairer treatment among Member States and among the various categories of farmers , is at the centre of the debate on the future of the CAP .
Nevertheless , there are still questions surrounding which methods and criteria to use in order to begin working towards providing more equitable support .
One important matter concerning the future distribution of direct support among Member States will be to determine how to progress from the current situation to a more equitable distribution in the future and , at the same time , avoid major upheavals which could have significant economic consequences in certain regions or for certain production systems .
The CAP post-2013 will also have to deal with many environmental challenges , including the issue of soil degradation in Europe , which , today , is a very serious problem heightened by the issue of climate change .
Biodiversity is also a main priority for the sustainable management of natural resources within the Europe 2020 strategy .
Although the goal to stop biodiversity loss by 2010 was not achieved , progress has clearly been made and the CAP has made a significant contribution to this .
At present , the CAP supports sustainable soil management through direct payments subject to compliance with environmental requirements , especially good agri-environmental practices regarding soil erosion , soil organic matter and soil structure , as well as through specific rural development measures , especially payments for agri-environmental measures which go beyond the basic conditions set out under the Good Agricultural and Environmental Conditions .
Furthermore , in order to ensure better soil management in Europe and to help maintain soil organic matter , the Commission tabled a proposal for a soil framework directive in 2006 .
One of the goals is to identify the causes of erosion and prevent it .
This proposal also takes account of the tools that the CAP has to offer to this end .
As regards biodiversity , today , the CAP refers to compliance with environmental requirements , including the Birds Directive and the Habitats Directive , the infringement of which results in penalties .
These penalties reduce direct aid and cut specific rural development measures , especially payments for the Natura 2000 regions as well as agri-environmental payments .
As regards the CAP post-2013 , the Commission is fully aware of the scope of environmental challenges to be met and is currently in the process of studying the different ways of better integrating environmental issues through all the CAP instruments , under the first and second pillars .
The impact assessment in order to prepare the legislative proposals for the CAP post-2013 is under way , and a communication broadly outlining the future of the common agricultural policy is scheduled for November 2010 .
I shall table this communication to the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development on 17 November .
( EL ) Commissioner , I am sure that you recognise the fundamental differences between the individual regions and Member States of the Union in the agricultural sector .
I would refer , among other things , to the extent , structure and typology of holdings and to the contribution made by agriculture to employment and the economy in disadvantaged areas and environmentally vulnerable areas .
That is why , in my opinion , we should not define area aid uniformly , by which I mean at European Union level .
Can you confirm , Commissioner , that objective criteria will be laid down for the allocation of direct aid ?
( IT ) Mr President , I am grateful to the Commissioner for the answer about soil erosion , but I would like to ask him a supplementary question .
Given that an important cause in Mediterranean regions is the existence of bare ground due to forest fires and fires characteristic of Mediterranean countries , does the Commissioner not think it time to change the way agri-environmental premiums are calculated , by introducing additional specific premiums for farms that undertake to develop and maintain environmentally friendly farming practices whose particular aim is to prevent fires on farms and rural land ?
( BG ) As you mentioned , Bulgaria and Romania , which were the last to join the European Union in 2007 , currently receive barely 40 % of the amount of agricultural subsidies granted to old Member States like Germany , France and others .
You remarked that the alignment of the subsidies will not take place until 2016 , which , during this crisis , puts the two newly admitted countries in an extremely unfair position .
This actually puts agriculture and a large section of the population which is involved in agricultural work at risk .
Do you not think that this factor , namely , the economic and financial crisis , should not be taken into account in the specific case of these two Member States ?
As was underlined in the Court of Auditors ' 2008 report , the Commission is well aware that the Member States ' application of cross-compliance could be improved .
I would , however , also like to highlight the fact that the Court of Auditors ' report covers a two-year period , beginning shortly after the introduction of the Good Agricultural and Environmental Conditions .
Since the first year of application of cross-compliance in 2005 , the Commission has implemented a whole series of initiatives that aim , on the one hand , to help the Member States and , on the other , to ensure that they comply with their legal obligations .
The Commission provides support through numerous exchanges on these subjects and discussions in the various forums dealing with these specific questions .
The talks on regulations have taken place in the relevant management committee , the most technical discussions have been held by a group of experts dealing specifically with cross-compliance , and discussions on the supervisory methods have taken place in certain specialist workshops .
Since 2004 , the Commission has , furthermore , regularly published guidance documents for the Member States that have helped them to adapt their national systems .
The Commission monitors the Member States ' legal obligations based on information from audits carried out in the Member States themselves that the latter send them .
If weaknesses are noted during the audits , financial corrections are made to the expenditure of the Member States in question , should a risk to the agricultural fund be identified .
This was the case in the past and a certain number of procedures are consequently under way , including at present .
The Commission is convinced that all of these initiatives have led to a significant improvement in the running of the cross-compliance system , particularly since the observations made by the Court of Auditors in their 2007 report .
Efforts will , of course , continue to be made in this area as the Commission places an emphasis on the smooth running of this system , which is an essential element of the common agricultural policy .
( DE ) Mr President , I am much obliged to the Commissioner for that very comprehensive reply .
I now have another brief question regarding cross compliance and biodiversity , which you have also already mentioned today .
Sound agriculture can help to preserve biodiversity and halt the extinction of species .
However , it should not only be the job of the Commissioner for the Environment to create awareness of this .
Commissioner , my question to you , specifically , is what will you do to increase the awareness of the parties concerned - and by that I mean the political decision makers , consumers , but , above all , the farmers concerned - of the value of biodiversity and its associated ecosystem services ?
If there are problems with the current system of cross-compliance , how are we going to address the potential of further problems if we deepen the requirements on the environmental side of pillar one , which is something contained in the leaked document on the reform of the CAP ?
I would just like your views on that .
The 2007-2013 rural development programme for Greece , cofinanced by the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development , does not contain a guarantee fund for small and very small enterprises as it stands .
The Greek authorities have not submitted a request to the Commission 's Directorate-General for Agriculture to modify the programme to include this guarantee fund .
It is important to underline that , in line with the principle of subsidiarity , it is the Member States which propose the content of measures under the rural development programme , in accordance with the Rural Development Regulation .
According to Article 19 of Regulation ( EC ) No 1698 / 2005 on support for rural development by the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development ( EAFRD ) , the rural development programmes may be revised at the request of the Member States , after approval from the national monitoring committee and following the Commission 's examination and approval .
In terms of the Greek fishing sector , the national authorities have informed the Commission of their intention to set up a new instrument in order to help small businesses in the fishing sector .
According to the Greek authorities , this instrument will be managed within the framework of an already established financial system .
The Greek authorities have also informed the Commission of their intention to cofinance this instrument through the 2007-2013 operational programme for the fishing sector in Greece .
Given that there is a plan for the implementation of financial instruments in the fishing operational programme , the Commission supports the creation of such financial instruments in order to set up key measures for the operational programme , providing these comply with the legal provisions on the subject , in particular , Articles 34 and 37 of Regulation ( EC ) No 498 / 2007 .
The amount that will be contributed to this instrument under the European Fisheries Fund could total EUR 35 million .
The monitoring committee of the abovementioned operational programme will establish the criteria for selecting the beneficiary of these funds .
The Greek authorities are finalising the action plan that will also include the conditions for the operation of the financial instrument .
The Commission expects that this financial instrument , which will benefit from cofinancing from the European Fisheries Fund , will be operational before the end of 2010 .
( EL ) Commissioner , your reply was fairly comprehensive and I thank you .
I have a supplementary question : did the Greek Government specifically make this proposal - you expounded certain aspects of the question - and does what you said - by which I mean whether this will apply as of 2010 - depend on whether the Greek Government makes its request on time , so that the points you mentioned can be cofinanced ?
Member of the Commission . - European Union aquaculture is at the forefront of sustainable development .
The Commission and I have to admit that the aquaculture sector deserves greater recognition of its assets and values .
The Commission therefore adopted a communication entitled ' Building a sustainable future for aquaculture ' which identifies three strategic objectives for public authorities to pursue : promoting the competitiveness of the aquaculture sector ; maintaining its sustainability ; and improving its governance .
In this communication , the Commission identifies a number of measures to be taken by public authorities at all levels - EU , national and regional - in order to address the challenges faced by the sector .
In order to support the sustainable development of European aquaculture , including shellfish production , the EU has in place comprehensive animal health and food safety legislation .
We are very active at international level in establishing animal health and food safety standards for aquaculture products , including shellfish , that are essential for international trade .
The Commission has also established an EU reference laboratory for mollusc diseases , which receives annual financial support , to ensure coordination of national laboratories in the Member States and provide scientific support to the Commission .
The Commission , with the concerned Member States , is also closely monitoring the abnormal mortalities observed in oysters over the past few years and has taken measures to control the virus that seems to be associated with these mortalities .
As far as the overall strategy for EU aquaculture is concerned , the Commission would also like to recall the debate held in Parliament in June 2010 , based on the report prepared by Guido Milana .
The Commission appreciates Parliament 's support for sustainable aquaculture and for giving it a greater focus .
The Commission is of the view that sustainable aquaculture activities should be adequately supported through the common fisheries policy , and that this aspect should be covered under the reformed common fisheries policy .
The Commission is convinced of the need to help the sector organise itself more efficiently .
In particular , we want to strengthen its producer and inter-branch organisations so as to better link production forecasts to market needs and ensure higher value for their products through marketing and labelling .
Thank you , Commissioner , for your comprehensive response .
In relation to it , I just want to say that a recent investigation in Ireland showed that much of the fish coming in was wrongly labelled , so that people who thought they were eating cod , for instance , were in fact eating a different fish .
I just want to ask whether the Commission is aware of this .
What , if anything , can be done about it in the short term , apart from developing our own aquaculture , which is very , very important ?
I would appreciate your answer .
Mr President , I am pleased to note from Commissioner Damanaki 's reply that aquaculture will play an important role in the new common fisheries policy .
I should just like to point out to the Commissioner that there are huge opportunities for job creation in the development of aquaculture , particularly in areas where there is a very high rate of unemployment .
I believe that the Commission can play an important role .
It can take the lead in communicating the Commissioner 's views to the Member States and in suggesting to the Member States that although we cannot compromise on the quality of food , we certainly should ensure that one body in each country will deal with aquaculture rather than cross-cutting through various departments and agencies .
Member of the Commission . - I would like to thank Mr Tsoukalas for his question because this really is a very important issue for us and I have to say clearly and openly that the implementation of the European Fisheries Fund has not yet reached cruising speed .
We are not satisfied with it .
Certified interim payments sent by Member States to the Commission amount to 5 % of the overall EFF allocation .
However , the data we have received recently from the Member States under annual reporting show that by the end of 2009 , 18.2 % of the overall EFF allocation was committed to specific projects .
This is encouraging .
Importantly , these figures include premiums not only under Axis 1 but also other Axes .
Only Axis 4 ' Sustainable Development for Fishing Areas ' is unfortunately lagging behind due to the long implementation process required to set up partnerships .


The reasons for this situation include , firstly , the late adoption of the EFF regulation ; secondly , the delayed adoption of the operational programmes , some of which were adopted in the second half of 2008 ; thirdly , problems in setting up the management and control systems , the approval of which is the precondition for sending the payments to the Commission ; and fourthly , the effects of the financial and economic crisis on the fisheries sector .

At this level of implementation , it is too early to state whether the EFF achieved its objectives .
More information will be available with the interim evaluation due at the end of 2011 .
It is also difficult to point to best practices in this respect as Member States have very different EFF amounts to spend and these amounts have been allocated to Axes in a diverse way which impacts on the rate of absorption .
For example , Axis 1 , ' Measures for the adaptation of the Community Fishing Fleet ' , is very easy to absorb .
The others are not so easy .
At the meeting of Directors-General organised by the Belgian Presidency last September as a remedy to the absorption problems , notably , to the problem of access to capital , the Commission recommended financial engineering techniques such as the use of facilitators or the simplification of procedures and application forms .
The next EFF Committee will have presentations on the use of these possibilities .
The implementation of the Greek operational programme for 2007-2013 is delayed .
I am sorry to say this , but it really is delayed .
Up to 15 September 2010 , actual payments only reached EUR 5 000 600 , which amounts to 2 % of the total EFF allocation . Two percent is a very small amount .
This unsatisfactory situation results mainly from problems in setting up the management and control system and delays in the launching of key measures under the operational programme .
The financial crisis is also responsible for some delays , in particular , for measures under Axis 2 .
The Commission is currently preparing its annual report on the implementation of the EFF in 2009 which will provide further information and background on the question posed by the honourable Member .
( EL ) Thank you , Commissioner , for your comprehensive reply .
I should like to take this opportunity , as you referred to the terrible economic situation and the possible failure in getting the European Fisheries Fund up to speed , to ask if a complete ban on fishing gear such as boat seines would come under the provision of compensation for fishermen who lose their job or if , in keeping with the regulation , the two-year derogation from the rules of the European Fisheries Fund could be extended in order to safeguard viable social conditions .
In the question , you were asked which Member States could serve as examples of best practice , and I also wonder which Member States could serve as examples of worst practice .
Are you at liberty to say and maybe to give the reasons for the disparity between the best and the worst ?
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , to answer Mr Kelly first , I would like to say that , in general , for countries which have a better system for controlling compliance and have all the instruments at their disposal , it is easier to absorb the money .
This is a general rule .
Generally speaking , I have to admit that Mediterranean countries - the countries of the south - have bigger problems .
Greece has a special problem .
We have to be very sure that we can help everybody in order to have better absorption .
It is our plan to make an effort to simplify the rules for absorption .
That is why we will have a funding line in the framework of our CFP reform which will be much easier for the Member States to absorb .
Referring to Mr Tsoukalas 's question about the Mediterranean Regulation , we have decided that this Mediterranean Regulation has to be implemented .
We have had to implement this regulation since 1 June , and there is no way back .
If we were to amend this regulation , we would need two or three years without any control and compliance system , so we are going to implement this regulation .
I have already cooperated with the Greek authorities .
I have explained to them that they have to implement this regulation without any further delay .
That means , of course , that all the provisions about special types of gear that are very heavy for the environment have to be met .
It also means that we are going to exhaust the margins from our fund possibilities to give them funding in order to compensate them .
This is something I would like to say referring to boat seines , to trawlers and to all types of gear : they have to give us a good example of compliance .
We will do our best in order to exhaust our funding margins to make it possible for them to have better gear and to improve the selectivity of their gear .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will receive written answers ( see Annex ) .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 20 : 30 and resumed at 21 : 00 )

Combating late payment in commercial transactions ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Weiler , on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on combating late payment in commercial transactions ( recast ) - C7-0044 / 2009 - .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I would like to thank the team of shadow rapporteurs from the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , my colleagues and everyone who contributed to this splendid result .
Without constructive and fair cooperation with the Commission and with the Belgian Presidency , we would certainly not have achieved this result .
As rapporteur , I am - as you can imagine - very pleased with the result , firstly because we have made significant improvements in relation to the old directive , and secondly because we have introduced new ways to encourage better payment practices .
We have achieved the goal .
Well , I would prefer to say that the course has been set for improving the liquidity of SMEs , the small and medium-sized enterprises , and for securing investments in new products , new jobs and new processes .
Why was it necessary to improve this directive ?
The legislation from 2000 was non-binding and not very efficient .
In recent years , payment practices in almost all Member States have deteriorated , and this happened even before the financial and economic crisis .
The reform was also requested by the small businesses that expressed their wishes within the framework of the Small Business Act .
They wanted payment practices in Europe to be organised in a considerably more efficient manner .
With regard to the results , I can say , firstly , that we have trodden a new path .
We have strict rules .
As a matter of principle , invoices must be paid within 30 days with few exceptions , and these must be justified .
We have introduced a higher late payment interest rate of 8 % .
We have set the recovery costs at a completely non-bureaucratic fixed amount of EUR 40 , and we have made it easier than it was previously for small businesses to assert their rights .
The second aspect to the new path , however , is the positive incentives and the new instruments , for example , the naming of customers with good payment practices , more information provided to small businesses concerning their rights , payment in instalments and the promotion of alternative dispute resolution mechanisms .
This legislation is also part of the ' better regulation ' approach and it will also apply to the EU institutions .
We are particularly proud of this , because - as I am sure you can imagine - not everyone was enthusiastic about it .
Of course , there were a few conflicts and I would like to mention some of these .
Firstly , to start with , there were certainly major differences and a diversity of opinions in Parliament .
The 100 amendments alone demonstrate that we first had to tussle together over this in Parliament , too .
The Commission was certainly not always happy with our endeavours , including the extension of this to the business to business level , but I think that , overall , we have achieved a good result .
It was the Council that posed the problems .
It is regrettable that the Council has not always fulfilled its objective of helping small businesses .
I find that particularly regrettable for the relatively rich and well-structured countries like Germany and Austria .
With regard to the professional organisations , I can only say that they were constructive , even though we , naturally , did not always accept or were not always able to go with their opinions .
In summary , the next steps are that , after tomorrow 's vote , we expect the Council to conduct a final positive vote and then the Member States will be able to implement this legislation .
We do not expect it to take two years for this to be implemented .
Instead , we expect the Member States to begin to transpose it into national law as early as January of next year .
Madam President , I believe this debate brings an important period of work to a close .
The Commission , Parliament and the Council have decided to join together in giving a specific response to small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) by implementing part of the Small Business Act .
A directive will , I hope , be adopted tomorrow which will enable a great many SMEs in the European Union to breathe a sigh of relief .
The number of unpaid bills has been increasing for too long : last year , there was an 8 % increase , and today bad debts total EUR 300 billion .
This is a problem that leaves SMEs in extreme difficulties .
They are often in danger of closing down because they cannot survive due to the failure by large companies and , especially , public authorities , to honour their commitments .
I believe the Union 's institutions are ready to give a positive response for the EU economy .
When the legislation that we are about to adopt is fully in force , roughly EUR 180 billion will be put back into circulation , which means stimulating growth and innovation initiatives in favour of SMEs .
As you know , access to credit is key to the development and increased competitiveness of our businesses .
I therefore believe that the decision to support this directive proposed by the Commission is of great importance to our economy , because it finally provides an answer to millions of European enterprises and gives hope to millions of workers who have jobs thanks to the existence of such enterprises , which form the backbone of our economy .
I would like to thank the Belgian Presidency for the important part it played in mediation , and I also thank all the Members of the European Parliament who have worked hard during this stage , starting with Mrs Weiler , Mr Baldassarre and Mr De Angelis , as well as all the shadow rapporteurs , who made it possible to find a positive solution .

As a result of the harmonisation of payment periods for public bodies , which will have to pay their invoices within 30 days , I think we will inject a substantial amount of extra cash into companies ' coffers .
These rules will also have the effect of strongly encouraging those public authorities that delay their payments to bring their management methods up to date as well .
In fact , when a public body acquires goods or services , it has already included the funds for that spending in its budget .
Therefore , it should not be difficult to pay its creditors punctually .
It should also be emphasised that shorter payment periods will result in savings for the public authorities .
Another important point in the agreement is that businesses themselves will have to pay their invoices within 60 days , unless agreed otherwise between the parties on terms that are not unfair to the creditor .
In conclusion , I must point out that the Member States will remain free to keep or adopt provisions that are more favourable to the creditor than is necessary under the directive .
Consequently , this legislative document does not prevent Member States from adopting shorter payment periods or harsher penalties .
Madam President , honourable Members , this new directive shows the Union 's determination to give Europe 's enterprises , and especially SMEs , a decisive boost to get through the economic crisis , which the Commission intends to tackle by means of a series of actions .
We have just tabled the communication on innovation and next week , we will also table the one on the new industrial policy , and innovation and industrial policy cannot be put into practice without there being access to credit .
Tomorrow , Parliament , in agreement with the Council Presidency and the European Commission , will provide a concrete response to these expectations .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Mrs Weiler for the excellent work she has done .
With this provision , Europe is putting an end to a procedure that has brought a great many small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) to their knees .
Parliament is taking action to protect SMEs - the most vulnerable businesses and the ones most exposed to the effects of the crisis - from problems of liquidity and access to credit .
The current practice of delaying payments is pushing a great many small businesses towards bankruptcy , with adverse effects on employment .
That is why the provision is important : it sets the maximum payment period at 60 days , increases interest on late payments to 8 % and outlaws the use of contractual terms that are unfair to the creditor .
In other words , it lays down definite time periods , incentives and , most of all , no exceptions .
These are measures designed to protect SMEs , stimulate our economic and productive fabric , and boost employment .
It is now the turn of the Member States to take swift and effective steps to implement this directive , which confirms that Europe exists , is useful and can make itself felt .
Madam President , Mr Tajani , Mrs Weiler , ladies and gentlemen , I am very pleased and proud to have contributed to the adoption of this directive on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs .
It is a vital counter-cyclical measure which provides very real support to companies , especially small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) , by laying down definite payment terms and appropriate penalties to encourage punctual payment by both public authorities and private enterprise in the European Union .
If everyone involved paid their debts on time , the European economy would receive a cash injection worth EUR 300 billion .

Our market will not be common and our competition will not be fair until uniform rules are established that apply to everybody .
That is the motivation behind the new directive on combating late payment : it forces public authorities to be more efficient and virtuous in their actions and helps the internal market and free competition to develop homogeneously , to the benefit of SMEs .
This House has been able to make a decisive contribution to this successful outcome by overcoming all kinds of pressure and divisions for the sake of the general good of the people and of the European production system .
Commissioner , fellow Members , I am pleased that , today , we can sum up the discussion which we have been having in recent months .
Everyone involved in the work on the directive knows that reaching agreement was not easy , although all of the parties were aware of the importance of the problem .
I think the measures we are going to vote on tomorrow are good news for businesses and , in particular , for small and medium-sized enterprises , which are going to be able to have their invoices paid more promptly .
The scale of the problem of late payment is not the same in every Member State .
However , we should not forget that businesses operate in the common European market and often conduct their activities in different Member States .
Business operators should have a guarantee that their invoices will be paid on time irrespective of whether it is Poland , Spain , France or Malta .
Ladies and gentlemen , I was asked by a journalist , today , if the directive has teeth and what principal instruments it has which will change behaviour in the market .
Well , in my opinion , its teeth are to be found in the maximum and non-extendible 60-day settlement period for public authorities .
It is extremely important that information about the directive 's main instruments reaches business operators .
They have to know that they are entitled to compensation for the costs of recovering due amounts , that payment deadlines have been shortened and that contractual provisions which rule out interest on late settlements , rule out compensation or contain unjustified extended settlement deadlines are , quite simply , dishonest .
Only then will businesses make use of the directive 's provisions and demand respect for settlement deadlines and other rights to which they are entitled .
For payment delays should be the exception and not the rule .
In my opinion , the directive is a strong signal from the European institutions that this is precisely how things should be .
I would like to thank everyone for their cooperation and attention .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to congratulate our rapporteur , Mrs Weiler , on her work and the remarkable compromise achieved with the Council , as the Commission 's initial proposal had some major faults .
I would like to go back over four important points achieved in this directive .
First , I am very pleased that there is a guarantee in place on equal treatment of the public and private sectors .
The Commission was expecting heavier sanctions for the public sector , even though the latter works in the general interest .
This was the result of ignorance about the reality of the state of the Member States ' public accounts , and could have resulted in a competitive disadvantage for public companies .
Another move forward is the extension of payment terms to 60 instead of 30 days for public health services , which have complex budgetary procedures forcing them to have longer payment terms , for which they cannot be held responsible .
Still on the subject of payment terms , it was essential to establish a ban on unfair contractual terms affecting creditors in contracts between companies , which often happens between a large group and a small and medium-sized enterprise .
Finally , and this relates primarily to the small and medium-sized enterprises which are victims of payment delays , the introduction of an 8 % interest rate in the event of a delay and compensation to cover collection costs could encourage these companies to demand damages .
Until now , they have tended to refuse to do so at the risk of this jeopardising anything .
I am therefore delighted to be able to vote on this bill which , I hope , will constitute real progress for the viability and good health of European businesses , progress that is needed not only for a more successful internal market , but also a fairer one .
Madam President , Commissioner Tajani , ladies and gentlemen , tomorrow , the European Parliament will adopt a directive on combating late payment that will make history .
It is the first directive that can quite simply be explained in three sentences : firstly , public authorities will , as a matter of principle , have to pay within 30 days in future if no shorter payment targets have been agreed and if no special circumstances make a payment target of no more than 60 days necessary .
Secondly , when agreeing payment targets , enterprises have freedom of contract within 60 days and payment targets of more than 60 days are no longer permitted , except if expressly agreed and if it does not pose a serious disadvantage to the creditor .
Thirdly , if the aforementioned payment deadlines are exceeded , recovery costs of at least EUR 40 and interest of at least 8 % above the European Central Bank base interest rate can be charged without a prior reminder .
This directive will help small and medium-sized enterprises in Europe to a great extent to improve their liquidity , and they will not need to accept as much credit from the banks .
Debtors with a strong market presence will no longer be able to force small and medium-sized enterprises into granting longer payment deadlines , and that is a good thing .
Furthermore , individual Member States will not only be able to retain shorter payment target deadlines in the form that has been customary up to now ; we assume that , in fact , they will be retained , because we cannot imagine that the Late Payments Directive will lead to a deterioration in payment practices within the Member States .
Enterprises that do business within Europe know that , in future , their claims will be settled after no more than 60 days .
This is a huge step forward and a further step towards the completion of the European internal market .
We can be very satisfied with the adoption of this legislation .
It will help small and medium-sized enterprises and it will help the European internal market .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , on behalf of my political group , and also as the chairman of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , I want to thank Mrs Weiler in particular as the rapporteur , and also all the many colleagues from the committee who are here today , for a great example of teamwork .
I include in that both the Council and the Commission .
There is a lot of talk about smart regulation at the moment , but I think this is a classic example of smart regulation .
For a start , it goes to the heart of problems that many small businesses are experiencing in an economy in which they are finding conditions very difficult at the moment .
We must insist that Member States implement this proposal as soon as possible .
Secondly , the Commission rightly analysed the problems and successes of the previous directive , and I want to remark here that this was the first directive where the agreement of the committee coordinators to invite the Commission to present its full impact assessment of any proposal was carried out to the full .
We had a very comprehensive impact assessment which clearly identified the areas which needed to be changed .
Above all , the insistence now that public authorities in particular also have to conform to the standards applied to the private sector and cannot abuse their position against small suppliers by complying with these requirements , is absolutely central .
This is the major achievement , and I particularly want to thank the Belgian Presidency - and I see that they are represented here this evening - because they resisted demands from some Member States to try and get themselves a carve-out from this 60-day requirement .
We said to the Belgian Presidency that there is no point whatsoever in having this directive if you allow this to happen .
It is devoid of meaning if you let public authorities off the hook .
I think this is a good example of smart regulation , but may I just conclude by making two final observations .
First of all , we must get this implemented properly and consistently in every Member State ; and secondly , it must result in a change of culture which says that it is simply no longer acceptable for large customers to exploit small businesses by paying them late .
I think this is what this directive will achieve .

Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I must thank Mr Tajani for his statement , which I endorse wholeheartedly .
It is all too common to find that public authorities themselves are bad payers , and they often cause otherwise healthy companies to fail and seriously damage the competitiveness of our firms .
They can bring about a terrible chain reaction with major social repercussions which , in the end , may sometimes backfire on the public authority which gave rise to this trail of damage , through increases in prices , costs and , consequently , spending .
In view of all this , it is hardly surprising if a small business is forced into bankruptcy due to a lack of liquid assets , especially in periods of economic crisis and recession such as the one we are now experiencing .
It has therefore been decided that severe penalties should be imposed for such late payments .
The new parameters laid down in the adopted report include keeping contractual freedom in negotiations between private enterprises , but imposing time limits ( 30 + 30 days ) ; setting the term within which public authorities must pay private enterprises at 30 days ; and introducing a new rule for large corporations - such as those operating in the postal service , energy and transport sectors - which compete with private companies even though they are publicly funded , in that they are equated to private companies and are therefore subject to the rules of the private market .
It is now for the Member States to implement this provision as swiftly as possible so as to reinvigorate those companies that are still in difficulties today , as the Commissioner and a number of my fellow Members have emphasised .
( HU ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in view of the chains of debts which also affect and shackle the economy of Hungary , we should definitely welcome a regulation that facilitates the reinforcement of a stronger payment discipline and the predictability of financial processes , thereby contributing to an improvement in the situation of financial operators .
On the one hand , the tabled amendments make the original proposal clearer , which is an improvement , and , on the other , as opposed to the original objectives , they weaken the dissuasive forces seen in the original proposal , especially on the part of the authorities .
Derogation from the 30 days is particularly not allowed in the case of public authorities .
We must apply a background regulation which makes this deadline possible .
As regards sanctions , enterprises and authorities must be treated equally .
The fundamental objective is the recovery of the economy and prompt payment in order to facilitate the financial stability of small and medium-sized enterprises .
No provisions have been made to facilitate this in the proposal .
Abusing their significant market share and dominance , large multinational companies force their domestic partners into contracts stipulating 90 or 120 day payment terms , with possible notional sanctions if missed .
However , the vulnerable supplier does not dare enforce the sanctions even when clearly supported by the law , for fear of losing orders .
In order to avoid this , we should have statutory regulations in every case , stipulating mandatory late payment penalty charges , with fines to be imposed even on the creditor when such penalties are not charged . Thank you very much for your attention .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is , of course , completely normal in the European Parliament to begin by thanking our fellow Members , but in the case of this directive , I believe that it is actually appropriate to start with this expression of thanks .
First of all , I would like to thank Commissioner Tajani , who , in a way seldom seen before , accommodated the requests and the justified concerns of Parliament in the work of the Commission in an unbelievably open manner .
This really was a very positive new development in the cooperation between the Council , the Commission and Parliament .
In this regard , I can only endorse what has already been said about this : this is smart regulation and we could do with more of it .
However , I believe that we in the European Parliament were also able to help to enable this directive ultimately to end up in the Council with this result , which has already been described by many fellow Members as positive .
Between the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection , we followed a common cross-committee strategy .
We worked closely together , including across the group divide , and I must say that , as a representative of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , I would like not only to offer my thanks , but also to express my respect for the rapporteur , Mrs Weiler , for the fact that - although at the start she had a different content defined - as rapporteur for this House , she ultimately represented the vote , the majority opinion of the Committee , in a very serious and very emphatic manner .
Without that , this success would not have been possible , despite the significant work performed by the shadow rapporteurs .
Finally , I would just like to mention one point .
There is one area that we have so far mentioned only very briefly and that is the EUR 40 that it will be possible , in future , to charge as a flat rate in the event of a late payment .
I believe that when this measure is implemented in the Member States , when consumers get to know about it , we will have to attempt to explain this many times , because in the case of a completely normal delivery of goods , EUR 40 is actually a good means of preventing these late payments that we want to put a stop to in Europe .
I believe that the Commission and the Member States will still have to exert their influence on public opinion in order to enable consumers to understand why this is necessary in the interests of small and medium-sized enterprises in Europe .
Madam President , I would like to thank the Commissioner for his excellent comments earlier on .
This is excellent legislation , and I would like , in particular , to compliment my colleague , Barbara Weiler , on the manner in which she brought this through .
It is absolutely fantastic work and an example of the type of good legislation that we can bring through .
It will provide a better flow of money around our economies and therefore is good for business , small businesses and society in general .
More importantly , it will help us with the big issue facing us all at the moment , which is the provision of jobs .
This directive will provide clear strong principles that can be communicated in markets and Member States to the effect that late payments will no longer be tolerated .
This should create greater liquidity .
Companies getting paid promptly are more likely to be able to avail themselves of credit , grow their businesses and generate and create employment .
Furthermore , I know from recent insolvency court cases in my own country , Ireland , and particularly in the construction sector , that the many late payments end up becoming bad debts and bring companies to their knees .
That has been the case for a company very close to me , and mass redundancies have resulted from this .
I also welcome the provision on positive naming .
I think this is a good idea .
It rewards good practice and creates incentives .
Let us not forget farmers .
Farmers have been suffering from failure to receive payments in time from processors and supermarkets .
The multiples have been winning .
Hopefully , these laws will give them a stronger negotiating position so that this vulnerable group in the food chain can also be better protected .
( CS ) To start with , I think that I first need to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Weiler , for the good work she has done , because initially , it was not easy at all .
Nevertheless , I think that we can be satisfied with the final form .
Unlike the original Commission proposal , which seemed to me a little divorced from practice , this new amendment has managed to move closer to the reality that prevails in commercial and contractual relationships .
The proposal also managed , in particular , to simplify and clarify what I consider a fundamental shift towards the better intelligibility of standards .
If there is anything in particular that is worth highlighting , it is the fact that , unlike the original Commission proposal , we managed to retain the principle of contractual freedom in commercial and contractual relationships .
At the same time , it is very good news that we managed to put through a provision which stipulates that European Union institutions have the same status as public authorities in the Member States .
So , from now on , these institutions will have to pay on time , which will be particularly appreciated by the beneficiaries of European funding .
I am also very happy that we managed to delete the very ridiculous provision that ordered public authorities which pay one day late to pay a flat penalty of 5 % of the full amount owed in addition to the standard rate of interest for delayed payment .
I do not need to emphasise the kind of impact that this provision would have on already strained public budgets .
Once again , I would like to thank the rapporteur and my colleagues for the amount of effort they have put into finding a joint compromise on the form of this report .
I think that it was energy well expended .
Madam President , I would very much like to join the chorus of thanks and congratulations , which are more than a mere formality this evening .
I would like to thank Commissioner Tajani for his personal commitment , the Council for its flexibility and , of course , my colleagues , for reaching this compromise in first reading that is so important for us in business .
In particular , I thank my friend Małgorzata Handzlik of the EPP .
Having been a businesswoman myself before entering this House , I am fully aware that late payment is a serious issue for small companies .
Sometimes , it can lead to bankruptcy .
Other times , at best , it can be a cause of uncertainty and can damage business .
Limiting the payment period for public administrative authorities to 60 days is , of course , a major achievement , since public authorities , as Commissioner Tajani has just said , simply have to process payments , so it is a matter of reducing bureaucracy .
I am also glad that we have introduced BtoB as small businesses now have a clear legal framework to enable them to make claims for late payment from big companies , something they at times did not dare to do .
I believe that we have found a good balance between respect for freedom of contract - which is all important - and providing small companies with the necessary tools to avoid being held hostage by bigger companies or public administration .
Instead of spending their time chasing debts , they can now devote their resources to effectively exercising their right to receive payment , interest and compensation .
I believe this agreement should be a tool to deter late payments rather than a tool to enforce collection of late payments and , as Malcolm Harbour said , to really create a culture of paying on time which will make for a better functioning internal market and , of course , benefit all the stakeholders .
We have shown that Parliament can take concrete measures that can really make a difference , create more jobs and assist SMEs .
Now , the overriding issue is for the Council and the Member States to assume their responsibility to make sure that these rules are properly enforced .
( EL ) Madam President , my thanks to Mrs Weiler who has , I believe , given a helping hand to small and medium-sized enterprises throughout Europe and , hence , to Europe itself .
At this critical time for the Union 's economy , a very serious and substantiated effort is being made to strengthen small and medium-sized enterprises .
We all know that late payments are often the reason why these companies go bankrupt and jobs are lost .
We have managed , with a great deal of difficulty , coupled with an even greater willingness to compromise so that jobs can be saved , to broker what may be a rather harsh , but which is certainly a necessary and fair agreement .
I am sure you understand that , as a Greek , I personally take an even greater interest in and am especially concerned by this issue .
The fact that Greece has agreed to payment margins which might be termed ' narrow ' illustrates that we really are committed to turning round the situation in my country .
The general 30-day payment rule means , in very simple terms , that our internal administrative auditing procedures for approving payments need to be changed .
The 60-day exception , especially in sectors such as health , gives us a margin for handling chain payment procedures which are not always easy to audit .
I want us to succeed - and I believe that we shall - because we owe it to workers and businessmen in Greece and to workers and businessmen in Europe .
We must give small and medium-sized enterprises a chance to work with more incentives and to create healthy growth .
( PL ) The problem of prompt payment in commercial transactions also affects farmers and suppliers of agricultural produce .
Very often , settlement deadlines are put off to very distant dates , and this is one reason why the economic situation of many farms is worsening .
Farmers often do not receive timely payment for their produce .
In the recent Bové report , the European Parliament declared in favour of farmers and deemed that the maximum settlement period for transactions of this kind should be no longer than 30 days .
We should strive for the effective introduction of this period into practice in all Member States of the European Union .
Farmers should be protected from the dishonest practices of commercial enterprises and , in particular , those of the huge retail chains .
( IT ) Madam President , Mr Tajani , Mrs Weiler , the directive on combating late payment in commercial transactions is a powerful and important act of this House , which has become the spokesman for the just requests of Europe 's small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) , which have been suffering from late payment of their invoices for years .
This is a very serious problem , which has hindered companies ' development and , in some cases , has bankrupted healthy firms , which were already under pressure from the high interest rates charged by the banks .
Under the agreement reached on 13 September between Parliament and the Council , companies can now rely on definite deadlines by which they can expect their invoices to be paid , and these deadlines will have to be met by both public authorities and the private sector .
The proposed directive will certainly improve cash flow for Europe 's companies , which thus have an important legal instrument with which they can fully and effectively exercise their rights .
I would not like to see this benefit for SMEs have an impact on purchase prices .
I hope the Member States will know how to react to the strong message being sent out by the European Union at this time of particular economic downturn by speeding up the transposition of the European directive into their national legislations .
( CS ) This necessary proposal for revising the directive on late payments , which we have been discussing today , is decidedly better than the original proposal .
I regret , however , that in the final compromise , we did not manage to ensure equal status for all parties and to maintain a level playing field both for public and for private entities .
While the payment periods for contracts between businesses should , in principle , be limited to 60 calendar days - and this period may be extended in exceptional cases - in the case of contracts with public authorities , including municipalities and towns , the periods should not exceed 30 calendar days .
This seems to me to be wrong , because all players should operate under the same conditions .
The justification that public authorities are at an advantage in that they can obtain financing on more attractive terms than businesses , or are less dependent on building stable relationships , may be valid for national authorities or European institutions , but is definitely not valid for most smaller towns and rural municipalities , not only in the Czech Republic , but throughout Europe .
The resulting proposal is therefore largely discriminatory towards such smaller towns .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I personally agree with the need to strengthen Directive 2000 / 35 / EC and to identify the instruments needed to put an end to , or at least significantly reduce , late payment in commercial transactions .
The economic and political consequences of late payment on national markets and especially the European market are obvious to everyone .
The ongoing economic recession has worsened the situation , damaging competitiveness and profitability even further and posing a serious threat to the survival of small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) , which form an essential part of the European market , create wealth and play a decisive role in creating jobs .
This political choice by the European Commission is a step in the right direction , the same one that Mr Monti referred to in his report when he spoke of the need to intervene to make the business climate more favourable for SMEs .
As for whether the public authorities will comply promptly or whether the 8 % interest rate will act as a deterrent , I cannot hide the fact that I am somewhat doubtful as to the outcome , when I think of certain regions in my own country and other Member States that will really struggle to comply with the new rules .
I hope that this new approach can be a real opportunity for change .
Now it is important to monitor the transposition of the directive into the various internal legal systems , with the involvement of regional and local authorities , to ensure that it is carried out uniformly everywhere .
( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by congratulating my fellow Member , the rapporteur , for her work , as well as thanking all those who worked with her on this report , which has allowed this agreement to be reached at the first reading .
Everyone here recognised that the present directive , which recasts the previous directive that is more than 10 years old , aims to put an end to a widespread problem : the European Union and late payment .
Such delays are unreasonably long in some Member States when they involve public administration .
This practice has massive negative effects on economic life , whether in terms of small and medium-sized enterprises or the internal market , and they cannot be tolerated any longer , especially given that we are experiencing the kind of economic and financial crisis that we are at present .
This legislative amendment brings coherence and sense to the plan for reviving the European economy and implementing the ' Small Business Act ' .
This directive is sure to improve the liquidity of companies .
Creditors will have an effective and efficient tool for exercising their rights against ' bad payment behaviour ' .
With this directive in place , reprehensible practice by public entities will be the exception .
Public administrative bodies should set a good example by paying their bills for goods and services within a month .
Now it is up to the institutions involved , the Council and the Member States to ensure that the transposition of this directive is carried out as swiftly as possible .
( FI ) Madam President , Commissioner , small companies frequently suffer from financial difficulties owing to late payment , and in the present economic situation , delayed payments can even mean bankruptcy for suppliers of goods and services , due to poor liquidity .
An agreement has now been made with the Council to update the Late Payments Directive , which would set a general deadline of 30 days for payments between businesses and public corporations .
In my view , however , it is also important to recognise a general freedom of contract in business transactions between enterprises , and that is why I think that it is a good idea if payment periods in business transactions between companies can also be extended to 60 days , if that is the view of both parties .
The prospect of extending payment periods for public authorities is a more limited one , and late payment in public administration , in particular , has become a huge problem in some EU countries .
In Greece , for example , the average payment period has had to be stretched to as much as 165 days ( although things are getting better , as our Greek fellow Member pointed out here ) .
In Spain , it is 138 days , and in Italy 128 .
Late payment has meant that finance companies have come to benefit , because businesses have been forced to sell their accounts receivable to speed up their revenue cycle .
These financial services cost money , and we need to point out that companies have a basic right to receive the money owed to them without having to pay any middlemen and incurring additional costs .
The agreed interest for late payment , the reference rate plus 8 % , is acceptable , but the EUR 40 minimum recovery charge might become seen as excessive for small and , for example , repeat deliveries .
We have to remember that arrears charges must be reasonable , which is to say , tied to the reasonable costs that the creditor has actually incurred .
Despite these marginal comments , the Late Payments Directive will certainly be of most benefit mainly to small and mediumsized enterprises .
( RO ) In an unstable economic environment , late payments have an adverse impact on SMEs .
Improving the system in this respect is an ambitious objective , but it is also necessary to ensure that employees and suppliers are paid on time .
The new regulations on late payment in commercial transactions should facilitate and speed up the process for companies to recover the money they are due .
I believe that all the parties involved must be on an equal footing and the rules must apply to all .
During the last three years , more than 30 000 SMEs have ceased operating due to financial deadlock .
One of the causes is late payment by the state for products and services .
I wish to end by expressing my support for this proposal for a directive which encourages better supervision and evaluation of the commercial transactions system .
( CS ) I have no doubt that tomorrow , we will pass this revised directive and thus open the way to a new business culture where early payments are common practice and late payments incur harsh penalties .
In particular , smaller entrepreneurs will appreciate the fact that state authorities and institutions linked to the state budget will also no longer owe money for many months for goods and services , and will perhaps pay within 30 days .
I am pleased that the Council has agreed with the new fee of EUR 40 for recovering payments , and also supports an increased interest rate on arrears of 1 % compared with now .
I just think that it is not feasible when recovering minimal amounts which are due more to errors and which do not have a visible effect on the ability of companies to pay .
Fortunately , this does not relate to late payments by consumers .
I am pleased that my Committee and the Council have agreed with the fact that it is not possible to introduce a dual system of penalties for the private and public sectors , as the Commission proposed .
I noted the paradox that , for example , hospitals would have to pay their private creditors higher penalties than they themselves could require of their debtors .
This change creates a high quality instrument , and I congratulate Mrs Weiler .
( HU ) Ladies and gentlemen , I welcome the report by Mrs Weiler , which aims to eliminate loopholes and create fair commercial morals in the European Union , but let us not have any illusions .
This is a necessary , but not sufficient measure , as we are all aware of the ways in which dominant companies can exercise pressure .
This is a very important and necessary measure , but it is not sufficient .
Further control is very important , since it is well-known that small enterprises , including those in the agricultural sector , are particularly disadvantaged within the food supply chain , as also mentioned in the Bové report .
They are exposed to the dominance of buyers and large chain stores .
Mrs Weiler 's report brings an important contribution to this as well , but further efficient monitoring and control are required . Thank you for your attention .
( PT ) Madam President , in many Member States today , there is a wide disparity as regards the payment terms to businesses , especially when the state , small and medium-sized enterprises , and large companies are involved .
Those of us who come from business know that in the current economic crisis , and with the growing difficulties in financing , companies are increasingly struggling with liquidity problems , and that in many Member States , they are even exposed to an increased risk of bankruptcy .
It seems clear that the existing directive , which attempted to regulate this matter , had a limited effect , and the proposal that we are analysing now represents an important step in meeting the deadlines for payment , not only in relations between the companies and public bodies , but also - and this is crucial - in the relationships that companies establish with one another .
We now have legislation that offers us greater added value , with a clear system of penalties for late payment , and that also represents an effective improvement in counteracting abuse by the state and large companies of their dominant position .
( SK ) The legal environment in the Member States in the area of debt recovery varies .
Experience with the promptness of payment for goods or services supplied therefore also varies in the Member States .
However , we have one thing in common - late payments create enormous problems for small and medium-sized enterprises .
In my own country , there are two groups of investors who quite often fail to comply with deadlines for paying invoices .
The first group comprises public bodies at various levels , from local authorities to municipal authorities and regional bodies , all the way up to the state .
The second group are the large foreign contractors who often get small sub-contractors into impossible situations , particularly in the construction and agricultural sectors .
Small firms usually do not have the sort of financial reserves that would allow them to pay their employees for several months without receiving payment for work carried out .
Let us all hope , therefore , that the new directive will bring the expected improvements , and that the deliberate holding back of funds will become a thing of the past in the European Union .

( IT ) Madam President , Mr Tajani , ladies and gentlemen , small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) in Italy and throughout Europe are suffering terribly from the effects of the crisis .
They are the ones that struggle most every time they have to deal with a large debt , since it is more difficult for them to put up security .
They are the ones that most need to have liquid assets available , since they have less capital that they can make grow .
They are always the ones that first find themselves overwhelmed by market difficulties , as they cannot leverage diversification so much .
It is in their interests , above all , that we will be voting tomorrow on the report on the proposal for a directive on combating late payment .
Public authorities are there to serve the citizens and their interests , which , in this case , are economic interests .
It is in line with these interests that administrative procedures must be designed , established and implemented to respect and value the efforts of those who are responsible for the future of as many families as there are workers employed in a company .
Thanks to the European Parliament , from tomorrow , SMEs will be better protected against those opposite numbers in the public and private sectors that , hitherto , have relied too heavily on being able to put off paying their bills .
In conclusion , Madam President , I would like to thank the rapporteur and Commissioner Tajani for their commitment .
( SK ) Anyone who has ever been in business or has been involved in commercial activities will know what complications can be caused by something as trivial as late payments .
I applaud the approach taken by the rapporteur , and I agree with her assessment of the proposal from the Commission , and with her views on amendments and additions .
On the other hand , it might help the matter if more measures were drawn up that would provide a positive incentive for those involved in commercial relations and encourage them not to delay payments .
For example , support could be given in the European Union Member States for the use of a Prompt Payment Code , or the publication of some kind of White List of good payers .
It is simply necessary to consider not only sanctions in case of late payment , but also to try preventatively to develop an informal culture of early payment .
( DE ) Madam President , with the new regulation of late payment in commercial transactions , we can bring about a real improvement for all businesses in the European Union .
For small businesses in particular , it is unacceptable to have to wait several months for invoices to be paid .
I am therefore very pleased that today , we intend to lay down fixed payment deadlines and reminder charges for both private and public contracting authorities .
With this Europe-wide harmonisation , we will really help to improve commercial transactions throughout Europe , which will benefit small and medium-sized enterprises in particular .
We must now tackle the black sheep of the industry .
The black sheep are those who , at the time they place the order , already know very well that they will never pay for it .
Madam President , I think the debate has shown Parliament 's willingness - albeit with a variety of nuances - to support this new directive , which will provide concrete responses for small and medium-sized enterprises and millions of Europeans who are expecting the Union 's institutions to help them keep their jobs .
Since I was a Member of the European Parliament for many years , I must say I am delighted with the enormous effort made by the whole of Parliament , and particularly the rapporteurs , to move swiftly to adopt such an important piece of legislation .
I would like to thank the Presidency and all those who have collaborated : the Commission staff , my office , the Belgian Presidency 's staff and the parliamentary assistants .
We cannot sit back , however , as someone suggested , but must make sure that these rules are adopted quickly by the Member States , which have 24 months at most to do so , although we hope some of them may take less time .
I also assure you that the Commission will continue to closely monitor the ways in which the directive is transposed and implemented , and will take care to submit a report to Parliament according to the established timetable .
I thank you once again for your cooperation with the Commission and for the extraordinary result we have achieved in such a short time .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , when we discuss this matter back home in our electoral districts , I believe we will all find that we receive a great deal of support - something that is not a foregone conclusion where European dossiers are concerned - because this issue of late payment as a whole is not merely criticised back home ; it is considered by everyone to be a given that payments should be made on time .
That is the case irrespective of which party someone belongs to , and it is not dependent on what branch of industry you talk to , either .
So we have broad agreement .
I would also like to thank my fellow Members who have indicated their agreement with this result this evening .
I would like to mention three more aspects .
As I said at the beginning of the debate , we will set the wheels in motion tomorrow .
However , we will have to look very closely at whether the relaxations that we have introduced for micro-businesses , for agricultural undertakings , for example , and for artisan companies , are actually sufficient to enable these enterprises to obtain the money they are owed .
We will have to examine very carefully how the limited freedom of contract will work .
That is something new in the European internal market that we are now going to try out and that all of us also more or less support .
We will need to examine whether the 8 % late payment interest rate is adequate ; Parliament would have liked it to be 9 % .
We will see how it works , and I would like to ask the Commission to pay close attention in order to ensure that , during the process of implementation , the Member States do not water down the directive .
I also see definite success on the horizon .
I have heard that Spain has already produced new national legislation following our methods , and I know that the same is true of other Member States .
In any case , our Committee will monitor the situation or carry out an impact assessment according to a directive , so that the Member States also know that , when the parliamentary term comes to an end , we will know who has implemented the improved payment practices as we intended and who has not .
I would like to thank everyone who has contributed to this result , including the Belgian Presidency , which has perhaps not received enough recognition for its contribution .
We know how efficiently and constructively you conducted the negotiations - a small country , but I would say a country with very intelligent and efficient methods for achieving results in Europe .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 20 October , at 12 : 30 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The directive on combating late payment provides an essential instrument for establishing a proper and fair relationship between public authorities and small and medium-sized enterprises .
Once this directive has come into force , it will punish authorities which are bad payers and offer business people important leverage for recovering their debts .
Such legislation was a necessity in order to balance the market and offer the private sector guarantees that the authorities are a player with equal powers , which can be held to account when they break the rules of the game .
The directive offers a reasonable timeframe of 30 days for making payments , with derogations of up to 60 days in special cases such as hospitals , not to mention compensation and late-payment interest .
Although the form of the directive which was voted on is more lenient towards authorities which are bad payers than the European Commission 's initial proposal , it offers adequate support both to small and medium-sized companies and to large companies which , in many European Union Member States , encounter difficulties in recovering their money for the services they have provided .
I am disappointed that the 5 % penalty has been removed .
However , I see this backward step as a strategic means of winning the support of as many EU countries as possible during the Council debates .
The report on action against late payments aims to improve the functioning of the internal market , to improve payment ethics , and to support the ability of small and medium-sized enterprises to pay .
The current trend is to pay the invoice immediately before it is due or when it is overdue .
The measures contained in the proposal submitted could lead to a new business culture in which timely payments are the rule and late payments are considered to be an unacceptable abuse of the customer and a breach of contract .
A new rate of 1 % could be imposed for reimbursing the costs of recovering late payments - for individuals , businesses and public authorities - whereas in the event of late payments of individual instalments , the interest rate and penalties would be calculated exclusively for late payments .
A fixed period of 30 days is proposed as the payment period .
Exceptions are allowed only in special circumstances .
Here , it is necessary to define clearly what counts as a special circumstance .
The rapporteur proposes setting a period of 60 days as the maximum payment period for public authorities , which I fully support .
The interest on late payments should be progressive in order to motivate the debtor to pay the amount due as soon as possible .
The legalistic approach , including penalties , should , in my opinion , be supplemented further by so-called soft measures by the Member States : for example , the promotion of electronic invoices , the adjustment of payment regimes for a large volume of work or services or positive publicity .
The Commission on Sustainable Development ( CSD ) has long been fighting a battle to turn the state into an upstanding citizen when it comes to fulfilling its obligations .
Back in February this year , a draft law by the CSD was approved in Parliament which establishes that the state is to begin paying default interest when the delay in payment exceeds the limits set out in the contract or in law ( 30 or 60 days ) .
The CSD has also been advocating the possibility of compensation of claims between state debts to companies and corporate debts to social security or the tax authorities for several years , attempting to make life easier for companies that , not being paid by the state , are still being confronted with the obligation to pay its social and tax contributions .
We are therefore completely on board with the text that has now been approved , and which will establish an average period of 30 days for the state to pay its debts to suppliers .
This term may be extended to 60 days in specific cases .
It will also establish the obligation to pay default interest for late payment These are rules based on absolute justice , and they can help to alleviate the situation of many companies , especially small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) .
I would like to thank Mrs Weiler for this high quality report and the outcome of the negotiations with the Council , as the first reading agreement includes all the key elements that were put forward by the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament and which were approved in the vote in the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection .
I am especially pleased to see that private companies and public authorities are now placed on an equal footing .
The Commission 's initial proposal contained far more stringent penalties for public authorities , a position which our group felt was unacceptable as , unlike private undertakings , public sector bodies are not focused primarily on profit but rather operate in the general interest .
The fact that the lender is entitled to compensation for recovery expenses also represents real progress since , up to now , many companies , particularly SMEs , have chosen not to reclaim late-payment interest from borrowers for the simple reason that the cost of the relevant procedures outweighed any financial gains .
Finally , the maximum payment period of 30 days set out in the text seems reasonable , given that there is some scope for flexibility , notably for public healthcare bodies , a point that our group deemed particularly important .
in writing . - ( LV ) At a time of economic crisis , we must carry out reforms to improve the environment for business , because that is our best opportunity to stimulate the economy by the most direct means , thereby creating new jobs .
The directive on combating late payment in commercial transactions is one of the most positive examples of this type .
Late payment for the receipt of goods and services is a practice that is noticeable in Member States .
Furthermore , on several occasions , it is public bodies , which should theoretically have no problems in settling bills , that act in this way .
This is a significant impediment to the activities of businesses and prevents them from developing .
This sort of practice must be brought to an end .
The biggest winners from this directive will not only be businesses that operate wholly within the borders of a particular Member State but also especially small and medium-sized enterprises , which will be able to export goods and services to other Member States without needing to worry that they will need to wait several months to be paid .
All European consumers will , for their part , be winners from the increased competition and supply that the new rules will ensure .
The directive is a significant step towards the improvement of the payment culture in Europe .
By taking these sorts of decisions , we are building a Europe that is an attractive place for investors and our own businesses .
It is also essential for us going forward to take courageous decisions to encourage development .
In many EU Member States , it is common practice for invoices of ninety days and longer to be requested by the public sector and large businesses .
Small and medium-sized enterprises therefore serve as banks for public corporations or large businesses .
The internal debts of small and medium-sized enterprises accumulate , giving rise to an economic poison in the form of invoices with long payment periods which are hard to enforce .
This reinforces economic inequality and also significantly reduces competition .
Small and medium-sized enterprises are forced to cover long payment periods with credit , which they always get under worse terms than could be obtained from banks by large firms or the public sector .
The new conditions and rules for all parties significantly help small and medium-sized enterprises to defend themselves against this disguised credit .
The fixed interest rate for late payments , proposed at 8 % , is an adequate deterrent for large firms too , the fixed 30-day payment period is balanced for supplier and purchaser , and the 30-day delivery verification period prevents abuse of the verification procedure for extending the payment period .
Above all , as regards the European rules , they prevent the public sector and large companies from distorting the legislation adopted at a national level in the Member States .
I sincerely thank the rapporteur for this extremely valuable report and excellent result .
I welcome the proposal for a directive , which represents a decisive step forward in relation to the directive currently in force .
Once transposed nationally , regionally and locally , it will appreciably improve payment , particularly by public authorities , to companies , especially small and medium-sized enterprises , which will be able to count on having a more secure cash flow .
In many countries in Europe , when the public authorities are in a difficult situation , they are known to generally pay late and very often cause some companies to go bankrupt .
A glaring example is Italy where , by the end of 2009 , the public authorities were in debt to companies to the tune of approximately EUR 60 billion , and the payment delay averaged 186 days , with extremes of 800 days .
One need only think of the amounts owed to the hotels that took in the survivors of the severe earthquake that hit the Abruzzo region in April 2009 .
Sludge catastrophe in Hungary ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on the sludge catastrophe in Hungary .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I would like first to express my deepest sympathy to the families of the victims and to all those who are affected by the industrial accident that occurred on 4 October in Ajka , Hungary .
I also would like to recognise the decisive and effective actions of the Hungarian authorities to contain the impact of the spill and its spread from the rivers Torna and Marcal downstream into the Danube and into neighbouring countries , and also to prevent the risks of new spills by building additional protection walls .
I had the opportunity to thank Minister Sándor Pintér , the Hungarian Minister of the Interior in charge of civil protection , for all the efforts of the various services involved and for the bravery and dedication of the first responders .
I have just come back from the site of the accident where I witnessed both the catastrophic impact of the red sludge on people , homes , land and the ecology of the region , and the significant efforts of the Hungarian response teams .
While the causes of the disaster and its full impact are still under investigation , it is clear that the most severe damage is in the immediate vicinity of the accident and the directly affected human settlements , agricultural land and ecological systems .
7 000 inhabitants , mainly from the villages of Kolontár and Devecser , have been affected .
Nine people died and 130 have been injured , about 35 of them first responders .
Around 1 000 hectares of agricultural land and four Natura 2000 sites have been affected , and there has been substantial damage to flora and fauna in the area .
According to the information provided by the Hungarian authorities , the red mud does not contain high concentrations of heavy metals and is therefore not considered as hazardous waste .
Nonetheless , dust from the sludge presents a health risk and therefore , precautionary measures are necessary for the population and the emergency personnel in the area .
The Hungarian authorities have deployed massive human resources and equipment .
The day I was there , yesterday , there were around 1 200 rescuers from the civil protection , environment , health and police departments working tirelessly on the ground .
It is very important to stress that the emergency phase is broadly over now , because the damage downstream to the Danube is stopped and the risk of a second spill contained .
Steps are now being taken towards the next phase of decontamination and rehabilitation .
Machinery and staff continue to work on the removal of the red sludge and its disposal in appropriate sites .
Houses and structures beyond repair are being demolished ; protection dikes have been built to prevent the risk of a second spill and are being reinforced .
Monitoring is being carried out and information on precautionary and sanitary measures is being provided to the population .
Let me now turn to the EU response .
On 7 October , the Hungarian authorities triggered the civil protection mechanism requesting an EU expert team .
It was deployed immediately for a week in the affected area .
This team delivered a number of suggestions for measures to further enhance the Hungarian Government 's comprehensive remedial and recovery plan .
These include : minimising the further spread of red mud via air and water ; steps to assess the risk to human health and mitigate them ; steps to assess the risk of further damage and mitigate them ; environmental monitoring ; and remediation and revitalisation measures .
Beyond this initial emergency response , the Commission stands ready to deploy the civil protection mechanism to assist further with expertise , as well as equipment , if the Hungarian authorities so require .
Secondly , the structural funds could be mobilised to address the consequences of the disaster , and that was made clear .
The government was informed of that .
If they were to decide they wanted to redirect funds , the Commission would look favourably on such requests .
Thirdly , the mobilisation of the EU solidarity fund is very unlikely to be possible in this case due to the strict conditions of the current regulation , under which only natural disasters can be considered ; these conditions also include a 0.6 % threshold of damage to GDP , and that is unlikely to be met .
Once again , the Commission is very clearly concerned about the need to make the solidarity fund faster and expand its scope .
It is very difficult to explain to citizens in Member States why we can help people in Pakistan immediately , but we cannot help the people living in the Ajka area .
The Commission is also looking into the question of environmental legislation .
At a first analysis , the existing EU waste legislation , the directive on waste from extractive industries , the upcoming Industrial Emissions Directive replacing the Integrated Pollution Prevention and Control Directive , the directive on the control of major accident hazards , the so-called Seveso Directive , and the Waste Framework Directive provide a sufficient framework for regulating potentially dangerous industrial activities and managing waste in a way that does not pose risks to human health and the environment .
The Commission is of the view that the focus must not be on new legislation but on ensuring the proper implementation and enforcement of existing legislation by all Member States .
We also have environmental legislation that deals with post-accident damage , namely the Environmental Liability Directive .
It applies to the installation and consequently , the necessary remedial measures that have to be undertaken , by the liable operator who should bear the full cost of remediation .
Our report on the implementation of the environmental liability directive shows a rather slow take-up of the financial security instruments to cover for liabilities , and this is the case in Ajka .
We are considering how to strengthen this in the future and , if necessary , make this mandatory .
Following the Ajka sludge accident , the Commission will take stock of the lessons learnt at European level and , in particular , the appropriateness and the correct implementation and enforcement of European environmental legislation ; the measures needed to make sure that the affected population and industry at risk are covered by appropriate insurance schemes ; and the way forward to strengthen European disaster monitoring and response capacity and enhance our instruments to express solidarity with our members and our citizens in moments of need .
Concerning this last point , I would like to mention that next week , the Commission will adopt the communication on the reinforcement of EU disaster response capacity which will address the response to various types of disasters , including industrial accidents , and will strengthen our capacity to respond collectively .
I would like to take this opportunity to thank Parliament for its strong support in this area of strengthening EU disaster response capacity .
I look forward to hearing your questions on the specific case in Hungary as well as any comments you might want to make on the broader issue .
Since Commissioner Georgieva talked about the extent of the industrial disaster in great detail , I do not have to expand on it further , and I would like to thank her for the appreciation expressed for those who participated in damage control .
I know that she visited Budapest and expressed the same thoughts there .
This is obviously welcome by those who have been working on damage control day and night for more than a week .
You have just talked about the possibility of mobilising structural funds .
I would like to ask you to elaborate on this in somewhat more detail in your response , in your closing thoughts , and let us know what you mean by this .
You also mentioned that you are thinking about mandatory assistance as well .
I would also like to learn a little more about what this would involve .
I believe that this tragedy which happened in Hungary , as well as the tragedies which happened in the past 10 years in various areas , from Spain through France to Belgium , are warning us that such industrial disasters can happen and be repeated at any time , anywhere .
At the same time , this disaster also focused our attention on the fact that the Union has no means available to it , and I think we should phrase this clearly and unambiguously .
Yes , it has no means to handle such situations .
You have also referred to this earlier .
I think the time has come to review the list of hazardous substances , and I think red sludge should be put back on the list .
I also think the time has come to impose mandatory liability insurance on plants engaged in hazardous activities , which happen to be the plants which are largely responsible for the large industrial disasters of the past 10 years .
And I also think that the time has come for us to establish a new financial system that can provide efficient assistance , namely , real and rapid assistance for the affected country .
We will soon hand over our proposal in this respect to the Commissioner , and I hope she will show the same open attitude in receiving it as in her introductory thoughts .
Firstly , I would like to thank you and the European citizens who have expressed their sympathy in relation with the disaster in Hungary .
The tragic event in Hungary is also a loss for Europe .
The purpose of today 's debate is to turn the solidarity intentions of the EU into concrete assistance , and to think about the prevention of future environmental disasters .
Fellow Members , I propose that we transform the solidarity fund .
It would be practical to extend the range of support to industrial disasters as well and to reduce the threshold of the monetary equivalent of the damage .
This is even more justified in view of what we have heard from Mrs Georgieva , that we have used only 10 % of this fund in the past 10 years .
Today 's debate must also provide answers to five technical safety issues related to long-term environmental protection .
Firstly , all the reservoirs still in operation or abandoned should undergo a technical and environmental review , according to uniformly established EU principles .
Member States should enforce compliance with the jointly established technical discipline , and the European Commission should verify compliance .
Secondly , industrial units which do not store red sludge appropriately should be included in the category of hazardous industrial plants .
Thirdly , Member State implementation of the Mining Waste Directive should be accelerated .
Fourthly , as I also proposed in a written question , the EU should support research programmes aimed at recycling red sludge .
Fifthly , during the Hungarian Presidency , as part of the Danube strategy , we must start to clear up and recultivate the industrial and mining waste reservoirs in the catchment area of the Danube .
And finally , the only industrial activities allowed in 21st century Europe should be those which ensure the decontamination and recycling of their waste .
This is how Europe can be made safer and the natural environment more habitable .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , let me begin by expressing our solidarity with the victims .
However , there are also some issues that need to be discussed in the light of this disaster .
First of all , thank you , Commissioner , for the information that a communication will be issued next week on the emergency intervention measures , which are , of course , essential .
We should be in a position to come to the aid of our fellow citizens in the event of natural and industrial disasters alike .
However , I am not happy that this very toxic sludge - the television reports have included images of people who have burns as a consequence of coming into contact with the sludge - is to be classified as inert waste .
That is wholly unacceptable .
The Commission must initiate a review of the list of dangerous waste products , with a view to including the sludge and , at the same time , establishing whether other types of product could be added to the list .
The key issue here is the de facto implementation of Community law , and in this regard , Commissioner , I feel that it is vital that the Commission should have the resources necessary to monitor the actual implementation of Community legislation .
This does not simply mean transposing directives , but rather means implementing the legislation in all businesses within the Union .
In order to achieve that aim , the Commission requires supervisory powers that it clearly does not have at present .
We do not need more rules ; we actually need to apply existing Community law .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I too , of course , wish to express my solidarity and sympathy with the victims on behalf of my group , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , in Parliament .
We need to help the people .
What happened there is dreadful .
Yet I wish to make three comments following your speech , Commissioner Georgieva .
You said , or your words implied , that , at first glance , most European legislation is being properly observed .
Yet I wish to ask the Commission to carry out an in-depth investigation .
As Mrs Lepage pointed out , there is a wide range of European legislation : the Mining Waste Directive , the directive on emissions from certain industrial installations and the Environmental Liability Directive .
This accident was able to happen , and yet apparently all the environmental legislation was observed ?
That is impossible ; there has to have been a mistake somewhere .
Did the Hungarian authorities shoulder their responsibility ?
Did they carry out sufficient checks ?
Therefore , I think that a kind of stress test , an investigation , is needed into the application of European legislation and whether this has been carried out correctly .
Secondly , our friends from the Hungarian Greens have insisted that an independent investigation commission be sent to the area to establish objective data on the pollution .
I do not believe that such an investigation can be carried out by the Hungarian authorities alone .
Thirdly , there is the issue of inspections .
Environmental inspections are vitally important .
We have already debated the subject in Parliament , and we adopted a resolution on it on 20 November 2008 .
We want to see a legislative framework for these inspections as a matter of urgency .
Environmental inspections must be carried out ; there must be not only inspections by national inspectorates but also , in particular , control and supervision of the supervisors ; control of the controllers .
We urgently need sound environmental inspection throughout Europe and , in particular , proper implementation of the environmental directives .
In the past two weeks , the Hungarian press talked of little else but the responsibility of the company , the Hungarian Aluminium Corporation .
The Chief Executive Officer was arrested even before the investigation was launched , well before it could show any results .
The investigation will determine the responsibility of the company , but I think we can already draw one conclusion .
Responsibility lies not only with the company but also with the authorities and local governments .
Damage control is very important , and the Commissioner has spoken about the most important things we have to do in that respect , but prevention is at least as important .
In Hungary , the administration , the central government administration , and even local governments , are not sufficiently prepared to prevent such disaster situations .
Administration is extremely fragmented , it has no means , and there are neither human nor financial resources to prevent disasters .
I propose that we draw the conclusion and take this into account in terms of local government and administrative reform .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , please allow me to say what has not been said .
Commissioner , I have listened to you carefully , and what I heard made me want to say that up until now , it seems to me that the most effective action , whether by the national or the European authorities , has been to ensure silence .
Industrial accidents can and should be avoided .
There is European legislation for this , and it seems clear that the law has been violated .
There has been inefficiency , delayed response and neglect of those affected , particularly the most disadvantaged .
People have died , and many are still under the threat of what might happen to their health .
It is impossible to calculate the total costs , and it is immoral to fail to take care of victims .
I would like to ask you , Commissioner , how it is that we can know the news through reports from Hungarians , yet the authorities see and tell us nothing ?
That is why I would like to ask a few questions .
How can the bank be allowed to put pressure on people with a mortgaged house in the affected area , asking them to pay what they owe , since their houses have lost value ?
How can you consent to telephone operators cutting off the only means of contact for people in this disaster zone ?
How is it that the company responsible for this disaster is already back in business ?
Finally , Commissioner , you spoke of mitigating the effects of the sludge .
I would like to ask : what are the reasons for continuing to play down the true scale of this human tragedy ?
This way , it seems as though we are always starting from square one .
I would like to begin by expressing profound sympathy with our Hungarian friends in connection with the major accident which struck the inhabitants of the villages of Kolontár and Devecser on Monday , 4 October , when they were suddenly inundated by a huge wave of chemical sludge from a reservoir in a nearby factory .
As has become clear with the passage of time , in this case , too , it is innocent people from the affected communities who are paying the highest price for the carelessness of those who should have taken care of the upkeep and safety of the reservoir , and therefore also the safety of these houses .
I am pleased that among the first to come forward with voluntary offers of assistance to the affected citizens were rescue specialists and volunteer firemen from Slovakia .
Slovaks did not hesitate to leave their own homes and families immediately in order to help the unfortunate people affected in neighbouring Hungary .
I know that it will take a very long time to heal the wounds in Kolontár and Devecser , but we must now give thought to the fact that around Europe , there may be more of these neglected , hazardous reservoirs containing chemicals and other waste .
One was even found in an impromptu inspection by the Ministry of Agriculture in my own country .
It seems that the depositing of industrial or mining waste in dumps is not a good solution for society or for the environment .
We should therefore start to consider seriously the demand for every industrial or mining activity to be licensed only when the resulting waste will be immediately and completely destroyed or neutralised as part of the manufacturing or production cycle .
Only in this way will we be able to prevent similar accidents to the one that is now affecting the inhabitants of Kolontár and Devecser .
( HU ) Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by making a procedural motion , and ask the European Parliament not to discuss the important events regarding Hungary so late in the evening , if possible , but rather at a time when as many fellow Members as possible are able to be present in this Chamber .
Unfortunately , we had the same situation when we discussed the Slovak language law .
Well , in the experts ' opinion , the disaster at Kolontár was the result of uninhibited profit making and a serious breach of technological discipline .
Unfortunately , after two weeks of investigations , the people responsible for the accident have still not been identified , and there is less and less hope of getting to the truth .
What makes the situation even more serious is that the victims cannot even count on the Solidarity Fund , as this is not a natural disaster , and the value of the estimated damage does not exceed the prescribed EUR 591 million , but it is a case of serious human negligence .
In addition to this , commercial banks are sending out the most outrageous demands to owners of mortgaged properties , asking them to repay all their debts immediately , in one amount , in view of the fact that residential properties in the region have become completely worthless .
This reminds me of Thomas Friedman , the New York Times columnist , who said in his editorial of 4 September that credit is a drug , banks are drug dealers , and the central bank is the Godfather .
In order to solve this situation urgently , it is essential to have European social solidarity that can mitigate the damages .
It is our duty to provide the victims with every assistance , to help them restore their normal living conditions as soon as possible .
In addition , the Criminal Code should be made stricter without delay , to avoid the occurrence of similar disasters taking human lives in the future .
Madam President , something absolutely unprecedented happened in this Chamber today .
As my colleague was talking about a major tragedy in our country as a result of which nine people died , two representatives were laughing provocatively .
This is a formal complaint which I would like to raise with you , Madam President .
Please forward it to Mr Buzek .
I would like this case to be properly investigated .
Mr Nigel Farage did something which was far less provocative and offensive .
He was fined and had to go through disciplinary action .
These two women over here , these two representatives , deserve at least as much .
The Bureau takes note of your complaint .
( DE ) Madam President , I admire the ability of my fellow Member to make something out of the laughter of the two fellow Members over there .
However , back to the matter at hand .
I believe this debate is too important to try to score cheap political points from it .
First of all , I would like to express my solidarity with , and my sympathy for , the victims , particularly those who are helping and risking their lives to halt and ward off this disaster .
However , it is now important for us to keep a cool head and carry out an analysis of the current situation and , above all , to attribute responsibility .
I fully agree with the Commissioner when she says that we need to see whether the directives that we have produced for such incidents here in Europe have been properly transposed and implemented .
That is the first step and , in this regard , I am very eager to see the Commission 's report and what conclusions it will draw .
At the same time , however , I would like to ask the Commission to be much more stringent and much swifter in calling to account the Member States that do not transpose the law that we lay down here .
That is the Commission 's job , and I would say that it is sometimes a bit lax in doing this .
In this regard , the Commission would be well advised to remind the Member States of their responsibility .
Secondly , here in Europe , we have the principle that the polluter should pay .
I believe that is a very good and important principle , and I do not think that the responsibility for such incidents should be passed to the public purse .
I therefore consider the call for an extension of the Solidarity Fund to be unjustified , because we have an obvious polluter here and this polluter should pay for the damage that has been caused .
When such disasters occur , we should , of course , consider whether individual companies are in a position to bear the costs .
Here again , I am looking in the direction of the Commission , which ought to examine whether we should introduce insurance solutions in order to be able to provide appropriate compensation to people who have suffered damage .
( SV ) This is a terrible catastrophe to have hit Hungary and I have a great deal of sympathy for the people who have been affected .
What is incomprehensible is the fact that a by-product containing chromium , arsenic and mercury was stored in an open reservoir , where , in principle , heavy rains could be enough to cause a dangerous situation .
How many more of these reservoirs are there in Hungary , in Europe , and throughout the world ?
Allow me to quote a researcher in biogeometry :
I will quote in English : ' There is an urgent need for a complete global inventory of such tailing ponds , whose toxic contents represent chemical time bombs . ...
This is already the third such catastrophe in Europe alone in the last 12 years .
All of them would have been avoidable .
It cannot be the task of research alone to protect the world from such catastrophes .
Government regulations and supervision are needed here . '
( SV ) What does the Commissioner think about this ?
Do we need better chemicals legislation , an improved substitution principle , more effective rules , more rules , more controls and more alternative products ?
What should be done and how quickly can we do it ?
The intention and the aim , however , must be to bring about long-term changes and to put preventative measures in place .
( RO ) Indeed , we must demonstrate proper solidarity with Hungary , especially at the moment when the environmental disaster has spread and the toxic substance which was spilt from the plant 's tanks has already reached the waters of the Danube .
For this reason , I call on the European Commission to get directly involved in managing the situation , to provide every means available to support Hungary and to ask the responsible authorities to supply the following documents and data : a report on the effects of each chemical compound identified in ecosystems , to include the quantities spilt and give details of the spill 's impact on flora and fauna , and a report on the measures taken by the Hungarian authorities , more specifically , the quantity of chemical substances which were thrown on the spill as a counter-measure and the environmental impact of the new substances .
In view of the gravity of the situation and the danger posed by these toxic substance spills , I believe that we must take action as quickly as possible .
The European Commission is the only body in a position to request this information , in order to be able to stop this environmental disaster from spreading to the other Member States bordering the Danube and take immediate action to combat the effects of this disaster where this has already happened .
This is precisely why I am going to submit a written question to the Commission , because I expect it , apart from devising a strategy to prevent such disasters from occurring in future , to present concrete measures to us as soon as possible , which will be implemented immediately in the case of the environmental disaster in Hungary .
I am deeply concerned about the impact which this disaster may have on Romania as well .
( NL ) Madam President , I should like to thank the Commissioner for her contribution so far .
She says that no new legislation is necessary , yet this conclusion is rather hasty , in my view .
Let us be honest : this red sludge is not considered hazardous waste ?
There is no good explanation for this .
What do you mean by it ?
Is this really enough ?
Yet the directive on integrated pollution prevention and control ( IPPC Directive ) , under which this aluminium factory falls , also requires the application of the best available techniques .
These techniques include , for example , two protective walls .
There was only one protective wall .
Thus , there are clearly problems there , too , and so I should like the Commission to carry out a much clearer analysis of whether the legislation is really satisfactory .
Then there are the inspections .
Photographs in June already showed leaks , yet national supervisory authorities said that there were no problems .
Those inspections were inadequate .
Is it not time that the Commission presented more ambitious proposals on European inspections so as to ensure that the national inspectors , in turn , are controlled in order to prevent this kind of disaster in future ?
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , my sympathy , of course , goes out to the victims of this disaster .
As a member of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , when I read in the newspaper that red sludge had escaped from a reservoir there , I asked myself how something like this could possibly happen , because for years we have been adopting rules and legislation in order to isolate and contain precisely this kind of toxic substance to ensure that this sort of thing does not happen .
Clearly something has gone wrong here , and clearly there are people responsible who have not implemented the rules and legislation of the European Union .
In that case , we quite simply have to call these people to account .
The question of who was , and who was not , responsible needs to be answered .
I admire the Hungarian people , who responded very quickly and averted an even bigger disaster .
However , that must not mean that we leave everything as it is .
We must determine who was responsible and these people must be named and shamed .
We must not - and I would warn against doing this - alter the Solidarity Fund now on account of this incident .
It was established in 2002 when the floods happened .
We have rules , and we cannot shift the mismanagement of one country to Europe and allow the damage to be paid for here .
That must not be the result of this .
That is not the purpose of the Solidarity Fund .
It is intended to be used for unforeseeable events that can quite simply just happen .
We need to keep funds in readiness for these events and not for incidents such as the one that has just occurred in Hungary .
However , I would like to make a suggestion .
When the floods occurred in 2002 , we did not even have a Solidarity Fund and we were able to use resources from the European Regional Development Fund ( ERDF ) , together with a reduction in cofinancing in this area , for example .
That also helps the countries by enabling them to use their resources for other things .
We could therefore take a different path here in order to make these funds available .
The Commission ought to follow this recommendation .
( HU ) I would like to express my sympathy to all affected Hungarians .
Your environmental disaster focused the attention of the whole world on Hungary .
This disaster made one thing clear to everyone , namely , that the maintenance and checking of old industrial facilities are of primary importance .
The costs of maintenance must not be reduced during the economic crisis , either .
( NL ) I shall now switch to Dutch .
An environmental disaster in Hungary has attracted everyone 's attention in Europe and , if one thing is clear - you have heard it here already - then that is that supervision of maintenance and the maintenance itself are essential , not least in the case of older installations and industries from times gone by .
Even in these times of economic crisis , we really cannot skimp on maintenance and supervision .
Proper transposition and implementation of the directives on waste is central and necessary .
In addition , just to mention it , waste is the raw material of the future and must represent an opportunity rather than a hazard .
Waste storage such as this - lakes of waste - really must not recur .
Waste must be recycled or reused .
Europe 's environmental and raw materials plans are very ambitious .
The Member States must be at least as ambitious and must make haste to act in the interests of human beings , the environment and industry and to take more action on waste recycling and reuse .
Therefore , I join the calls for Hungary , and also the Commission and the other Member States where this could conceivably also occur , to ascertain whether the directives on waste , not least in the field of industrial waste , and the environmental safety requirements are being properly implemented .
In addition , there is supervision of maintenance .
A human and environmental disaster of this nature must never recur .
Madam President , this drama reminds us of our responsibility as politicians .
It is not an urgent matter to come up with another new law , another legislative package .
We already have a full environmental acquis in the European Mining Waste Directive .
The problem in Europe is not about having a proper legislative framework , but about the proper implementation of these laws by the Member States .
Obviously , companies have had way too much leverage in negotiating with national authorities over what constitutes hazardous waste that should fall under the strictest safety standards .
Furthermore , I am honestly worried when I hear of the large number of toxic deposits all across the Danube region and of over 1 000 contaminated sites in Romania alone .
I think the first priority in terms of prevention should be to list these sites in Europe .
We cannot afford to wait until 2012 for this to come into force .
Member States should voluntarily share this information with the Commission as quickly as possible .
This case also demonstrates that the Commission should be given more means to ensure correct implementation of environmental law , especially in Central and Eastern Europe .
It also shows that the Commission should also be given more resources to investigate quality control and inspection of these dangerous sites .
Last but not least , I should like to emphasise that the basic principle should be that polluters pay for the environmental damage they cause .
This is why I am unsure that the use of the EU Solidarity Fund for natural disasters would be appropriate , as it may undermine this principle at the core of the Environmental Liability Directive .
( FI ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to say two things .
Firstly , the Commission should definitely send a task force to Hungary to analyse the situation there .
It is hardly satisfactory for us simply to rely on the information supplied by the Hungarian authorities , with respect to what this red sludge actually contains , for example .
We need information provided by independent investigators .
The other matter is that you , Commissioner , said that the red sludge does not meet the criteria for hazardous waste and that our legislation is in proper order .
These claims , however , cannot both be true at the same time .
The criteria for hazardous waste definitely need to be clarified , in such a way that high alkaline levels , or high pH values , are made one of them .
( SL ) We have to do everything we can to prevent such accidents from happening .
So I expect the European Union to establish why it is that accidents are still happening in the European Union , and then , to take appropriate action .
Certainly , we need to address more seriously the implementation of the legislation we have already adopted .
Studies of individual accidents have shown that , among other reasons , they took place because of negligence and a failure to comply with the law .
In general , we have achieved very little in the way of implementing environmental legislation in the Union .
Furthermore , I expect the Commission to provide some information about any future cross-border risks to human health as a result of the accident in Hungary .
For instance , will toxic substances migrate into the air and will people living in neighbouring countries , such as Slovenia , be in any danger if they inhale them ?
We must also call polluters to greater account and strictly apply the ' polluter pays ' principle .
Using public funds to clean up the damage and to assist people should be a last resort only , under the principle of solidarity .
That is another way of encouraging business owners to operate safely .
( SK ) First , I would like to express my sincere sympathy to our Hungarian friends , and solidarity with the families of the survivors , as well as my concern for the 150 who suffered injuries .
The toxic sludge which leaked after the breaching of the dam at the aluminium plant flooded the surrounding communities and affected about 40 square kilometres of land and water courses flowing into the Danube .
Perhaps up to nine people perished in this environmental disaster , which has become the worst in Hungarian history .
In my opinion , the top priority is to mitigate the consequences of the disaster and therefore to take a responsible approach towards revitalisation of the river ecosystems , together with the prevention of possible future disasters .
The European Union can play an important role in this context , as it is not only its right but also its duty to insist on full compliance with high environmental standards , as I can well imagine that similar hazardous reservoirs exist in other Member States .
( RO ) I , too , wish to extend my sympathy regarding the events which have taken place and would like to make the following comments .
According to the assessments by Green Peace , this accident is much more serious than the one which occurred in Baia Mare in 2000 .
I should point out that there was no loss of human life then and the impact was relatively small over time .
However , Hungary 's MEPs have tabled a resolution in which they have called for a ban on the use of cyanide technologies in mining , without submitting an alternative , with the sole purpose of blocking the Roşia Montana mining project .
We regret to note that , 10 years on , Europe is still facing major risks to human and environmental safety .
This situation is a consequence of environmental protection and disaster prevention regulations being inadequate or not being applied properly .
Measures required include a review of the criteria for classifying toxic and hazardous waste .
We should note that the pink sludge of the type which caused the accident in Kolontár is not classified as hazardous waste .
( SK ) I believe that everyone in Europe was shocked by the environmental disaster that occurred in Hungary two weeks ago and I would like to express in this place my solidarity and my sincere sympathy to the families of the survivors , and also on behalf of the citizens of the Slovak Republic .
I am delighted that Slovak rescuers were among the first to provide assistance to our Hungarian friends .
In my opinion , the European Union and the Hungarian Government , as well as the company involved which caused the environmental disaster , must act together in the current situation and on a solution to it .
I would like to conclude , Madam President , by explaining very briefly to Mrs Morvai that my response was definitely not provoked by the disaster in Hungary , and that I do not sit in Parliament at 11 o 'clock at night in order to make fun of people who are suffering .
My reaction was provoked by the completely stupid statement of your colleague from the Hungarian extremist party Jobbik , which associated the dramatic situation that has occurred in Hungary with the language law in Slovakia .
I can assure the Honourable Member that the current government , which includes the Hungarian party Hid , has not changed the language law , and that the law is quite reasonable .
To link the death of people and the disaster in Hungary with the language law in Slovakia is totally ridiculous .
( EL ) Madam President , I should like to send a message of solidarity to the citizens of Hungary .
Commissioner , we really must see if there are any other dangers and map those dangers , before another such accident occurs .
We must record dangerous materials .
Parliament has taken a stand in this Chamber on these issues .
We are calling for a ban on the use of cyanide in gold mining and the Commission should take an initiative in that direction , given the previous massive accident in Baia Mare , which had serious repercussions , precisely as a result of the use of cyanide .
I absolutely agree with what you said about the Solidarity Fund .
Finally , we must review the directive on soil , it must stop being ' blocked ' at Council level , and we must undertake to decontaminate the soil and to find out who is responsible for it .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , I think this disaster demonstrates quite clearly once again how important European legislation is , as well as the implementation and monitoring of this legislation .
Environmental disasters and their effects quite simply do not stop at the borders of a Member State or any country in the world , but extend beyond these borders via groundwater , contamination of rivers , fine particles or through the air , and then spread throughout other regions .
Commissioner , a few people have already mentioned to you that the European legislation that we have in place is , to a certain extent , inadequate , and that it is also inadequately transposed and not monitored sufficiently by the Commission .
One example of such legislation is that relating to liability .
There is a real gap here insofar as the party that causes such disasters must be called to account and made to pay .
What legislative amendments do you intend to introduce here to ensure that the polluter has to pay ?
What do you intend to do with regard to Hungary to enable independent investigations to be carried out , and what is your opinion of the proposal - as Mrs Hassi has already mentioned - to set up our own EU task force ?
I have one final point , which is that we have heard about journalists being obstructed in their investigation of this accident .
Do you intend to use your influence on the Hungarian Government to ensure that an independent report can be provided ?
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I should like to thank very much those who spoke .
You gave a good coverage of all the issues that we are facing .
Before I get into answers , just let me say the following .
When I arrived in the villages affected yesterday , the thought I had in my mind was : thank God it happened during the day , because if that accident had happened during the night , many more people would have died .
Actually , from a distance , the houses look like somebody has painted half of them in red .
Obviously this goes above the level where there are beds in which women , men , kids , elderly people sleep .
When we are faced with something like this , it is really appropriate to have a thoughtful discussion and to make sure that we draw lessons from it .
Then we can have a feedback into preparedness , prevention and response in the case of any future disaster .
So I take the comments that have been made here in this Chamber in this respect very seriously .
Let me try to respond to them .
First , on the question of legislation and the role of the Commission .
My exact wording was that , from the first analysis we have carried out , it does appear that we have the appropriate legislation in place and that , where we are still lacking sufficient action , this lies in the implementation of that legislation .
I am emphasising the words ' first analysis ' and , in my conclusion , I did stress that we would look into whether we have gaps in the legislation .
Again , based on what we have in front of us in this case and in many others , the focus really has to be on implementing the legislation we have rather than on saying : ' Oh well , let us go out and write another piece of paper and stick it on top of many other pieces of paper ' , when we know that the critical issue is implementation .
When we talk about what we might specifically be looking into from a legislative point of view , there are two specific issues at this point , though there may be more when we finish taking stock .
The first one is on the question of classification of the red mud as hazardous or not .
We do not say that in every case when we have red mud , it is not hazardous .
It may be hazardous if there is a high content of heavy metals , and if specific technical qualifications are met .
In other words , there could be cases when red mud is classified as hazardous .
At this moment of time , on the basis of the information that was provided by the Hungarian authorities , we can say that , on the basis of their information , this red mud is not hazardous , but obviously we need to carry out a more thorough analysis .
Then the question would be how we deal with an issue like this and whether there is a need to tighten up the definition of hazardous waste .
That I cannot answer today , but I can assure you that it will be looked into .
The second legislative issue that is very important is the question of liability that has been raised by a number of speakers .
Do we have in the Liability Directive enough teeth to bite when it comes down to the implementation of the ' polluter pays ' principle ?
I said at the very beginning that this is an area where the Commission is already initiating work to assess whether there is a need for tighter regulation of how companies act in terms of having the means to meet their obligations as polluters .
That again would be work we will follow up very thoroughly .
The second set of questions concerns financing .
What can we do ?
Hungary has dedicated structural funds and rural development funds at its disposal .
We know from experience that , in the process of implementing programmes , there is always some room for manoeuvre .
Basically , no country has ever achieved 100 % utilisation of structural funds , and priorities shift over time .
Therefore , it is possible for Hungary , if the government judges this a very high priority , to use structural funds or rural development funds for environmental monitoring for treatment facilities , for the rehabilitation of damaged infrastructures and the rehabilitation of agricultural land .
They can also be used for changing land use , because it may not be possible for the land I saw to be quickly rehabilitated for its conventional agricultural use , but it may be possible to use it for energy crops which do not need to meet the same test in terms of dangerous materials .
We also had quite different views on the Solidarity Fund .
I would say two things here .
One is that I agree that it is the responsibility of the polluter to pay , but at the same time , when communities are hit by a disaster of this nature , it is a matter of European solidarity and compassion to be able to give them a hand at this moment , because by the time that the liabilities of the company are met , months and months will have passed .
I find myself in an awkward situation , as Commissioner in charge of humanitarian aid and disaster response , when I can help the victims of the floods in Pakistan quickly , but there is nothing in my hands as an instrument to help the victims of this disaster .
This summer , when we had floods in Romania and Moldova , I could very quickly provide funding to Moldova , but I could not do anything for the victims of the floods in Romania - and I am talking not just about myself ; I am talking about us as European citizens .
This is a question to be looked into to see whether indeed , with the increase in disasters both at home and abroad , we should have in our hands an instrument that allows us to show compassion to our citizens .
And by the way , our citizens are perplexed as to why we can help Pakistan when we cannot help Ajka .
There have been questions that were directed to the role of the Commission .
Let me make this very clear .
The inspections and the monitoring are a Member State responsibility .
We do not have a mandate in the Commission to do it .
What we do try to do - through training activities , awareness raising , lessons learnt - is to bring all Member States up to speed in terms of their capacity to monitor and inspect .
One of the speakers here said there are clearly institutional shortages in this area .
We can help with training , but we do not have a mandate to be inspectors and to substitute for national authorities .
I do not mean that we should never have this mandate , but we do not have it today and , frankly , I think it is much more important for the national authorities to be better equipped to perform their duties than for more and more layers of inspection to be built up .
Make sure that the people who do the job are equipped to do that job .
There have been questions relating to the recycling of red sludge .
The directive does provide for incentives for research , and our environmental legislation encourages the transition to the best available technology .
Specifically for this installation , it should be in compliance with the highest standards by 2012 .
Of course , it is terrible that the disaster happened in 2010 .
Obviously - and I will finish with this point because I am well over my time - we have to learn from this case and raise our alert level as regards other places in Europe that could potentially be a source of danger in the future .
For a hazard not to turn into a catastrophe , the key is in monitoring , preparedness and prevention , and I could not agree more with those speakers who have hammered on this point .
We do have a policy on preparedness and prevention and again , as is the case with the legislation we discussed , the critical issue is for this policy to be turned into reality in our Member States .
For our part , we will bring you a proposal , a communication to strengthen the EU 's disaster response capacity , and we will come back to you with the lessons learnt from this disaster .
( SK ) I would like to make a personal statement in response to what Mrs Morvai said .
There are three things I would like to say .
The first is that it was Mrs Morvai herself who tastefully responded in this assembly to what other Members were saying .
The second is that it is utterly despicable to make political capital out of something like the disaster that occurred in Hungary , and to compare it with something entirely unconnected .
The third is that she cannot really think that anything at all relevant could be said by people who parade here through this assembly in fascist uniforms .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Although the Hungarian prime minister said that ' Hungary is strong enough to overcome the consequences of such a catastrophe on her own ' , I would like to thank the European Commission and the Member States for the support extended and offered so far to overcome the consequences of the disaster .
This disaster in Hungary also proves the need for stricter community regulations in the area of civil protection .
The Treaty of Lisbon makes this possible , since it makes disaster management the joint responsibility of the community and Member States .
The disaster in the vicinity of Ajka can be the first real test of the Environmental Liability Directive that came into force in 2007 , and we will now see whether we can fully enforce the ' polluter pays ' principle .
Among other things , the law proposes that companies create financial reserves to manage the consequences of potential industrial disasters .
It is worth considering whether we should make the creation of such financial reserves mandatory for companies working with hazardous materials .
I urge the Hungarian Government to start negotiations with the European Commission as soon as possible on the redistribution of environmental protection and rural development funds for the purposes of disaster management .
I welcome the proposal made by the European Commission in the communication concerning the budget review , published on Tuesday , that the Solidarity Fund should also be made available in future for the elimination of the consequences of industrial disasters .
in writing . - ( BG ) I would first of all like to express my condolences to the families of the nine Hungarian citizens who died as a result of the incident , as well as my sympathy to all the victims .
An industrial accident like the one which occurred in Hungary raises a number of questions for Europe 's citizens .
As might be expected , my compatriots in Bulgaria are extremely concerned and are watching closely to see whether the waters of the River Danube will be polluted now or in the future , as a result of this incident , with heavy metals or other harmful substances .
Commissioner , what capability does the European Commission have for creating the capacity to respond in such situations , in terms of prevention , immediate response , monitoring of risks and compensation for the victims ?
Is the EU capable of having an analysis carried out of the environmental risks arising from the accident in Hungary , which should be presented as soon as possible ?
This raises the question not about transferring national responsibilities to European level , but about the need for the EU to give an assurance to its citizens about problems which extend far beyond national citizens .
I wish to express my solidarity with the population affected by the environmental disaster which occurred in Hungary at the start of this month .
I believe that this is a time when we need to show decorum , without making a great fuss or putting on displays on the subject or without exploiting the images of this unfortunate industrial accident .
We can learn an important lesson from the incident in Hungary .
Economic activity is not dangerous in itself , as long as the stringent environmental protection regulations are observed .
It is only when the regulations adopted at EU level are ignored that the risk arises of whole ecosystems being destroyed .
The accident in Hungary also provides an example of European solidarity .
A team of experts from different countries has gone to this country to help the authorities in their efforts to counter the disastrous impact on the population and environment .
I also believe that it is the right time for us to raise for discussion again the provision of backup from a European civil protection force .
This must be constantly available to provide prompt , professional intervention in places affected by various disasters , which continue to grow in number not only on our continent , but worldwide too .
In the past six months , a particular part of our planet has been struck by a second major environmental disaster - in April there was the oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico and now there is red sludge in Hungary .
Although different , both disasters have something in common - they both could have been avoided or could at least have been smaller in scale if environmental protection had been given more consideration .
Unfortunately , in a number of countries , both within the EU and beyond , the environment and environmental requirements are often not a priority when planning , building and operating installations that have a significant impact on the environment .
Therefore , I am convinced that if we looked around , all of us would find numerous installations where , sooner or later , there may be an environmental disaster on a greater or smaller scale .
In many places , we can find instances where there is scant regard for environmental requirements ( whether deliberately or through incompetence ) , the construction of installations is permitted very close to residential areas , and the environmental impact assessment is only conducted in a superficial manner without residents being properly consulted and its results are somehow always favourable to the client .
When operating such installations , residents ' complaints are also often simply brushed aside .
I call on both the European Commission and the Member States to open their eyes for once and to take action once they have seen the true situation - to initiate legislative amendments tightening monitoring of the implementation of environmental requirements and responsibility for non-compliance with such requirements , and guaranteeing an independent environmental impact assessment .
The ecological disaster which has occurred in Hungary has moved us all by its extent and by its exceptionally tragic effects .
We would like to express solidarity with the victims ' families as well as with all those who have lost everything they owned and who are going to feel the effects of the leak of toxic sludge for many years to come .
I am certain that the most important thing , today , is to answer the question which is being asked so often : could this tragedy have been avoided ?
Or , rather : how should this have been done and what should we , as the European Parliament , be doing today to ensure that such events do not happen again ?
We know there are many more such reservoirs in Hungary .
However , that is not all .
For example , in Poland , in Lower Silesia , we have the largest liquid waste dump in Europe , which was established in the 1970s .
Can we sleep peacefully in a Europe in which such an event has taken place despite the existence of numerous binding legal regulations which were supposed to guarantee appropriate supervision of chemical substances ?
We have the REACH Regulation , which has been in operation for three years and is being implemented by the European Chemicals Agency .
We have other legislative documents , such as the CLP Regulation of 2008 on substances and mixtures and the Globally Harmonised System , which classifies substances and mixtures according to the hazards with which they are associated .
We must carefully and thoroughly examine existing Union law and its implementation in Member States , and we must specify clear priorities in order to ensure effective hazard prevention and efficient crisis management .
I wish to express my regret at the loss of human life resulting from the industrial waste spill which occurred in Hungary .
We have natural disasters , such as floods , which we cannot always prevent or control their impact .
However , in the case of industrial waste which is potentially harmful to human life and the environment , we have rules in the European Union for this .
Unfortunately , we can see that these rules are not complied with in every Member State .
This is why I am suggesting to the Commission to propose as its objective to inspect the quality of the national institutions entrusted with enforcing EU regulations on the storage of potentially hazardous industrial waste .
This inspection must be carried out as a priority in Member States admitted to the EU in 2004 and 2007 .
Databases relating to racial and ethnic origin in the EU ( debate )
The next item is the debate on :
the oral question to the Commission by Monika Flašíková Beňová , Claude Moraes , Kinga Göncz and Sylvie Guillaume , on behalf of the S & D Group , on databases relating to racial and ethnic origin in the EU - B7-0553 / 2010 ) ,
the oral question to the Commission by Hélène Flautre , Raül Romeva i Rueda and Judith Sargentini , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on databases relating to racial and ethnic origin in the EU - B7-0554 / 2010 ) ,
the oral question to the Commission by Renate Weber , Nathalie Griesbeck , Sophia in ' t Veld , Sonia Alfano , Cecilia Wikström , Louis Michel , Sarah Ludford , Gianni Vattimo , Leonidas Donskis , Alexander Alvaro , Niccolò Rinaldi , Ramon Tremosa i Balcells , Metin Kazak and Marielle De Sarnez , on behalf of the ALDE Group , on databases relating to racial and ethnic origin in the EU - B7-0556 / 2010 ) , and
the oral question to the Commission by Rui Tavares , Cornelia Ernst , Marie-Christine Vergiat , Cornelis de Jong , Nikolaos Chountis , Marisa Matias and Eva-Britt Svensson , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on Roma databases and discrimination - B7-0557 / 2010 ) .
According to recent media information , the French police are using the MINS database which focuses on Roma and travellers .
Non-governmental organisations have submitted complaints relating to the creation of illegal and secret databases for storing personal information in connection with racial and ethnic origins , and have stated that they are appealing to the relevant authorities .
The French authorities , however , deny the existence of such a database .
The Minister for Immigration has previously declared that biometric data on the deported Roma may be retained in the OSCAR database and in a new database that is under construction .
It is said that even the Netherlands and other countries of the European Union are registering data on ethnic and racial origin .
In connection with this , the Council is discussing a draft of the conclusions relating to mobile criminal groups in a very controversial way , and without informing the European Parliament of this initiative .
I would therefore like to ask you , Commissioner , what the Commission is doing , with regard to evidence on the existence of the MINS database in France , to verify such information .
If the Commission finds that the database breaches the principle of non-discrimination , what measures will it adopt to correct the situation ?
Is the Commission considering bringing proceedings against Member States in connection with a breach of law , and with regard to recent developments in other Member States concerning the creation or existence of databases linked to racial or ethnic origin ?
Will the Commission launch investigations in order to obtain information on such databases and to verify whether they are lawful in relation to the principle of non-discrimination ?
I would finally also like to ask what the Commission is doing to ensure that Member States do not adopt ethnic profiling in their administrative and criminal law proceedings .
Good evening Madam President , Commissioner .
Mrs Reding , you are quite rightly delighted today that France has responded to the European Commission 's infringement proceedings at the eleventh hour and has provided a legislative programme for establishing procedural rights as required under the directive on the freedom of movement .
According to your assessment , these promises are genuine and , as a result , the infringement proceedings have been put on ice - as opposed to cancelled .
We have taken note of your comments but as Members of the European Parliament , we would also like to be able to monitor these commitments .
That means having information about the promises made and the timetable provided by the French authorities .
However , let us not forget that you also asked France about individuals who have been escorted to the border and required to leave the country , an enquiry intended to confirm that these administrative procedures were not discriminatory .
What has happened to those enquiries ?
Have you received a response ?
Just as the press revealed information about the villainous and discriminatory August circular , information was recently published about a file - a database - which contains personal information including details of ethnic or racial origin .
Has this new twist not dented your confidence in the promises made by the French authorities and the accuracy of the information provided ?
Mrs Reding , would you not agree that the logical next step is now to tell us the current state of play in the ongoing examination of the documents requested by the Commission , both on the alleged discriminatory practices in France , but also regarding the potential infringement of data protection standards as laid down in Community law ?
I think that today 's European citizens are entitled to demand a responsible Commission which may publicise its successes but will also be determined in persevering with proceedings against the French authorities .
After all , this is what you are doing more generally for all EU Member States which , it is widely recognised , have fallen into bad habits in relation to the Roma .
I should also point out that the CNIL has itself confirmed the existence of four illegal files which contain personal data , in which the subjects are described as Gyppos , Gypsies or Roma .
author . - Madam President , we know the Commissioner is a very determined and courageous person .
Commissioner , you will not be easily held back by anyone and you do not usually need nudging .
If you want something , you go straight for your goal .
I wish you would be as determined in this particular case .
Just this week , you published the Commission communication on the effective implementation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
The communication states that the Commission will make full use of its powers to ensure that the Member States apply EU law , in full respect of fundamental rights , and that you will not hesitate to initiate infringement procedures .
In the case of France , I wonder why the Commission relies exclusively on the declarations of the government when , as Hélène Flautre has just pointed out , there has been a series of declarations which , with hindsight , turned out to be unreliable .
Why does the Commission not start its own investigation ?
We have asked for this before .
You know that a majority in this House is behind you .
We know that there is a lot of opposition from the Member States , but we are behind you , Ms Reding .
I should like to refer to the situation in France , the situation in Italy - which seems to be even more serious - and the situation in my own country .
First of all , I would like to know whether the existence of these databases can be confirmed .
Do we have proof that they exist or do not exist ?
Do we have a list ?
In the case of the Netherlands , I know there is a list because the municipalities which created the databases are quite proud of it ; they think they have done a very good job .
They probably did it with good intentions .
If the databases exist , would you take the view that this is legal or illegal ?
If it is legal , we do not need a debate .
If it is illegal , we need to start infringement procedures .
It is that simple .
The Commission does not hesitate in other areas .
For example , you tackled the opposition head-on when you wanted to sort out mobile phone roaming rates .
If there are cartels , then the Commission does not hesitate for a second .
In this case , I think that the Commission should act .
Ms Reding , this is the time for the EU to prove that it is a community of values and that it will intervene if fundamental rights are being violated .
Citizens are watching us .
Like Hélène Flautre , I would like to ask you to come to the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs to explain to us what the situation is and what action the Commission intends to take .
I too , as a Member of Parliament and as a European citizen , expect to obtain full access to all the correspondence that has taken place with France and possibly other Member States .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I will simply ask the question : what is the situation with regard to anti-discrimination and the equal treatment of Roma in Europe ?
When we now hear that ethnically motivated databases on the Roma - and I believe these databases as such are prohibited - are being set up by the French Gendarmerie , but also by other countries , and , to a certain extent , for preventative purposes , then that really is the limit .
Both in France and in the EU , databases that are primarily used to compile personal data on the racial or ethnic origin of people are quite simply prohibited due to the high risk of them being misused and on account of the risk of discrimination .
Only under very particular - purpose-specific - circumstances , which take non-discrimination into consideration , can the collection of data of this nature be carried out at all .
The Roma must not be criminalised , and that is the crucial point .
Ethnically motivated databases for the purpose of preventing crimes are unlawful .
The Roma must not be the subject of the special collection of data on account of their way of life , and we expect the Commission , in other words you , Mrs Reding , to repudiate any form of ethnic or racist data collection and to work hard to ensure that this is indeed stopped in the relevant countries .
Frankly , I ask myself more and more what it is other than talk , talk , talk that actually happens in this Parliament and in the framework of the EU , and what , in practical terms , we have actually managed to do to improve the situation of the Roma in Europe other than talk , talk , talk .
If we look at the collection of data , we see that the Roma have become scapegoats and people to push around in many Member States of the EU .
They are being deported to Kosovo and , in doing this , France has been contravening EU treaties for months , the principle of anti-discrimination is being violated - and the Commission behaves as if it is satisfied - and I see this rather differently to the previous speaker - with the promise by the French Government to provide the legal basis for transposing the directive on freedom of movement by the beginning of 2011 .
In the interests of decency , however , it must be said that France has to put a stop to the deportations of Roma , and it is also important for those Roma who have been unjustly deported to have their return to France facilitated .
In connection with the databases , I would like to ask you : what definite information to you have , what initiatives will you take , if these databases actually exist in this way , and will you initiate treaty infringement proceedings in such cases ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , I believe it is against human rights that we are sitting here so late at night discussing important subjects which we should really discuss during the day and not in the middle of the night when normal human beings should relax at home and go to sleep .
Having said that , there have been many debates , many scandals and many actions in the last weeks , and I think this Parliament should look at what has happened in France and the reaction in the European Commission to what was some kind of a historical event .
There has never been , so far , in the history of our European Union , a court case started because of rights .
We have started court cases because of commerce , because of the economy , because of finance , but this is the first time , on the basis of the Treaty of Lisbon and on the basis of the Charter of Fundamental Rights which is included in this Treaty of Lisbon , that the Commission has said enough is enough .
The Commission decided - all 27 Commissioners - on 29 September to start infringement proceedings against France on the basis of non-implementation of those rights of the human being , the rights of the individual citizen .
I do not need to tell you all the pressures which have occurred since that moment , but the Commission said unanimously that it will start court procedures and will put an ultimatum to France .
If France has not answered in a positive , acceptable way before 15 October , this court procedure is going to be implemented .
That is the normal way we proceed with all Member States .
Now , what has happened ?
Well , France has given an answer .
And this was the first time , it was unique in terms of the way questions are handled , and I believe personally that it was the first moment of the European of the Citizens .
Let historians one day look at that .
We are in the middle of the proceedings , we are in the middle of the fight , so we might see it from a different point of view .
Now , objectively , what has France done ?
France has done exactly what the Commission has asked it to do .
Under the 2004 directive , there are material rights , we also call them procedural rights , which exist for the sake of protecting citizens against an unacceptable action by the authorities when they are imprisoned .
And these procedural rights have not been implemented in French law .
So we said to France : by 15 October , we need to know the ways in which you intend to change French law implementing the 2004 procedural rights and showing us a credible timetable of how you are going to introduce that into French law .
Well , we got it .
We got it one hour before the end of the deadline , but we got it .
Since 08.00 on Saturday morning , my experts have been looking at the papers and I have come to the conclusion today that all the points on the basis of law which the Commission asked for from France have been answered - though , of course , not yet applied in national French law , because first they have to go to the Senate and then be introduced de facto into French law and applied in real terms .
We decided we are happy with what the French authorities gave us , but we cannot close the case , because these promises , these elements of law , these proposed laws , are not yet implemented .
So we have said that we are freezing the case , but are leaving it open .
We are leaving it open until the moment the French Government has really applied this legislation de facto in day-to-day proceedings .
That is one thing that I think is some kind of a victory .
Think about everything which has happened .
Now the French will say there is no problem , there never has been any problem .
Well , there was a problem and they are bringing us the law which they are going to change .
Let us see if they do it .
I believe they are going to do it .
There was a second question and that is how the individuals were treated during the summer period , and whether they had procedural guarantees as individuals , as European citizens , or were discriminated against .
Why did I not start infringement proceedings like those we started on the basis of the laws ?
Simply because if we want to act , we can only act on the basis of legal evidence .
We cannot act just because we have a feeling , because we are persuaded something is wrong .
We have to have the legal proof and that is why we have asked the French Government to supply us with the dossiers on the individuals .
Now we have got dossiers on individuals , several piles of them .
My experts are analysing those and they have told me they will certainly have supplementary questions to the French Government , and they think they will finish this analysis with answers from the government in four weeks ' time .
So , as of today , we have these two cases .
This is , I think , a very important fact because I would also like to tell Members very frankly that the implementation of the 2004 directive on free movement is not brilliant .
What we are seeing now , because the Commission has been strong , is that all the countries who are not perfect either - not imperfect to the extent of France , but not perfect - are starting to say that they are now going to implement it perfectly .
So something has happened .
I think that all Europe has understood that we are not joking any more and that the rights of the individual , of our citizens , and the values of our society must be handled seriously .
That is enough about the French question , because a decision has been taken by the Commission on that matter , but it is not finished and is still an open procedure .
Now to the question on the database allegedly held by the French Gendarmerie and possibly containing ethnic elements .
First , the Commission is closely following developments in these matters .
We have again been given assurances by the French authorities that everything is all right , but a different system applies here , because there is a French law here on data protection and the handling of data which is checked in accordance with our rules by the French data protection authority CNIL .
It is in line with the rules that CNIL has carried out an inspection and made a preliminary public report last week .
You have seen CNIL 's results .
I have read them too .
The way it is reported sometimes in the press is not complete , because CNIL has also said , very seriously , that there might not be ethnic elements , but there are certainly databases which have not been authorised by the authorities .
As regards compliance with EU legislation , the information provided has to make sure that the situation is covered by the Data Protection Directive .
This might be the case only for immigration-related purposes .
For immigration , there are a series of guarantees and safeguards which apply to what we call ' sensitive data ' .
Sensitive data can only be processed in exceptional cases , in cases of public interest ; they are subject to suitable safeguards , and those suitable safeguards have to be provided by the country concerned .
Should the data processing not come under the Data Protection Directive , then the 2008 framework decision on the protection of personal data processed in the framework of police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters could apply .
There , we still have a problem because this framework directive applies only as from 27 November this year .
So , on the basis of this directive , the powers of the Commission are rather limited .
I will answer the very concrete questions which have been asked in addition to the French case .
Are there other Member States where we could verify the possible existence of databases containing data on ethnic or racial origins ?
Under the Data Protection Directive , the processing of such sensitive data is authorised by way of exception and has to be notified to the national data protection authorities .
The data protection authority in France is CNIL .
And these exceptions for reasons of substantial public interest also need to be notified to the Commission .
When such notification is made , the national data protection authority and the Commission are in a position to assess if the measures are in line with data protection rules , and here we have the result of the preliminary analysis by CNIL which clearly says that such authorisations have not been asked for .
So , we should allow the judicial work in France to be done by the judicial authorities which are not just authorised , but also responsible , for doing this kind of work .
What about the Netherlands ?
There were several databases where the processing of sensitive data was provided for and was notified by the Netherlands to the Commission in 2005 and 2006 .
The most controversial database related to criminal activities of youngsters of Caribbean origin .
This database has since been deleted .
Recently , one municipality in the Netherlands planned to create an ethnic file , but it cancelled its project in response to the recommendation of the Dutch data protection authority .
This shows that the system under the directive - whereby the data protection authorities , the national data protection authorities , are responsible - works .
By the way , I would like to tell Parliament that I am working on the reform of the Data Protection Directive , partly with the aim of reinforcing the independence and the intervention opportunities of the national data protection authorities within a European framework .
That will have to be that for the time being : I have to shorten my speech because there is no interpretation after 24 : 00 , so let us cut it off there .
Madam President , Mrs Reding , ladies and gentlemen , I was delighted to hear today that the College of Commissioners does not intend to pursue the infringement proceedings against France in relation to Directive 2004 / 38 / EC .
However , some time ago , in a meeting of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , I asked you a question on this matter , and I have already told you that France provided all the information in 2006 and 2007 , together with the concordance tables for transposition of Directive 2004 / 38 / EC .
Yet now you profess surprise , in 2010 , at finding that the procedural rights are not adequate .
You never did reply to my question , Mrs Reding , so I would like to have an answer today .
I have one thing to say on the subject of the Mens file .
I think that the opposition and others are now beginning to tire of this debate .
It is very easy to prove that there is no basis for these allegations .
You have the conclusions of the CNIL report submitted to the prime minister .
I imagine that you will also have received , as I did , the report from the Director-General of the National Gendarmerie , Mrs Reding .
You have mentioned a number of points which you apparently consider unsatisfactory .
You champion human rights , but we should not limit ourselves to defending the rights of minorities .
The rights of all humans need to be defended , and we are all entitled to respect .
We are also honourable in France and I can guarantee that the Mens file has never existed .
Mrs Reding , the CNIL has investigated , looking for various unpleasant keywords such as Gypsies , Gyppos , Roma , and has not found any evidence that the National Gendarmerie holds any such files .
The only criticism that can be levelled at the National Gendarmerie is the failure to declare this database , but the files do not contain genealogical information .
It is just that the National Gendarmerie has a number of files which ...
( The President asked the speaker to conclude )
Please allow me to finish my remarks .
I am the only speaker from the PPE Group , so I would like the opportunity to speak on behalf of my group .
These files contain information on groups of individuals who have no fixed abode and no home ; they do not contain data on ethnicity .
So although there has been no statement by the CNIL , I would at least like you to acknowledge that there is no ...
( Exclamation )
Yet it is true and I would like you to acknowledge the fact .
I would also like you , Mrs Reding , to put aside your suspicions of the French Government .
Your attitude is close to becoming an unhealthy preoccupation .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , ethnic profiling is not a new practice in the Member States , but it does appear to have intensified in recent years in the name of counter-terrorism operations , maintaining law and order , and even of combating illegal immigration .
Recent revelations about the existence of a database on the Roma and travellers in France have demonstrated how important it is that the Commission should continue its investigations in order to obtain additional information about the existence of these databases but also to establish whether the databases are legal and compatible with the principle of non-discrimination .
Commissioner , I do not entirely share your enthusiasm regarding the answer provided by France a few days ago , but I do understand why you have expressed yourself in these terms .
You tell us that France claims to have plans to transpose the directive on freedom of movement and will provide a timetable .
On the question of this much-discussed directive and its transposition , there are two possibilities .
Either France has given a purely formal commitment , which would mean that the Commission has not received an answer and has forgotten past history , or , alternatively , France has given a full answer , in which case we would like to know the details .
You mentioned a timetable , a timetable for transposition which is in progress .
France is currently transposing the directive on freedom of movement as part of the fifth revision of its immigration laws in seven years .
I can guarantee that the revision will extend far beyond European principles on freedom of movement .
Consequently , I think that you will need to monitor the process very carefully .
Let me conclude by expressing my hope that the Commission will stand firm and uphold the principle of non-discrimination .
I hope that you will not allow yourselves to be lulled by amicable agreements or mere promises , even when they are made by the French Government .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , I know that it is very late , but this evening 's debate involves a fairly passionate clash of opinions .
This morning , despite the very clear explanations which you have just given us , another new French information website has been found which contains a Roma database , illicit of course , which contains detailed and extensive information including surnames , first names , nicknames , parentage , social contacts , car registration numbers and models , and partners ' names .
Once again , the authorities have claimed that they were not aware of the existence of such files .
At the end of the day , irrespective of whether the information found on this site turns out to be true , there is still an underlying risk of discrimination linked to the existence of these databases in France and various other European countries .
So , Commissioner , in view of your comments and your reputation for strength of purpose , what do you intend to do ?
What other evidence do we need to provide in order for you to act and react given this failure to uphold the principle of non-discrimination ?
In other words , and without wishing to be controversial , let us try to uphold the law in France , in the Member States of the Union , and amongst those who make up this half-hearted European democracy .
We have heard about the expulsions in France this summer , the circular issued on the 5 August - which fortunately was later withdrawn - the Mens file , and more .
We have listened with great interest to the arguments that you put forward this evening .
You have told us today that you are happy with France 's promise , made last week , to amend national legislation in line with the European directive dating back to 2004 .
Like my fellow Members , I would like to be given access to these documents so that we can share your view and your commitment to reinstating the rule of law .
From your comments this afternoon , it sounds almost as though you have capitulated .
To conclude this long debate , let me stress that it has served one purpose ; it has shown us the overriding need to address the nub of the problem , by encouraging national efforts and European policies as part of the rule of law on which European democracy is based .
Madam President , Commissioner , when you said your famous phrase , ' enough is enough ' , many people in this House , but especially in the street , applauded .
This generated a huge degree of expectation for all those of us who still believe in the European project .
Finally , someone in the Commission was daring to stand up to a strong Member State on the issue of fundamental rights , which had always been the most important thing in terms of words , but not always in terms of actions .
This surprised us a little , and it was not , shall we say , properly understood that when the proceedings were brought , they would not be brought on the basis of discrimination but only on the basis of free movement .
I believe that this was , to some extent , a deficit , but in any case , we continued to applaud your commitment at the time .
Today 's decision has therefore left us a little confused , and that does not only apply to us but to all those people who were hoping to see a courageous response in this action on your part .
This is particularly the case as we know that the confidence that you have in the French Government has been more than shown to be , at the very least , debatable .
Secondly , this is particularly the case because we know that in the review of the Free Movement Directive , alarmingly , some moves are being made in favour of introducing concepts and redefining the concept of travelling groups , which would , to some extent , allow these groups to be criminalised once again .
I believe that the frustration that some of us are feeling today should not be fuelled even further .
We therefore ask you to please allow us to hold on to the hope that you gave us with your ' enough is enough ' statement , because here , we still believe that the problem exists and that we need to stand up to the French Government on this issue , along with other governments .
Commissioner , this debate is about fundamental rights such as non-discrimination and free movement .
Yet it has also become a debate on the crucial provisions that govern our work in the European institutions .
This means knowing whether a Member State is acting in good faith , whether it is providing reliable information to the European institutions , and so on .
Moreover , in view of this , it has also become a debate about whether we , the European institutions , are able to ensure that both these principles and provisions are respected , whether we are able to speak clearly , and whether we can be uncompromising in their defence if necessary .
I believe that we already have clear answers as to the question of good faith .
There are Member States , particularly France , which have not acted in good faith .
They repeatedly deny the existence of documents , copies of which later appear in public .
This also occurred during the summer and it is happening now with databases .
How can it be claimed that there are no databases when we have published a database called Roms on a French website on the Internet today , with the cities of origin and a variety of information about Roma people , including those from the EU : from Bucharest , Belgrade and Timişoara ?
The answer to the other question is also very important .
You said that we had an historic moment , Commissioner , and that historians will recognise that the Commission was clear for the first time .
I doubt that greatly , Commission , and I am a historian .
I have many doubts because even the journalists have doubts .
The day after having gone to the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , some newspapers , like the Financial Times , wrote that the Commission will not prosecute France .
Other newspapers said that it would .
Even today , the news is that the case against France has been suspended or , elsewhere , that it has been dropped .
If the Commission is not speaking clearly - and evidently its words are not understood clearly - I would like to say that it will have a formidable ally in Parliament if it does want to speak clearly .
If the Commission hesitates , Parliament will not neglect to pursue this case : it will not be a case that occurred during the summer and simply died .
It will continue to be spoken of in this House .
( HU ) We can see that the crisis has undermined many European citizens ' sense of security .
This creates a good breeding ground not only for the development and dissemination of extremism , but also for political manifestations naming particular ethnic groups as threats to security and connecting minorities and migrants with crime .
The French Government started to drive out the Roma from France on ethnic grounds , which is unacceptable .
We have good reason to assume , as mentioned by several people , that the French Gendarmerie , as well as other European states , have not stopped the collection of ethnic data yet .
If this is proved , we sincerely hope that the Commission will truly act as a guardian of the treaties and the Charter of Fundamental Rights , and will initiate a procedure for breach of commitments .
The police plays an important role in maintaining public order , but ethnic profiling cannot be allowed to become part of standard police practice .
This undermines the minorities ' trust in democratic institutions and can constitute grounds for discrimination .
The majority of Roma people live in deep poverty in Europe , and in addition to poverty , they also have to suffer discrimination .
While we have ambitious plans to combat poverty in the 2020 strategy , what we often see is a fight against the poor , which we must definitely stop .
( FR ) Madam President , Mrs Reding , you have told us today , with some enthusiasm , and I quote , that France 's reaction demonstrates that the EU is an effective community of law , or , and again I am quoting , that we now need to work towards practical action and results based on our shared European values .
I have a copy of the consolidated treaties and the Charter of Fundamental Rights in my hands , and I hope you will forgive me if I do not entirely share your enthusiasm .
What evidence does the Commission need to take the matter further ?
What evidence is required to denounce the discriminatory treatment , the expulsions , currently being meted out to the Roma in France and other European countries ?
It is true that the Commission has introduced a whole raft of measures to promote Roma integration , notably using the Structural Funds .
Yet by pursuing a policy of refusing to face the facts , I wonder whether the Commission has not effectively shot itself in the foot .
( FR ) Madam President , Mrs Reding , I have to admit that I , too , feel disappointed this evening .
Many of us have taken note of your previous statements and have even supported you .
We have now been given to understand that the freedom of movement infringement proceedings have merely been suspended .
Yet the subject of today 's discussions is discrimination .
You want evidence , Mrs Reding , and you have asked the French Government , and the French Government alone , to provide that .
You tell us this and have told us this each time that we question you .
I have to say , Commissioner , with all due respect , that I am beginning to wonder whether you care what we have to say .
I was in Marseille this weekend where I met with the associations who work with the Roma community .
I have been active in this field for many years and I have to say that I was appalled , Commissioner , by what they told me about the situation of the Roma in the Marseille area .
Mrs Reding , the Roma in France are afraid , they have gone to ground .
They do not dare to leave their makeshift encampments .
Their children no longer dare to attend school .
The associations are unable to locate them and therefore unable to monitor their social well-being and health .
That is what the associations are telling us , Commissioner .
That is the current situation of the Roma in France .
The Mens file .
Let us drop the subject of the Mens file .
The Gendarmerie has announced that it has been deleted .
Yet if you read the report by the CNIL carefully , Commissioner , you will see that the inspections carried out by the CNIL referred to ethnic origin .
So let us ask for the inspection reports .
The CNIL is a reputable body .
Ask for the records of all the inspections carried out by the CNIL and ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( ES ) Madam President , Commissioner , on 9 September , Parliament adopted a resolution that triggered a timely and necessary debate .
Parliament did its job .
There are those who think that , based on the forceful nature of your subsequent statements - in line with Parliament 's demands - and on the explanations that you are giving us tonight , our only conclusion can be disappointment that there are no proceedings against France .
It should be pointed out that the debate was not on France , and certainly not against France ; it was a debate in favour of fundamental principles of European integration such as the free movement of persons , because Europe does not only mean free movement of goods and capital , but , above all , free movement of Europeans by right and without discrimination , and , of course , without discrimination on ethnic grounds .
This means that if there is still something to investigate regarding ethnic records that have not been fully clarified , it remains the work of the Commission .
What should be pointed out , however , is that this work has not been completed , because it also involves Parliament remaining vigilant against the temptation of populism , which looks for scapegoats for the problems of social exclusion rather than solutions or responses .
As well as tackling populism and its temptations , this work also involves working to integrate those who are excluded , those who have been marginalised for a long time , and , of course , the Roma population .
Parliament must sponsor a conference on the integration of the Roma community .
Parliament must also say that the work is not yet done ; in fact , it has scarcely begun , and we still have a long way to go .
This means that even if the proceedings against France are ultimately not brought , this debate will have had a purpose , because it has been shown to be timely and necessary .
( RO ) As you are all aware , 2010 was meant to be the European year for combating poverty , social exclusion , discrimination and xenophobia .
However , in actual fact , I think that the battle has been lost , at least this year .
The situation regarding fundamental rights within the European Union is becoming increasingly critical rather than improving .
Against the background of the economic and financial crisis , governments in a few Member States are increasing the acts of discrimination : deportations and databases based on Roma ethnic criteria are actions which have already been highlighted .
As long as the Commission is unable to guarantee the exercise of fundamental rights in the EU , its image as a defender of these rights will suffer .
It is a risk which this institution cannot afford to run .
Vice-President Reding , is the Commission also going to look into and investigate the other cases of discrimination reported in Member States ?
Can the Commission still conclude its investigations , bearing in mind the political pressure it is subject to ?
( HU ) Ethnic discrimination is clearly prohibited by EU and international law .
In spite of this , certain Member States are often suspected of covert discrimination against minorities living in their territories .
I do not wish to talk about covert discrimination at this point , but would like to draw your attention to an existing law which openly places an ethnic minority community at a disadvantage .
While the new Slovak Government amended the law on national language protection in a good direction , the law still stipulates fines .
Therefore , this law is perfectly able to intimidate and keep citizens whose mother tongue is not Slovakian in a situation of uncertainty .
In its position on this law , the Venice Commission clearly explained that the law contradicts the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages and limits the use of the minority language to an unjustified extent .
I would like to ask the Commission , the Commissioner and the European Parliament to examine thoroughly and condemn every practice in the territory of the EU that can be used for ethnic or racial discrimination .
( RO ) A month ago , the European Parliament expressed its concern about the mass expulsion of citizens of Roma ethnic origin and rejected any correlation between crime and immigration .
For its part , Romania has promoted , since 2007 , a European Roma inclusion strategy , an idea highlighted even at the European Council meeting in September .
I wish to stress that no satisfactory solution has been reached so far .
On the contrary , media reports about the existence of the Mens file in France reignite the debate about respect for the principle of non-discrimination .
I believe that the Commission must launch an inquiry in the relevant Member States to ensure that administrative procedures are not resulting from profiles produced according to ethnic criteria .
I wish to end by welcoming the official commitment made last Friday by the French Government to comply with European legislation on the freedom of movement .
France and Romania must act together to facilitate Roma social inclusion and obtain the necessary funding .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , today 's debate demonstrates once again how important the decision made by the European Parliament on 9 September was , in other words that , in our opinion , France - a Member State - was violating fundamental rights in this instance by discriminating against people on account of their ethnicity , and we called on you to take action .
You have told us very clearly and with enthusiasm and resolve about everything that you have done up to now , for which you have also received strong support from us .
In our opinion , however , you have now taken a step backwards , because the call for treaty infringement proceedings to be initiated on account of there being discrimination on grounds of ethnic origin has just been supported once again by the documents that a few speakers have already mentioned and which have been referred to in French newspapers today .
It is perfectly clear that there has been discrimination against the Roma on account of their ethnic origin and it was not only their freedom of movement that was violated .
I therefore call once again for action to be taken and for proceedings to be initiated .
( SK ) Security services , as an almost natural part of their preventative work , create databases of people who are involved in illegal activities .
The databases are created in accordance with national law , access to the collected data is restricted to authorised persons , and the information gathered can be used only for the purposes of protecting society from criminal activities .
I am quite sure that , just like the security services in other countries , the services in France and the Netherlands are interested in security analyses only of that information which they really need for their work .
Information on ethnic or racial origin is not normally included in that .
Any possible over-zealousness of the security services can surely be investigated and , depending on the results , I imagine , sensitively handled in order for it to be acceptable to the European Union .
( HU ) Ladies and gentlemen , the Movement for a Better Hungary ( Jobbik ) proposed as early as 2006 that it should be possible to indicate a person 's ethnicity in the criminal records , so that when applicable , attention can be drawn to Gypsy criminals .
We still maintain this position .
At that time , the left-liberal media said that Jobbik was an extremist party .
Four years on , we see lists drawn up in France in relation to the expulsion of Gypsies .
We see that in Holland , they are considered a national security risk , and databases are coming to light there , too .
Then we can also see that in Finland , the ethnic origin of Gypsy perpetrators is recorded in detention facilities .
And now let me put a question to one of the rapporteurs here , the Slovakian lady who laughed so loudly about the Hungarian victims .
I find it extremely hypocritical that she condemns the data collection on Gypsies , while , as a Slovakian politician , she supports a racist language law that punishes people on ethnic grounds for speaking their mother tongue .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , in a nutshell , the case against France has not been dropped .
It has been postponed because we need to wait for the implementation of law in practice and cannot pass judgment on legal proposals .
The legal proposals are acceptable , but they need to be implemented so that we can close the case .
The case is , therefore , still open .
Regarding the ethnic databases which the CNIL , the independent French data protection authority , is inspecting in accordance with French law , and , in this case , in accordance with the European directives , we have to rely on the independent national data protection authorities because they are responsible under European law for carrying out the analysis .
I think that the French independent data protection authority has shown that it is very capable of doing so .
( FR ) Having said all that , I do think it is very important to remind ourselves of the real issues at stake here .
Excluding those in France , there are 10 million Roma in Europe , who make up the largest minority in Europe .
I myself come from a country with 500 000 citizens .
There are 10 million Roma , so you can appreciate the scale of the issue .
The Roma live in most of our Member States in extreme poverty .
They face housing , education , health and work problems and to me , the real scandal is that these problems have still not been resolved .
So I hope that the current activities will continue - I think that they are to be welcomed because we should not tolerate this kind of discrimination .
The current activities will at least have served as a wake-up call for Member States .
I have not forgotten that at the ministerial meeting held in Cordoba in April of this year , only three out of twenty-seven Member States were represented at ministerial level .
So , one year on , we will call another ministerial meeting after we have conducted a detailed investigation , in conjunction with the task force , into the situation of the Roma and the question of whether or not European funds are being utilised , so as to establish what is really happening .
As I said , we will convene another ministerial meeting , one year on , in order to see exactly what commitments each Member State has made in terms of national strategies for the Roma within the wider European framework .
I hope that the current , rather ugly , situation will at least have served to ensure that the Roma are no longer sidelined when we come to formulate policies for tackling extreme poverty .
If we do not succeed this time round , now that we have an opportunity to do so , the next generation of Members of the European Parliament will find themselves having exactly the same discussions as we have had over the past few weeks .
We do not want that to happen , so let us take action now .
The debate is closed .
The creation of ethnic profiles is not a new practice in the Member States , but it has been on the rise in recent years , especially following the terrorist attacks in Madrid and London .
However , the only Member State that has been addressing this matter and creating legislation on it is the United Kingdom .
Creating profiles within the scope of specific databases can be legal and have legitimate purposes .
However , when the criteria used to collect data focus exclusively on race , ethnicity or religion , they should be considered discriminatory , and thus illegal .
It is legitimate for the authorities to carry out identity checks and monitoring in their respective territories as a way of safeguarding public order and security , and in order to prevent crime and monitor illegal immigration .
However , the physical and ethnic characteristics of individuals should not be seen as an indication that they are criminals or that they are in the country illegally .
Each person should be treated individually and there must be another reason , apart from the person 's race or ethnicity , for their data to be entered into a database , or for them to be subjected to different treatment from the general public .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
Opening of the sitting
Mr President , yesterday , we had a discussion on the budget .
It was clear during the debate that the report by the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy ( ITRE ) had not been received by the relevant services .
We checked the issue .
The report was completed and sent properly , so probably some mistakes occurred during the procedure .
However , it is not important to find who is responsible and what happened exactly .
What is most important is that we wish to be sure that our report , which was also our base for the trialogue , and where the biggest difference lay as compared with the Council paper , is sent to the Council official documents .
I therefore brought it with me and deliver it to you , as well as to the Council .
We kindly ask you to make sure that the proposal by the ITRE Committee , which was adopted unanimously , will arrive at the Council in due time .
Thank you very much for your support in this matter .
We will do what you want .
It is great .
The beginning of today 's discussion is fantastic !
Implementing measures ( Rule 88 ) : see Minutes
Preparations for the European Council meeting ( 28-29 October ) - Preparations for the G20 summit ( 11-12 November ) - Financial , economic and social crisis : recommendations concerning the measures and initiatives to be taken - Improving economic governance and stability framework in the EU , in particular , in the euro zone ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on the following :
Council and Commission statements on preparations for the G20 summit ( 11-12 November ) ,
Council and Commission statements on preparations for the European Council meeting ( 28-29 October ) ,
report by Mrs Berès , on the financial , economic and social crisis : recommendations concerning measures and initiatives to be taken ( mid-term report ) , and
report by Mr Feio , on improving the economic governance and stability framework of the Union , in particular in the euro area .

Mr President , Mr Barroso , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Council , I would like to thank you , Mr President , for the opportunity to talk about the preparatory work being carried out within the Council for the next European Council .
This European Council will have a busy agenda .
Its focal point will , without doubt , be economic governance .
As you are aware , the task force chaired by President Van Rompuy met on Monday and approved its final report .
This report contains important and specific recommendations and proposals that should enable us to make a qualitative leap in European economic governance .
In particular , its recommendations seek to improve fiscal discipline , broaden economic monitoring , develop and broaden coordination , strengthen the crisis management framework and strengthen institutions .
All these recommendations can be implemented quickly through legislation .
Naturally , we hope the European Council will be able to endorse them in order to enable the Commission , Parliament and the Council to make swift progress on these highly important matters .
This would , in any case , send a positive signal as to our intention to take the measures necessary to address the important economic challenge ahead of us .
It is true that some people have raised the issue of exploring other options that go further than these recommendations and beyond the scope of the treaties .
I am talking here about issues such as suspending voting rights or introducing new voting rules such as reverse majority .
Clearly , these are not easy issues , either technically or politically .
They will be discussed at the European Council next week .
Another important item on the European Council 's agenda is the preparations for the G20 summit .
Indeed , the European Council shall have to define the Union 's position on the basis of the preparatory work carried out yesterday by the ECOFIN Council .
Generally speaking , it is important for the Seoul G20 summit to mark a speeding up of the efforts to implement the framework laid down for promoting stronger , more sustainable and more balanced growth .
In particular , we need to address the major global economic imbalances which can compromise growth .
Since 2008 , with the onset of the crisis and the measures taken to deal with it - in other words , since the G20 's long-awaited rise to prominence - things have changed radically .
The reason is very simple : relevance .
The very nature of many decisions that have direct consequences for our fellow citizens has shifted within the space of a few months from the local or national level to the international level .
Globalisation means that we now have to act simultaneously at European level and at international level on most issues .
We all know that the European Union needed time to reach an agreement on a new treaty that was also meant to strengthen the Union 's role on the international stage .
It took us the best part of the last 10 years to deliver this treaty but only the last 10 months to realise how important it is .
The G20 has proved somewhat successful since its inception , but I believe that the hardest and most important test is the one awaiting it in the next few weeks and months , when we will have to confront the serious risk of losing momentum .
The European Union is currently preparing two important meetings , both in Korea , the first in two days ' time .
This is the meeting of G20 finance ministers and governors of central banks , and the second one is the G20 summit in mid-November .
In terms of substance , the Union 's contribution to strong , sustainable and balanced growth is based on : 1 ) growth-friendly and differentiated fiscal consolidation plans ; 2 ) the Europe 2020 strategy for structural reforms necessary for supporting , among other things , job creation ; 3 ) the programme for reforming the financial sector and markets ; and 4 ) the strengthening of the Union 's economic governance .
On this last point , we could present the findings of the task force at the November summit , once they have been adopted by the European Council .
I would add that the European Union is very interested in the peer review process within the G20 .
As Europeans , we are used to this type of exercise and we know how interesting and useful it can be .
Clearly , everyone must play his or her part and show a genuine willingness to contribute to the framework for growth .
The war against protectionism is not won in a single battle but by maintaining a general state of alert , day after day .
For the rest , although the work of the technical bodies , such as the Financial Stability Board chaired by Mario Draghi , is progressing well , and overall integration , particularly in certain areas , is , in my opinion , going in the right direction , it is also important to carry out a long-term reform of the International Monetary Fund .
The Europeans are ready to honour past commitments , particularly those made last year in Pittsburgh , to ensure that the new IMF is more representative of the new international economic reality and hence , that emerging economies play a bigger role and have more of a voice .
However , let me be clear on this : Europe cannot be expected to make all the concessions in this regard on its own .
All developed countries must contribute .
We have already made known what we are specifically willing to negotiate on , in terms of representation , governance and share of the vote .
We believe this is a good basis for reaching a compromise .
So , let no one blame Europe if nothing changes in this respect .
As a Union , we have negotiated among ourselves on all this and on a number of key issues and terms of reference for the G20 finance ministers ' meeting , which is due to take place this week .
We have done so to ensure that Europeans not only speak with one voice but also focus on defending and promoting that which represents their most important interests .
The Presidency and the Commission will do everything in their power to defend and support these interests resulting from our common position , which is the fruit of several months ' work by all the Member States .
With regard to climate change , in theory , the intention is not to have a detailed discussion at the European Council , since the Environment Council already adopted , on 14 October , a very comprehensive text with conclusions establishing the European position .
It is becoming ever more urgent to progress with the implementation of an ambitious scheme for combating climate change after 2012 , and to that end , the European Union continues to defend a step-by-step approach which is based on the Kyoto Protocol and the results of the Copenhagen conference and which paves the way for a comprehensive and legally binding global framework , by taking into account the political guidelines outlined in the final Copenhagen document .
The Cancún conference must achieve a balanced result which addresses the parties ' concerns and enables us to establish the progress made up to now .
The Union has expressed its preference for one legally binding instrument which would encompass the main elements of the Kyoto Protocol .
It could , however , envisage a second period of commitment under the Kyoto Protocol on several conditions .
This should take place within the context of a broader agreement to which all the major economies would subscribe and which would embody the ambition and effectiveness of international action and would fulfil the urgent need to protect environmental integrity .
I would like briefly to mention the preparation of the European Union 's position in view of the summits with the United States , Russia and Ukraine .
This will be the first time that the preparations for the summits with the Union 's key partners have been discussed by Heads of State or Government , in line with the conclusions of the European Council of 16 September .
The idea is for the Heads of State or Government to have an open debate on the main challenges in our relations with our partners .
Without wanting to anticipate this debate , let me briefly expand on the key issues of these forthcoming summits .
It will certainly be important to focus the summit with the United States on a few key issues .
Generally speaking , it will have to mark a strengthening of transatlantic cooperation , which is a fundamental vehicle for devising effective solutions to the common challenges ahead of us .
Furthermore , the day after the G20 summit , the Europe-United States summit will represent an important opportunity for taking these results on board and developing a common approach to several current economic issues .
We should also seek to develop a common approach in relation to the emerging economies .
The summit should also - at least we hope - make it possible to revive the Transatlantic Economic Council by turning it into an economic forum that goes far beyond purely regulatory issues .
The Council could usefully examine ways in which to tackle the crisis and to promote growth and jobs , on the basis of a strengthened mandate .
We also intend to use the summit to prepare for Cancún , and we are obviously expecting an important positive signal from our US partners .
Finally , important foreign policy issues will also be on the agenda , notably with regard to Sudan and Iran .
Concerning the summit with Ukraine , another debate is planned this afternoon with the High Representative , so you will forgive me if I do not say any more on this matter this morning .
At the summit with Russia , the European Union intends to express its full support for the partnership for modernisation , which will enable us to strengthen our cooperation in all areas , particularly in key areas such as innovation and energy .
Those , Mr President , Mr Barroso , ladies and gentlemen , are the main points due to be discussed at next week 's European Council : a busy and important agenda indeed .
President of the Commission . - Mr President , today , we are debating first of all the issues that will be addressed next week by the European Council .
I will concentrate on what I believe are the most important topics : economic governance in the European Union , of course , and externally - apart from the very important summit with the US and also the summit with Russia - what I believe are the critical summits : the summit in Seoul of the G20 and also the Cancún conference on climate change .
The reform of our economic governance is a cornerstone of our sustainable recovery and our credibility .
This is why the Commission has taken a very ambitious approach since the beginning of these discussions .
The proposals submitted by the Commission last month seek to translate the urgency deriving from the crisis into an ambitious legal reality .
They tackle the key issues of giving the European Union real clout in economic policy through adequate coordinated fiscal surveillance and addressing macro-economic imbalances , so , as we have very often said , now creating a real economic Union in Europe .
I very much welcome the attention that this Parliament is paying to these proposals .
An early first reading agreement would prove that the European Union is committed to putting its new vision into action .
We should look to have these rules in place by the middle of next year .
I therefore urge Member States to go all the way towards these important goals and to pursue this agenda as a matter of urgency .
We have , by now , moved towards a stronger consensus on key areas for action , reinforcing the Stability and Growth Pact and dealing with macro-economic imbalances , thanks also to the proceedings of the task force under the Presidency of Herman Van Rompuy .
Once all discussions are finished and all decisions are taken , the result of this combined process should be a vision for economic governance which will be much more comprehensive , much more attuned to the need to prevent problems in the first place , and much more solidly based through the use of sanctions .
But let me be clear . The overall result must represent a real change from the current situation .
We must show to our citizens that the European Union has been drawing all the conclusions and the lessons from the crisis .
Some other matters still need to be settled .
One issue of particular importance is how to replace the current crisis mechanism agreed in May with a mechanism of a more permanent nature once it comes to its end in 2013 .
We will do everything to avoid facing such crises ever again , but we will also do all we can to be better prepared for critical developments than we were last time .
Preparedness and the presence of a robust and permanent crisis mechanism can prevent such developments from arising in the future .
The Commission takes good note of the views expressed by Member States that favour a treaty change , for which , as everyone knows , the unanimity of Member States is required .
At this stage , the Commission will concentrate on the substance .
By this , we mean the design of a permanent mechanism that can provide defence in critical moments , whilst minimising moral hazard and making sure that such an instrument will only be used as a last resort in the common interest .
If and when realised in full , the result of all this work will be what we need : a system that provides incentives for Member States to conduct sound economic and fiscal policies , and a system that provides incentives for investors to observe responsible lending practices .
Overall , I believe we are on track .
We have been learning lessons from the crisis .
For the sake of its citizens , the European Union is putting in place a system of governance that is completely renewed when compared with the state of play before the crisis , and now we are putting all this system on a much sounder footing .
Our track record on economic governance , but also on Europe 2020 and financial regulation , will give us the right platform to go forward to the G20 in Seoul .
This summit comes at a critical time .
It will be a real test of whether the G20 can deliver the coordination the world economy needs through cooperative solutions at global level .
I believe it can , and I believe that the European Union will play a key role in making Seoul a success .
What do we want to achieve in Seoul ?
First , we need to remind ourselves that the G20 did play an important role in addressing the crisis .
It did so through acting collectively , and as we move into a new phase , we need to continue to act collectively , cooperatively .
That means accepting that global imbalances are a concern for all and that all major economies play a part in finding the solution .
And yes , we cannot ignore the reality that exchange rates are an important factor here .
Second , we need to see action on the international financial institutions as well .
IMF reform , in particular , is overdue .
We need others to match the flexibility the European Union has already shown .
Third , with the support of this Parliament , we are in the midst of a fundamental reform of our own financial system , and once again , I want to thank you for the emphasis you have put on the need to achieve this as soon as possible .
We need to keep up the momentum on the G20 as well .
Progress has been good , but now we have to be sure that it carries through into implementation .
I want the financial sector to play a part in this .
That is why the European Union should remain committed to push for a financial transaction tax at global level .
In the meantime , the Commission wants to explore other ways of ensuring that the financial sector makes an equitable contribution at European level , such as the financial activities tax .
The next G20 will also include development as an agenda item for the first time .
A multi-year action plan will be adopted to guide our common effort in this area .
The Commission has , from the beginning , been a strong supporter of this idea , together with the Korean chair .
We need to show that the G20 growth agenda also encompasses and benefits developing countries .
At the same time , we want to engage emerging economies in an international development framework which is in line with key principles of development policy and allows for greater coordination .
Yesterday , when I spoke here in Strasbourg with UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon , he specifically mentioned this point to me and he was very grateful for the support of the European Union for this agenda .
Finally , the G20 needs to take a lead in pushing ahead the trade agenda .
Far from being an alternative to the WTO , our agreement with Korea should inspire our partners to push ahead to a rapid conclusion of the Doha Round negotiations by seizing the moment .
On the run-up to Cancún , I want to say a word about this very important conference .
We need to stay focused on our goals here , to be ambitious for Europe , and also ambitious for the world .
We need to move the international process forward .
This is not easy .
We know that in some of our key partners , the pace of change has slowed rather than accelerated .
Let us not forget that in the meantime , we are putting in place the most concrete and effective system for cutting emissions in the world .
This is our strongest card and the closer we get to implementing the new Emissions Trading System , the stronger it gets .
We have credibility second to none , grounded in a strong consensus between this Parliament , Member States and the Commission on what we have to do .
When we get to Cancún , let us not be distracted by arguments about form .
We should go into the UN process with plenty of confidence and determination .
Cancún will not be the end of the story , the final breakthrough , but it can be a very important step on the road .
The EU needs to convey a clear and consistent message in order to move the negotiations forward .
We should aim at a set of concrete action-oriented measures which can deliver confidence and trust in the process and bring us closer to our final goal .
That is why I wrote to the Members of the European Council last week .
I set out what I believe to be a balanced , realistic position - one which continues to drive us forward without creating unrealistic expectations .
This is a time for Europe to take the lead by setting out how Cancún can make a series of important steps forward , delivering on important commitments like the fast-start finance and , above all , by making clear that we are continuing to set an example .
The European Union economy will grow more this year than previously foreseen , but recovery is not yet firmly established ; there is no room for complacency , as we have said several times , particularly when one sees the still very high figures for unemployment .
We all know that we have faced real challenges in the past months as expressed in a clear way in the report that you are going to discuss now from Mrs Berès .
I welcome the ambition and large consensus in this House on these important issues , but we all know that this is a time when unemployment is hitting hard , when public spending is being squeezed .
Our citizens show their concerns and we must take them into consideration .
We also , however , know that we have been able to find answers as the European Union .
We have proposed some important pieces of legislation on economic governance .
We have come forward with Europe 2020 .
That is , I want to remind you of that point , a strategy for growth because growth - smart , inclusive sustainable growth - is the answer .
These concerns are also echoed in the excellent report by Mr Feio .
We have proposed a wide range of financial market regulation measures .
Let me welcome the agreement of the legislator on our proposals on financial supervision .
The reality is that if most observers were asked two years ago whether the European Union was ready to have a European supervisory system , most would say ' no , it is not possible ' .
Now we have shown that this is possible .
We are pursuing a holistic approach to covering the different dimensions involved .
Let me therefore also underline the agreement reached yesterday by the Council on the Commission 's proposal on hedge funds .
I hope that this position can now lead to conclusive negotiations in the European Parliament so that the European Union can finally benefit from this long-awaited regulation and , once again , we will be in a position of leadership on that matter in Seoul .
We are also making progress in other areas because we have to look at the real economy .
Let me also congratulate this House for the work in favour of a new directive on combating late payment in commercial transactions .
The directive will give better protection to creditors , in most cases SMEs , while respecting the freedom of contract .
Public authorities will have to pay within 30 days or else pay an interest rate of 8 % .
You know how much this regulation is awaited by SMEs that remain the most important sector of our economy .
Our work is not yet complete .
All proposals need to be carried through to their end , but they are starting to show their results .
The objective is to get us out of the crisis and through recovery , achieving again the growth rates that create employment and make sure that our social market economy will be fit for the 21st century . Many thanks for your attention .



Mr President , Mr Chastel , Mr Barroso , the financial , economic and social crisis that the world has been in for several years now is going to cost USD 60 trillion worldwide , which is the equivalent of one percentage point of annual growth .
We have to do something about it .
It will result in an 11 % unemployment rate in our European Union by the end of the year .
It is unfolding against the backdrop of a new currency war , caused by the risk of a double-dip recession , in the words of our economists .
Faced with this situation , I have sensed the feeling , in this House , that it is our duty to send a strong message to the other institutions , to the Commission and the Council , to say that we must join forces again around the added value of the European project , and that the issue at stake can be summarised in a few words : we have a collective responsibility and we need to implement an EU-wide strategy that will enable us , in the area of energy , to be strong on the inside and thus , strong on the outside .
We must count on our own strength and , to do so , we need the European level .
However , Mr Barroso , to our mind , economic governance is not a vision .
It is a means of furthering this strategy , and it is on the basis of this strategy that we decide which resources are needed .
These are , first and foremost , financial resources .
There is the challenge of bringing the review of the financial perspective into line with this focus on a strategy for a European energy community .
There is the need to harness a proposal that you are rejecting : the taxing of financial transactions .
There is the need to grant a substantial European loan to finance long-term investments .
There is the need to restore the balance of taxation in Europe so that it promotes work and jobs instead of capital , and so that it is environmentally friendly .
There is the need to coordinate the Member States ' budgets with the European project so that efforts are aimed in the same direction .
In terms of governance , we suggest appointing a ' Mr Euro ' to ensure harmonious and balanced economic governance .
We also suggest not focusing exclusively on the situation of countries in debt but balancing it with an assessment of countries in surplus .
Moreover , we suggest that , in a monetary union , debt should also be managed in common and that we should be able to envisage mutual debt issuance .
We would like financial reform , which you are working so hard to achieve Mr Barroso , to focus on the needs of Europeans and not only on financial stability objectives .
We want to see the financial markets reformed in a way that revives the notions of ethics and moral values , that aids job creation and long-term investments .
No European project can succeed if it is not backed by the Member States .
The only way for the European Union to show the best it can do is to make the Member States want to support it .
A debate that is focused solely on the drudgery of imposing sanctions will not make Europeans want to get involved again with their Member States in the project .
What we are asking for is strong action based on the added value of the European project so that we can lift Europeans out of this recession and ensure that , in the future , everyone in Europe has a job , is out of poverty , and can once again have faith in the European project .
That is our ambition .
I hope , Mr Barroso , that you will be able to share it and take up many of the suggestions that we are making here , on behalf of this entire House .
( Applause )


Mr President , Mr Barroso , Mr Rehn , I should like to congratulate you in particular on the positive dialogue that Parliament has held with the Commission .
Representatives of the Council , I should like to start by thanking everyone who has worked on this report and made it possible , especially all the shadow rapporteurs , with whom I had the opportunity to exchange opinions and build consensus .
Consensus building was often difficult , with several tendencies within Parliament : from left to right , advocates of more sovereignty or a more modern type of sovereignty , and advocates of certain institutions .
So many opinions were given , but they were given with one goal in mind : that of finding solutions to the current crisis .
The crisis demonstrated that Europe did not respond in time and often did not respond well .
The crisis showed that many governments within the European Union were still upholding a policy that was not based on the true facts .
It is for precisely that reason that solutions are necessary , and the European Parliament must put forward these solutions with an appropriate and firm voice .
Some of these solutions will be short- and others long-term .
We are essentially tabling eight recommendations .
The idea of multilateral surveillance of macro-economic developments in the Union and in the Member States is being tabled , so as to better achieve the goals of the Europe 2020 strategy , to achieve a Europe of growth , and to strengthen a pact that is about stability , but also about growth .
Proposals are also being made to strengthen the Stability and Growth Pact and look in particular detail at what is going on regarding debt , to enhance economic governance in the euro area by the Euro Group , and to establish a robust and credible excessive debt prevention and resolution mechanism for the euro area , which could involve establishing a European Monetary Fund .
The ideas of reviewing the EU budgetary , financial and fiscal instruments , of financial market regulation and supervision with a clear macro-economic dimension , and of improving the reliability of EU statistics , have also been tabled .
Finally , it has been suggested to better represent the Union in the area of economic and monetary affairs .
Parliament is demonstrating or could demonstrate a firm voice on all these issues .
We are aiming for better institutional coordination between the European Parliament and the national parliaments .
We can contribute to this solution being able to provide better solutions to future crisis situations or difficulties .
From now on , Europe has the instruments to respond better in the field of economics ; Parliament contributed greatly to this and will continue to do so .
We are currently starting a legislative debate on six proposals that have been tabled by the Commission and , regarding which , I believe Parliament will maintain its own position .
It is for this very reason that I would also express my surprise that there was no mention of Parliament 's position and the dialogue that this House had with the Council in a recent Council document tabled just yesterday .
However , I would finish by saying one thing : the European Parliament has its own positions , irrespective of our differences .
The European Parliament is committed to a strong Europe and better economic governance , with more growth and better prosperity .

rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Budgets . - Mr President , in my opinion on Mr Feio 's report on governance and the stability framework , I emphasised three points .
The first was the need to be serious about sanctioning Member States that breach the Stability Pact .
Just a couple of days ago , the French Prime Minister and the German Chancellor even agreed to change the treaty to bring in tougher sanctions against countries that threaten the euro 's stability .
I also emphasised the need to prioritise spending in the budget in case a Member State has to be rescued .
Finally , I raised awareness about the need to evaluate the impact on the credit rating of the European Union since it acted as guarantor of the European financial stabilisation mechanism .
The relevant paragraphs have been amended and no longer form part of my opinion .
I feel obliged in these circumstances to disown my opinion .
There is no doubt that the European Union was exemplary in the way it chose to proceed with the regulatory and supervision measures .
This is reflected in the new supervision package which allows for certain systematic risks to be identified and for this to be done in a timely manner .
On the other hand , when it comes to the concept of economic governance , nobody can deny that there is still a long way to go .
Any Member State that ignores its obligations and responsibilities , particularly with respect to the Growth and Stability Pact , creates serious problems for other Member States .
Therefore , we are obliged to do our utmost to encourage serious observation of the rules that were agreed upon so as to guarantee stability within the Member States , both financially and physically .
I am very satisfied with the opinion recommendations I put forward to the Employment Committee and pleased that these have been taken into consideration .
I believe that the report has made a case for better job surveillance in the European Union , and for the strengthening of the Employment Committee .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we all acknowledge that monitoring of the short- and long-term macro-economic variables in the European Union has failed , not least regarding budgetary frameworks and accumulated national debt .
The crisis has made all the more pressing the need to strengthen the single market , taking into account the proposals of Mr Monti and Mr Grech .
It is essential to develop e-commerce and transnational trade , simplify online payment procedures , standardise products and services , and harmonise fiscal instruments , so as to reinforce consumer confidence and boost the economy .
The Union must emerge from the crisis in a way that is sustainable , guaranteeing robust growth and responsible budgets , but also employment objectives .
It should be mandatory for indicators such as the unemployment rate and the rate of employment among the active population to be part of the oversight system .
The indicators that will measure the progress of the 2020 strategy cannot be forgotten either .
The feasibility study on issuing joint Eurobonds could constitute an opportunity to examine in greater detail financial instruments for defending against speculation , and to put them into practice .
We would like it if this could be more than just a study .
The creation of the European Monetary Fund deserves our support and we see it not as simply a disciplinary instrument but , above all , as a means of reducing the speculative manipulation of the sovereign debt markets .
Our cooperation with the rapporteur , Mr Feio , has been profitable and has made it possible to achieve a text that is comprehensive , balanced and rich .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , if you look at your list of speakers , you will see that the next speaker is my colleague , Mr Jáuregui Atondo .
Before he takes the floor , please permit me , as chair of our Group , to inform the House that this morning , Mr Jáuregui Atondo , was appointed by the Spanish Government as its Minister for the Presidency .
As you can imagine , that is quite an honour for our group .
I offer him my sincere congratulations .
( Applause )
Mr President , I would like to thank my friend Mr Schulz very much .
I only have one minute to tell you that I believe that in the last few months , Europe has made extraordinary progress in terms of economic governance .
Curiously , the summit between France and Germany the day before yesterday also opened the door to a new hope : the possibility of revising our frameworks and treaties on economic governance .
I know that this is an issue that scared the Member States a little .
However , I believe that as pro-Europeans , we know that in order to achieve the economic governance that we need to build , there will probably need to be reforms , which will have to be agreed reforms .
I sincerely believe , however , that this agreement between France and Germany opens up the opportunity for the Feio report , which we will adopt later - as proposed by the Committee on Constitutional Affairs - to consider the need to adapt our constitutional framework to governance that is not only a stability pact .
This is in-depth governance , in order to bring together the economies in a way that seeks to be competitive , create jobs and produce the redistribution to which we , as social democrats , have always aspired .
( Applause )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the common thread between the meetings of the European Council and the G20 is the need to make the necessary adaptations after the financial crisis .
For the European Union , these adaptations consist of putting our respective national and EU public finances in order and protecting our currency , the euro , by consolidating it internally and defending its value against the other major currencies .
The European Council will be dominated by discussions on Europe 's economic and financial governance .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) welcomes the initial lines that the Van Rompuy task force has taken , including the plans for a system of sanctions against Member States that do not adhere to the criteria of the Stability Pact .
However , there is still more work to be done , with more Community method and less intergovernmental method .
I welcome the work that the Commission has done along these lines .
I would ask the Council to remember that this Parliament is now colegislator and will play a full role in defining the forthcoming reforms .
The more Parliament is brought on board in the early stages , the more chance we have of achieving a satisfactory and timely outcome .
I call on President Van Rompuy to heed this message .
Ladies and gentlemen , Europe must make its voice heard in the debate on relative currency values , and the European Council must establish our position on the subject next week , before the Seoul G20 summit .
Europe must join with its partners , in particular , the United States , in reminding the emerging countries of their responsibilities .
Currency dumping and the social consequences it entails must no longer be allowed .
Three major subjects will be on the table at the Seoul Summit : reform of the international monetary system of course , but also the stability of commodities - especially food and energy - and global governance .
Europe has a message to deliver on each of these subjects , but this message will only be credible if we put in place effective internal , Community-wide instruments to govern and manage our public finances .
Ladies and gentlemen , we will not be able to influence global governance and will not really have a place on the international stage unless we can make the often unpopular effort to clean up our finances and unless we stick to our priorities of combating climate change and development policy .
( Applause )
Mr President , I would like to quote a passage from the statement made by the Heads of State or Government at the G20 summit in Pittsburgh held on 24-25 September 2009 - in other words , a year ago .
The Heads of Government committed themselves at that summit to the following : ' To launch a framework that lays out the policies and the way we act together to generate strong , sustainable and balanced global growth .
We need a durable recovery that creates the good jobs our people need ' .
Great !
I presume that a similar passage will be written again this year at the next summit , and also at all the other summits .
This leads me to ask what has been done in the meantime to bring about the strong , sustainable and balanced growth that will bring the jobs our people need .
The description is correct , but what is being created is a philosophy at European level - in the European Council - that says that unilateral cuts in public services through budget reductions are a cure-all for stabilising our continent , rather than giving consideration to the fact that investment that stimulates growth is a basic prerequisite for creating more jobs and , through greater economic growth , bolstering state revenues - as is so urgently needed to consolidate state budgets and enable states to perform their duties .
What we are seeing in Europe is that as a result of a more or less black-and-white Manichaean process under which all expenditure is bad and all cuts are good , we find ourselves in a situation in which the countries worst affected by the crisis - Ireland and Greece - are in recession or have zero growth .
What is actually being done in practice is achieving the opposite of what was described here as the objective .
That is a dramatic development .
It is all the more dramatic when those who were at the source of the crisis , who caused the crisis - the financial sector , those who speculated with wild abandon - have not been held accountable by being made to contribute to state revenues through measures such as a financial transaction tax .
This may have been advocated at European level , but even at the time it was being advocated , it was already being put on ice on the grounds that ' We 'll never get it though the G20 ' .
Of course we will not get it through the G20 if we do not even try it first at European level !
This is an injustice that is particularly dramatic because the lack of action on the part of the Heads of State or Government - the fact that they are leading us in the wrong direction of social imbalance - is continually being reinforced .
The people in revolt on the streets are right in that social imbalance in Europe is not being fought against , but rather is being intensified further by incorrect policies .
It is the job of this Parliament to make this apparent and to develop strategies to counter it .
That is why we insist on the financial transaction tax .
The report by Mrs Berès and the report by my colleague , Mrs Podimata , will show us whether this House is prepared to say : ' We know that it will not be easy , but we insist that the European Union makes a start at levying taxes transnationally on the financial sector if it cannot be taxed at national level ' .
There is a further worrying development .
What happened in Deauville between Mr Sarkozy and Mrs Merkel turns the institutional structure of the European Union on its head .
I ask myself when Mr Van Rompuy will draw the appropriate conclusion .
He has been asked to work with his task force on detailing the necessary reforms - that should really have been your job , so it was a bit of a cheek to ask Mr Van Rompuy to do it - but to cap it all , the poor man is working on it in secret and before he can present anything at all , our charming couple in Deauville waltz up and announce : ' We have already decided everything ' .
What Nicolas and Angela did - this self-appointed Franco-German management committee - is an assault on the institutions of the European Union .
( Applause )
If I were Mr Van Rompuy , I would tell them where they could stick their job .
You cannot keep being a doormat for ever and putting up with such abuse .
There is one more thing , however : if our fine couple had glanced across the channel from Deauville , they would have seen the white cliffs of the British coast , where a referendum is required for their amendments to the treaty - at least , if Mr Cameron is to be believed .
Does anyone really think that Mr Cameron would accept the amendment without incorporating further brakes into the treaty to slow down European law ?
That really would open a Pandora 's box .
I do hope that our charming couple do not come crashing to the floor .
I therefore repeat : Europe is being led in the wrong direction , both institutionally and in substance .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , perhaps I may begin where Mr Schulz left off .
Maybe we could ask for a convention now if they want to change the treaty .
Normally , what we have to do is to ask for a convention .
That is the first thing to do , but things are not that far advanced , I think .
What we need now is to make an urgent deal in the European Council on economic governance and on strengthening the Stability Pact .
It is now nearly a year since the start of the Greek debt crisis .
It started in December 2009 , and it is now time to arrive at a conclusion , an agreement , on this .
There are , in fact , three proposals on the table at the moment .
Let us be clear about that .
We have received the proposal from the Commission , the proposal from the task force and , yesterday , the proposal under what we call ' the deal of Deauville ' .
That is the third one on the table .
And it is good , I think , that this Parliament is analysing the differences between the three proposals to decide if they are appropriate .
The Commission made what were , I think , good , bold and coherent proposals a few weeks ago .
The task force proposal differs from them in that it proposes that the Council should act on the basis of recommendations and not proposals from the Commission .
That is a big difference , because recommendations can be changed and proposals from the Commission cannot .
In addition , there is a more lengthy procedure for analysis in the task force proposal , which also sets it apart from the Commission proposal .
However , we have to say that the task force proposal keeps the semi-automatic character of the sanctions and maintains the reverse majority rule that was proposed by the Commission .
As of yesterday , we have a third proposal , ' the deal of Deauville ' .
I have to say that an agreement between France and Germany can often be helpful for Council business , but that this time , on the contrary , it is not .
This is because the Franco-German Deauville proposal simply relies on keeping the old-school QMV within the Council , so rather than needing to find a majority to block the automatic Commission sanctions , their proposals require such a majority for the sanctions proposed by the Commission to be initiated .
I think that is an enormous difference , because the semi-automatic character of sanctions in the Commission proposal is not present in the Deauville proposal .
I do not know if you know Deauville , but , aside from the beach and some beautiful hotels , there is a casino .
We should , therefore , perhaps be speaking not of the Deauville deal but rather of the Franco-German casino compromise , because a casino compromise is what it is .
Under this proposal , Member States are allowed to go on playing with the euro and the euro area .
If you have enough support in the Council , you can go for it ; you can do exactly what Greece did .
If you have enough support in the Council , go for it .
Faites vos jeux !
You can go for it .
The first part of the Deauville deal simply weakens not just the task force proposal but , above all , the Commission package .
I find this completely incomprehensible , certainly from Germany .
For ten months , they have been asking for bolder sanctions , and yesterday , they did just the opposite .
It amounts to a weakening of the bold proposals of the Commission .
And this comes at precisely the time when Mr Trichet , the President of the European Central Bank , is asking for bolder solutions , for bolder proposals , even bolder than the initial proposals by the Commission .
My conclusion is that this Parliament has one mission : to reverse the Deauville deal , or the casino compromise .
Let us stick to the good proposals from the Commission and carry out our necessary legislative task .


Mr President , Mr Chastel , Mr Barroso , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Verhofstadt has worn himself out today !
However , what he had to say is important , as was Mr Schulz 's speech .
I have my own thoughts for you also .
Do you all know the film ' Jules et Jim ' ?
Well , there is a woman - Mrs Merkel .
We know who Jules is - it is Mr Sarkozy .
The trouble is who is Jim ?
Is it Mr Cameron or Mr Barroso ?
That is the dilemma for the Commission .
I think Parliament and the Commission need to speak to each other frankly now , because the Council 's policy - Mr Verhofstadt is right on this point - and that of its Franco-German board of directors is anti-European Union .
Their policy does not reflect the essence of the EU , and our role today is to go beyond the differences that pit us against each other - Mr Daul is right on this point - and to save the European Union and the Community method .
To do this , the Commission , this Parliament and all of us need to understand that there will be no winners in this game unless we find a common approach between the Commission and Parliament , Parliament and the Commission .
Mr Barroso , I believe you when you say that you want a tax on financial transactions or on financial activities .
This is not the problem ; the problem is , how do we actually do this ?
It is not enough to say ' I want ' .
My four-year-old son says ' I want ' .
The issue is to work out how we can achieve our goal , and I think the Commission should not be asking for yet another study , as the Environment Council did yesterday to find out if climate degradation is really so bad that we should be stepping up Europe 's CO2 reduction - even though it is utterly ridiculous to ask for a new study .
No . What would a major study on financial transactions bring to Europe , and what would a tax on those transactions bring ?
A 0.01 % tax on financial transactions would be worth EUR 80 billion .
If you set aside EUR 30 billion for a reduction in national contributions and hence a reduction in national budgets , you get an extra 50 billion for the EU budget .
EUR 120 billion minus 30 billion makes 90 billion , plus 50 makes 140 billion .
So , it is possible to implement the European policies we need to implement post-Lisbon , and the Member States and Europe will be the winners .
However , this presupposes that we have a European vision .
Secondly , Mr Barroso , about the deficits : in my opinion , there are deficits and then there are deficits .
It is like cholesterol : there is a positive marker and a negative marker .
A deficit which invests , and therefore provides a country , or Europe , with prospects , is not a negative thing .
If we invest , as we have done before , in the industries of the past which are unproductive - I am talking about coal - we are investing in something that throws money away because it is futile , and therefore we lose out .
However , if we invest in the energies of the future and the production of the future , we gain .
Therefore , what we need to do , and I am asking this of the liberals also , is not simply to talk about ' stability , stability ' , but also to differentiate between what we should be doing and what we should no longer be doing ; not simply to talk about a ' deficit ' , but to say , ' this is productive ' , or ' this is not productive ' .
If we agree , though this will be difficult , if we manage to come to an agreement , we will be in a position to oppose the Council 's constant manipulations .
The problem today is that many governments want to reduce the European policy aspect , whereas our role is to defend and to increase the European policy aspect , because without it , we will not be able to get ourselves out of this .
You see , Mr Barroso , we have a common interest , but we need to take it to its conclusion .
It is not Parliament that you should be putting pressure on , but the European Council .
As you can appreciate , I have been quite flexible about the timing , partly because all the speeches have been very agreeable as well as very powerful - the IMF , casinos and cholesterol - all great fuel for this discussion .
We have all been recounting various anecdotes during these debates today , which also brought an historical association to my mind .
For 18 years of my life , I lived in a country of real socialism , where Party congress after Party congress kept setting new economic targets and the citizens of my country - and the same goes for other countries of real socialism - were told by party congresses that things would get better , and how they should get better .
What is more , there was a ministry of domestic trade in my country at that time , even though there was no domestic trade .
Listening to some of the speeches today , my impression is that the proposal we heard from the European Commission is one which aims to reinstate the priority of economic over political thinking .
Over that political mindset which would stifle any sound economic action , because today , politicians at national level and - as we hear - for populist considerations , really like to point their finger at Europe .
They say that we need to cut down on Europe and that Europe is not the solution , as this , to some extent , gets them off the hook in the eyes of their voters .
If we do not implement something which will make countries realise that they there will be harsh consequences if they conduct economically irrational policies , we will not get anywhere .
What is also needed here is solidarity , however .
In the Franco-German proposal , I see the real danger of ending up in a situation where the stronger countries will have greater leeway , and where Greece will be unable to go beyond certain limits .
Greece will have to cut expenditure , but when it comes to the stronger countries , their luck will be in , and suddenly we will find that they will be allowed to break these rules on political grounds .
What I want to say is this : we need European solidarity , and that is why we need European solidarity .
In conclusion , Mr President , I should like to say that I know that you stand guard over this European solidarity .
The latest decision of the European Commission on the gas agreement between Poland and Russia - for which I would like to thank you - is a fine example of how the Community aspect is something that works , and which works in the interests of countries like Poland .
I would like to say once again , Mr President , that we cannot wave away reality with a magic wand .
If we reach a point where the political solutions , compounded with the dose of populism that exists in some parts of Europe today , dominate over economic thinking , then your ambitious plans to intensify the market - which I consider a very good plan ( sentence unfinished ) .
I believe that as MEPs , we are well aware of how far we still are from a common market , just from the mobile phone roaming bills we get every month .
If we have a common European market but we still have to pay roaming bills , it shows quite clearly that we still have a long way to go before we achieve our aim of economic integration .




Mr President , Mr Chastel , Mr Barroso , if I have understood you rightly Mr Barroso , we are starting from completely opposite analyses , since you said that the economic crisis is behind us , whilst our group , the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , believes that it is getting worse .
To resolve the crisis , you are recommending austerity with the Stability Pact and now , the reinforcement of sanctions .
I think we should be doing the opposite : improving working wages , a new fiscal approach to help support these and a tax on financial transactions , improving social welfare , protecting public services and a bold employment policy .
Sadly , I fear your strategy could land the European Union in deep trouble .
Have you not heard the strength of the peoples ' protests throughout the European Union ?
For the sixth day yesterday , millions of people marched throughout France , with the backing of 70 % of the population .
Can you not see the danger that is threatening us today ?
The European idea , because it is based on competition and a policy of completely free trade , is colliding head-on with money in these economic wars , and now these currency wars .
Why do we not look at a new system : a human and social development fund instead of the Stability Pact , in conjunction with the European Central Bank , which should be able to refinance the Member States ' debts and the national banks through money creation , at interest rates that would be favourable to social criteria ?
The way I see it , the European Union must take the initiative in creating a new global monetary order , starting with taking up China 's proposal for a common international trade currency .
Like Thailand and Brazil , why does Europe not start by introducing a tax on foreign currency , to ease currency tensions ?
Commission President , representatives of the Council , I think the time has come for us to think of new initiatives and to listen to our people .

on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , well President Barroso , you are certainly flexing your muscles , using the powers given to you by the Lisbon Treaty which you pushed through using illegitimate means .
You now do everything you can on the world stage and within the EU to acquire all the attributes of statehood .
Nowhere could that be more apparent than in your recent proposal for a direct tax to be levied by the European institutions on the peoples of this continent .
Of course , in previous times , there was a very successful independence movement that campaigned on the slogan of ' no taxation without representation ' and you certainly are not a representative .
We have not voted for you and we cannot remove you , so I think with this direct tax , you have actually made a mistake .
And what an expensive club it is becoming .
Just two years ago , Britain 's net contribution was GBP 3 billion a year .
This year , it is GBP 6 billion .
Next year , it will be GBP 8 billion .
The year after that , it is due to be GBP 10 billion and now , we hear that you want to take away the British rebate .
You want to get rid of the British rebate , which will mean by 2013 , our contribution will be GBP 13 billion .
It will have quadrupled in the space of six years .
The taxpayers of Britain , realising all of this , seeing your direct tax , will simply conclude that we cannot afford the European Union .
But I do see a ray of hope : the Deauville deal between Merkel and Sarkozy , the thing that you are all so terrified of today .
I hope it happens .
Let us have a new treaty .
You yourself seem to be almost supporting it .
Let us have a new European treaty and let us put it to a referendum in lots of countries , particularly in Britain , and the British people will conclude that this is a very bad deal for Britain .
They will vote for us to leave the European Union and begin the unravelling .
Thank you .
We are happy to go .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( DE ) Mr President , I have a question for you , Mr Farage .
Perhaps you would be so kind as to answer it for us .
You are so concerned about the British tax coffers .
Just like me , at the beginning of this term of office , you had the option of choosing from which coffers your daily allowances would be paid : from the UK coffers or from those of the European Union .
Please would you tell the House whether your daily allowances are paid from the EU budget or whether you have opted for the national system in the UK ?
Mr President , I think we ought to do away with this notion of European money .
Prior to there being a direct tax , there is , as we speak today , no such thing as European money : it is our money .
We are a massive net contributor to this European Union for no single economic benefit in return whatsoever !
It is our money !
President of the Commission . - Mr President , I do not usually intervene , but there is a point of order that I want to make .
It is not the first time that Mr Farage has said when addressing me ' You have not been elected ' .
I have certainly not been elected by you , but I have been elected by this Parliament .
( Applause )
I was elected by this Parliament in a secret ballot , and you belong to this Parliament .
I consider that repeatedly saying that I , or the Commission , have not been elected constitutes a lack of respect for the Commission and for the Parliament to which you belong .
( Applause )
( ES ) Mr President , we will see if I can bring a little calm to this fierce debate .
It is regrettable that along with the European Union , some of its Member States are still part of the G20 .
Despite this anomaly , which certainly weakens Europe 's image in the world , it would be good if at least there was an overall common position in this global forum .
In my view , what would that common position be ?
In my humble opinion , I believe the following : firstly , the adoption of a global agreement to tackle the consequences of the crisis cannot be delayed by adopting just a financial agreement ; secondly , Europe must maintain the euro as the benchmark currency or , if it is preferred , as an anchor to prevent turbulence in the market from dragging us along and causing us to repeat the errors made throughout the 20th century ; thirdly , the euro must herald what Europe must represent in the world of democratic values and public freedoms .
In summary , we need to be aware that , in a global world , in this global game , those who only play national cards lose .

( DE ) Mr President , Mr Barroso , ladies and gentlemen , this debate shows one thing : the Deauville deal hinders us from overcoming the crisis , the Deauville deal is a backward step for the European Union and the Deauville deal shows us that neither member of this charming couple has learnt anything from France and Germany 's inappropriate behaviour in 2002 and 2005 when these countries began undermining the Stability Pact .
Instead , we are now seeing a continuation of such inappropriate behaviour .
We want to overcome the mistakes of the past .
We want a European answer to the nationalism and the vetoes that have been built into most European regulations .
We did this in the case of supervision of the financial markets .
We are doing so with the report in response to the crisis .
We are doing so with the Feio report and we are doing so with our daily legislative work .
Let us concentrate on that and not allow ourselves to be sidetracked further , including in this debate .
We need to move forward .
We need to find the answers .
The report by the five groups sends a clear message .
We have not yet overcome the crisis .
Fiscal and monetary policies are no substitute for structural reforms .
We are clearly stating that we want deficits to be reduced as a prerequisite for securing the future .
You cannot reduce deficits by simply taking a pair of shears to them .
It has to come about as a result of reforms , investments , savings and changes .
This report sends a clear response that we want to have more Europe as part of the solution .
Let us break through to the next step in integration - the creation of an economic union , the creation of a social union , the creation of a defence and security union , and let us make the internal market the home market of all our citizens .
The community of Europe - the initiative of the European Union - is the answer .
The task force and the Deauville route have failed .
Mr President , as we have heard , the task force chaired by Herman Van Rompuy has now produced its report .
It contains proposals for crisis resolution and budgetary discipline : in other words , only part of the picture .
I would emphasise that these are only proposals .
I am sure the ECOFIN Ministers who dominated the proceedings of that task force would like it to be the end point , but it is not .
It is the beginning .
We are right at the very beginning of the legislative process .
I hope all of the institutions will realise that the work of the European Parliament on the Commission 's legislative proposals will now need to be conducted in a fully democratic process with the Council .
The task force said that its aim was to achieve a quantum leap in terms of more effective economic governance .
I think what it is proposing is actually more like a potential step back in terms of prosperity and well-being for Europe .
It is proposing a strengthening of instruments , but only instruments that focus upon fiscal discipline .
That is a problem .
Economic coordination is more than fiscal discipline and economic union will not be achieved as long as that balance is not properly recognised .
It will inevitably lead to distorted economic policies which take insufficient account of other worthwhile policy objectives for the conduct of macro-economic policy , and by that I mean growth , investment and employment .
President Barroso , we do not need another task force to come up with a balanced set of policy measures .
We need the Commission to use its right of initiative to bring forward the proposals that will address growth , investment and employment .
Regarding the proposals now on the table , I believe that Parliament has an enormous responsibility in the coming months .
We need to make some changes along the lines of the Feio report to be voted on today .
I think we need three main changes there : the excessive balances procedure has to be broad enough to cover labour markets , including unemployment levels , and therefore the Employment Council needs to be included wherever relevant ; the qualitative assessment of public debt levels and developments in the corrective arm of the Stability and Growth Pact should pay full attention to levels and developments in public investment as well ; and the linkage with 2020 throughout the new system needs to be explicit and operationalised as fully as possible .
On governance , I would mention only two points at this early stage .
The Council needs to guide the system and assume ultimate political responsibility throughout , as well as ensuring the due involvement of all relevant Council formations - not just ECOFIN - wherever that is necessary .
Finally , the European Parliament needs to be fully involved throughout the process in order to ensure the highest level of democratic legitimacy .
Just look at the proposal for the European Semester to see to what extent the role of the Parliament is missing in all of this .
Some of us across the political groups are working on strengthened proposals for parliamentary involvement .
I hope they will be accepted by the other institutions to give this process the democratic legitimacy it needs .
( SV ) The last year has shown that the EU can take important decisions in difficult situations .
Unfortunately , the last few days have been a disappointment .
When the EU needs clear and stringent budget rules , France and Germany hesitate .
This causes us concern .
Our message is : leave Mr Rehn 's proposal alone !
I would like to thank unreservedly Mrs Berès and my colleagues in the Special Committee on Financial , Economic and Social Crisis , who have shown that we in the European Parliament can reach across the party boundaries and find common solutions in the interests of Europe .
The Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe has proposed an amendment to the effect that if a financial transaction tax is introduced , it must , of necessity , be done on a global scale .
It is important in this case that it is done at a global level .
Nationalism must not be allowed to gain a foothold in Europe again .
It is a market economy with clear boundaries and free trade that creates prosperity .
We need a more unified Europe , a more open Europe , a stronger Europe - we quite simply need more Europe .
The proposed penalty options will initially apply only to the countries of the euro area .
In this regard , we would like to see a wording that includes all 27 Member States .
I would therefore like to present an oral amendment to the Feio report which I hope that Parliament will be able to support .
The rapporteur and the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament have stated that they are willing to do so .
I will read the text in English :
As far as possible , all 27 Member States should apply to the maximum all the economic governance proposals , recognising that for Member States outside the euro area , this would be done on a voluntary basis .
( SV ) Today is not the time to create an EU that is in danger of tearing the Union apart .


( FR ) Mr President , Mr Barroso , Mr Rehn , I genuinely hope that you will look at the work done by the European Parliament on the subjects we have been dealing with today - the Berès report and the Feio report - because , of course , we are now working as colegislators on economic governance .
I can tell you that together with four pro-European groups in Parliament at least , we have made a genuine effort to work on compromises that will achieve something .
We have just come from the discussions to try to tie up the problems .
Some people are talking about the budget , some are talking about tax measures , and some are talking about governance .
What we need today is for the Commission - and it is your role to do this , we are trying to do it and it is your role to do it also - to propose an overall package : something in the spirit of the Monti report that is also along the lines of what Michel Barnier has been trying to do in the context of the internal market .
I am waiting for an overall package from Mr Barroso , which should show us how to get ourselves out of the economic crisis .
It should not just be about macro-economic governance , but should be along the lines of reading three or four dossiers on macro-economics , tax and the budget and then saying ' here is the package ' .
I am sure that if you do that , you will have a very large majority in the European Parliament to support the initiative .
If we only look at the issue of public finance , for example , two or three years ago , the Commission and its departments were themselves saying that , of all the countries , Spain was sticking to the Stability and Growth Pact most closely and that Spain 's public finances were in order .
The problem is that the instability came from elsewhere and now Spain is in a terrible situation , as is Ireland .
We can clearly see that focusing on public finances alone will not help us resolve the crisis .
The compromises that we have proposed in the various reports that have been presented today , which will be voted on tomorrow , represent the sum of these issues .
They are a way of saying that , yes , we do need to strengthen budgetary discipline .
Of course we do .
However , to ensure that this budgetary discipline does not lead to social breakdown , but only to public expenditure cuts , we need , at the same time , a European budget package that will finance investment and a tax package that will allow Member States to impose certain taxes .

My last question for Mr Rehn , and for Mr Barroso especially , is therefore : are you genuinely in favour of the common corporate tax basis ?
Do you genuinely support it ?
It has been shelved by the Commission for 10 years now and for 10 years , you have failed to deal with the matter .
It is now time that you did so .
( Applause )
( LV ) Thank you , Mr President , Mr Barroso ( who has left the Chamber ) .
First , I should like to thank the rapporteur , my fellow shadow rapporteurs and the chair of the committee , Mr Klintz , for the compromise that we at last managed to arrive at .
I shall only speak in relation to two items in the report , with which I am not satisfied , and they concern neither Germany nor France .
Firstly , as the result of aggressive cross-border investment , since 2004 , private household debt and business debt in many new Member States has grown , even by as much as 10 fold .
Moreover , the absolute majority of these loans were taken out on terms that left all the exchange-rate risk with the borrower .
This , in turn , means that the governments of these countries have little room for manoeuvre in their macro-economic policy apart from cutting public spending and raising taxes .
At the same time , the primary concern of households is solely to make loan repayments in euro terms .
Unfortunately , there is scant reference to this in the report .
My second point , which is linked to the first , is this .
Let us picture such a new Member State , whose GDP has fallen back to a pre-accession level , to a pre-2004 level , only with a private debt 10 times as large and public debt five times as large , and this Member State can deduce from this report that even cohesion policy may be altered , altered in such a way that the main criterion will no longer be per capita GDP but crisis management in a specific territory , which could have extremely significant political consequences .
Thank you .
( PT ) Mr President , the declarations by Germany and France in the so-called Deauville agreement are unacceptable and show the true faces of those who are calling the shots in defence of economic and financial interest groups .
These declarations also demonstrate impatience , arrogance and aggression towards the response of the workers and populations hurt by their neoliberal and anti-society policies - the Stability and Growth Pact and competition policy - in Greece , France , Spain or Portugal , where there is already a general strike planned for 24 November .
It is time for those who run the European Union to acknowledge the failure of these neoliberal policies : increasing unemployment , social inequalities and poverty , and which are causing recession in the countries with weaker economies , where the EU 's impositions could provoke a real social disaster .
Unfortunately , that is not what is happening .
All the promises to bring an end to tax havens , to properly tax financial transactions , and to bring an end to speculative financial products , have collapsed .
That is why we are protesting here : giving a voice to the many millions of workers threatened with poverty , to the unemployed , to older people with pathetic pensions , to the young and jobless , and children at risk of poverty to whom they want to deny a dignified future .
It is time for a break with these policies so that we can have a truly social Europe : a Europe of progress and development .
( LT ) I would like to say a few words about the work of the Special Crisis Committee .
It really has done a great job and has made good recommendations and proposals .
Of course , ideally , there would be a place for all of these in the documents being drafted by the Commission .
It is essential that the Commission does not forget the fundamental and most important issues .
One of these is the establishing of a regulatory and supervisory system , which leaves no financial market , no financial instrument and no financial institution off the record book .
The Commission should target its actions for the creation of new jobs and link them with measures to combat poverty and social exclusion .
All efforts in this direction must , above all , be focused on employing young people .
Emergency infrastructure decisions on renewable energy sources , green power , energy efficiency in the transport and building sectors , and a European energy network , are necessary to overcome the crisis .
It would be good if , exactly one year on from this meeting today , the Commission could come and say : ' The provisions of the resolution you proposed did not just remain on paper ; we adapted these specific proposals by the Special Crisis Committee and they have already had a real impact ' .
( HU ) As was the case in the previous major debate of this week here in the European Parliament , namely , the debate on poverty , the politicians of the European Union are once again surprised and sad to see that the situation of Europe 's citizens is not improving , but rather constantly deteriorating .
Poverty is growing steadily , and so too are misery , unemployment and homelessness .
And they are so surprised at this , as if it were the consequence of regrettable natural disasters or tsunamis .
No , this is the result of decisions taken by European politicians .
The increasing misery and poverty stem directly from the neoliberal policy which you - excepting those who opposed them - pursued , and this trend will continue .
Poverty and misery will continue to rise if you do not opt for a different value system .
These two reports can be likened to a scenario where a medical panel determines that the therapy used for a patient so far has caused him harm and made his condition worse , and then proceeds to say that the therapy prescribed on the basis of the diagnosis must be continued , that they must continue what they had done before , but with stricter supervision and punishing the patient if he does not comply , if , for instance , he fails to take his medication .
What is at stake here is a conscious choice between value systems .
So far , the European Union has deliberately chosen a value system where it always pursues the right decision from the perspective of money and profit , the right decision from the point of view of multinational companies and banks , and never from the perspective of people and the community .
It has always looked for what is right from the point of view of an unbridled competition that is not restrained by concerns for justice and morality , and never for what is right from the perspective of social justice and solidarity .
This needs to be changed , and from now on , good decisions must be taken .
( NL ) Mr President , despite some positive signals , the risk of the crisis worsening has not gone away .
The banking system remains unstable and a number of Member States face the threat of government deficits getting out of hand if nothing is done .
Therefore , we urgently need an economic union .
Mr President , the task force has yet to deliver any concrete results but , as this House 's rapporteur for the Stability and Growth Pact , I would like to tell Commissioner Rehn : we are able to work quickly .
I address those words to the Council as well .
We are able to work fast , but only on the basis of the Commission 's proposals .
Is the Council prepared to accept that ?
I would also like to sound a note of warning against the change in the treaty which has been requested , because that could be a decoy which will only force us to put off the necessary measures until another day .
We must now do everything that is possible under the Treaty of Lisbon .
Parliament now has a new colegislative role in the Stability and Growth Pact and it will take full advantage of that role in order to bring about a robust economic union , with a robust Stability and Growth Pact .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the crisis has had a very great impact on society in all European countries .
If we look at the consequences from a social viewpoint , we swiftly reach the conclusion - one that is driving much of the Commission 's work - that the worst is yet to come .
Unemployment is set to increase and the weak signs of recovery noted in some countries are not enough to guarantee the creation of new jobs .
We must therefore accept that it will be essential to face up to the most acute social aspect of this crisis , which was born out of the financial system but which has rapidly spread into economic and social realms .
For this reason , we must arm ourselves with other instruments to defend the people who are hardest hit .
We are about to discuss a proposal for a framework directive on a minimum guaranteed income in all European countries , which I consider very important for combating poverty , on the one hand , and for helping those who will be struck by the sting in the tail of this crisis in the coming weeks and months , on the other .
The best way to combat a crisis , however , is through policies of growth .
Growth needs resources , targeted investments and a clear agenda of priorities towards which a significant proportion of the available resources should be directed .
The Union budget is not enough .
For this reason , the Commission clearly stated a need for additional resources to be spent on infrastructural investments and investments earmarked for competition quality and employment .
This path leads to the creation of Eurobonds and a tax on financial transactions .
There is no alternative .
This is why the solutions we have indicated - and I hope that Parliament will approve their formulation - are important as well as innovative .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , at the height of the financial crisis , the G20 countries promised joint action to stabilise the financial markets .
Today , two years later , we are still a long way away from a global answer .
In many instances , the measures adopted pursue national interests and considerations .
The initial energy has dissipated and all too often we are back to ' business as usual ' .
Mervyn King of the Bank of England put it succinctly when he said : ' The need to act in the collective interest has yet to emerge ' .
In its interim report , the Special Committee on the Financial , Economic and Social Crisis makes it clear that Europe is at a critical crossroads .
We need to intensify our integration , we need to harmonise our economic and budgetary policies more , we need European infrastructure projects in the areas of energy , transport and telecommunications .
We need a functioning internal market and labour market , and we need the resources required in order to achieve the demanding growth targets set out in the EU 2020 strategy .
We need innovative sources of financing if we are to be able to exploit the potential of the SME sector .
We need more Community method and less intergovernmentalism .
A standstill here is a backward move ; it will not preserve the status quo .
The debt crisis in Europe clearly demonstrates that stability and confidence are not achievable without discipline .
The proposals made by Commissioner Rehn and by Mr Van Rompuy 's task force are intended to ensure that the Member States act in a disciplined manner .
I regret to say that in Luxembourg the other day , the finance ministers cast aside these proposals at the behest of our Franco-German couple - a missed opportunity and a bad day for our citizens , who quite rightly feel betrayed by politics yet again .
Mr President , the combined topics of this morning 's debate have a strong common theme of our continued response to the financial crisis and to finding ways to make our management of the risk more effective , whether it be risk management of public debt , risk management of our financial markets and products , or the risk management of global imbalances .
Whether it is the behaviour of our banks or the behaviour of Member States ' treasury departments , we need to ensure a common high standard of behaviour with respect to adhering to an agreed set of rules .
Stronger financial and fiscal discipline by both the private and public sectors needs to be enforced .
We need to ensure that , in the search for growth opportunities by the EU , the financing tools used by the EU and the individual Member States are of the highest calibre and as transparent as possible .
The use of innovative financing needs to be approached with caution , and the moves by the EU to leverage its own budget need to be taken into account , knowing all the risks and the potential for moral hazard .
The European Financial Stabilisation Fund is a large off-balance sheet vehicle reliant on a credit rating .
To leverage the EU budget in the issuance of project bonds by the EIB needs to be subject to intense scrutiny .
As we all know , complex financial instruments and leverage bring their own risk .
There is no free money and there are no short cuts .

( EL ) Mr President , speaking on the Berès report on the crisis on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , in order to explain why we shall not be voting , I wish to say , as there is a surfeit of historical references , that today 's text , compared with the initial text submitted by the rapporteur , looks like an old papyrus , like an old parchment on which the initial text has been scratched out and the new text written , leaving traces of the previous text ; what we call a palimpsest .

The savage ' scratchings out ' , by the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament and the European right , of the rapporteur 's initial , honest and honourable attempt to map the causes of the crisis and provide bold proposals , have given rise to a text which is no longer a text of the European Parliament , the only democratic institution in the European Union ; it is a Commission text , a text which conceals the cause of the crisis and commits EU policy to the Merkel , Sarkozy and task force initiatives .

We made proposals to improve the text .
We criticised the Stability Pact and the functioning of the European Central Bank .
We tabled amendments in order to see if everyone talking even today about the European Union taking a wrong turn meant the same thing .
Our proposal was inspired by today 's demonstrations in France , by the demonstrations by workers in Germany , whose incomes are being cut so that Siemens has money for bribes , by the demonstrations by workers in Greece , who are currently being treated like guinea pigs , a text , in other words , which has ended up in a form which we cannot accept .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we should have listened to the advice of the Nobel laureate , Maurice Allais , who called for a clear separation between business banks , credit banks and speculative banks , in accordance with the principles of the Glass-Steagall Act , which is not discussed in this report .
As far as the proposal to tax European taxpayers is concerned , my response is ' No tax in Europe ! '
If this European Union proposal goes ahead , you can rest assured that we will have our own Tea Party here as well : there will be a mass protest .
The European public has no intention of paying for a service they are not getting and they are perfectly right .
We are continuing to fund the banks .
However , what are the banks doing in the midst of this economic and financial crisis ?
They are buying securities , even ones that contain dodgy derivatives and so on .
They are still buying them .
And what is the ECB doing while this is going on ?
The ECB - set up to be an unchallengeable body - is letting it go on .
It seems clear to me that this is a Europe for bankers .
If even the Masonic leaders claim this to be true , I do not see why we cannot claim it too .
We believe that there is only one way to combat speculation effectively : transactions carried out at the same time as negotiations are paid for , and only in cash .
Mrs Merkel dared to say it and she was shouted down .
There must be some reason for that .
Mr President , it is only two years since the financial crisis broke out and only six months since the Greek issue , and we are seeing all willingness fading away in our nation states .
Today , we have a clear message from the European Parliament in the Berès report and the Feio report .
We need more current economic and financial policies .
We need more Europe , and a better Stability and Growth Pact with its mechanisms strengthened .
The most recent decision by the ECOFIN Council is a slap in the face for European citizens .
This is not adequate .
We need to strengthen the strategy for growth , so that in this environment , it is sustainable and socially responsible , and we need better governance mechanisms for EU 2020 .
We need more and better European economic governance for national actions to support this line , including the financial transaction tax that I urge the Commission to look at very carefully , including in a European context .
We need a better and stronger united Europe speaking with one voice at global level .
We need a better financial regulation and there is a long way still to go .
To conclude , we need a Commission initiative .
We need the Commission to act in the interests of European citizens , instead of a number of task forces .

( DE ) Mr President , Mr Chastel , Commissioner , this could actually have been a time of great answers , but in hindsight , it does not look like it .
What is on the table for the so-called reform of the Stability and Growth Pact is no great answer ; once again , it is the lowest common denominator - the small morsel that could actually be agreed upon .
I congratulate the Commission .
You are still at the table - the Member States are not quite going it alone .
I also congratulate the Council .
Success has been achieved , France and Germany have an agreement - we do not know whether it is a good one or a bad one , but at least they are no longer stuck in the quagmire .
What does all this mean ?
It means that next year , if the growth figures collapse again , we will stand up in front of everyone and have no answer to the economic situation .
Where is the section , the legal statute , in which you propose how we can together learn to drag ourselves out of the debt crisis ?
That is where my group feels there is a gap and that is the debate that we are going to have in this House .
Yes , we agree with those Members who want greater commitment to reform .
That is something that we want too .
However , we then need to discuss the substance .
If you are not prepared to provide a more solid foundation for the actual orientation of our budgetary policy , then we can see no reason to continue discussing EU 2020 .
It is already a paper tiger - we can throw it in the waste paper basket today if you will not debate the substance of it with us more forcefully .
We want to make a difference .
Yes , it makes a difference whether we invest in limping bureaucracy or in the energy sources and jobs of the future .
Where is the point in your proposals where we can make this difference ?
That is what we are waiting for .
This debate has yet to take place .
That will be the decisive thing for us .
Moreover , we will not accept a catalogue of indicators that is based on the legislation .
This Parliament will not have the wool pulled over its eyes .
We want to debate whether employment and unemployment are an important feature of budgetary development or not , and we want to do so before the legislation is passed .
Mr President , the current financial crisis offers the opportunity to make clear headway in the process of European integration .
I want to focus my intervention on the creation of a European common treasury for the eurozone countries .
This would be a clear improvement of the institutional framework for European economic governance .
I know that this is a very delicate issue for some countries , but we will have to deal with it in the coming years .
The European treasury would improve the coordination of the stimulus policies implemented by Member States .
The European treasury would also be able to issue eurobonds to finance the construction of European infrastructures .
The EU needs its own resources in the context of future diminishing budgets in the EU Member States .
A European common treasury collecting some taxes at European level would allow the reduction of national transfers to the EU .
Without real autonomy in income , there will not be real autonomy in expenditure .
The creation of a European common treasury is a political decision .
The sticking point in this discussion is the lack of political will or , to be more precise , the lack of political will on the part of Germany .
In the 1990s , Germany had the political vision to push for the launching of the euro , despite the difficulties faced with its reunification process .
In my opinion , Germany should lead now and move towards a common European treasury .
( CS ) If you have been listening to this debate here from early on , then I think that all those who say that the European Union is at a crossroads are correct .
On one side , are those who advocate a strong Community approach .
On the other side , it is fair to say , are a minority in this Parliament who think that the European Union should henceforth work more on an intergovernmental principle .
The proposal to introduce various forms of European taxes also fits with this , even though it is called innovative financing .
This echoes calls for the strengthening of the European Union , transferring more powers to the European Commission at the expense of the Member States .
It is a shame that no one has yet said that the European Union and the European Commission should start reducing their programmes , reducing the number of its often controversial agencies and reforming the common agricultural policy .
( DE ) Mr President , economic governance as it is being developed here focuses solely on savings and competition policy .
As has just been mentioned by the honourable Member from Spain , the problem of Germany 's orientation towards exports has not been addressed at all .
Yet this is clearly a central problem , both in the euro area and in the European Union as a whole .
German competition policy is being conducted to the detriment of internal demand in Germany .
This is not being discussed at all .
Above all , however , it is also being conducted to the detriment of wages .
It is a wage battle - a wage competition .
This wage competition is exerting enormous pressure on our neighbouring European countries , on European trade unions and on European workers .
Neither the Commission nor the Feio report have addressed this problem .
Any economic governance worthy of the name must take corrective action in this area rather than remaining silent .
( FR ) Mr President , Mr Chastel , Commissioner , in 1968 , our fellow Member Mr Cohn-Bendit 's friends wrote , ' words , not deeds ' on the walls of Paris .
Today , citizens are asking for the opposite : deeds , not words .
We are hearing a lot of words , but our fellow citizens are not seeing results .
The European Union 's slowness to respond is not good enough given the imperatives we need to deal with .
We need to move forward together , with a united European spirit .
In this respect , I would like to say a word about the role of Parliament .
Here too , there is still work to be done in terms of upholding the codecision principle .
The President of the Commission thanked Parliament several times for its support , but Parliament is not here simply to play a secondary , support role , or to ratify decisions taken by the Council without having the chance to discuss them first .
Parliament is on a par with the Council .
It is time we recognised this , and the debate on economic governance will be a test in this respect .
Finally , as regards the forthcoming G20 summit , the European Union must present a united front to ensure that this international body plays the role that is expected of it and does not merely indulge in endless talk .

( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to start by thanking Mr Feio for his cooperative efforts and the spirit of compromise with which he has imbued his report .
However , the conclusion that we reached was that on certain issues - and this also happened with financial supervision - Parliament is able to unite and take up a strong position in defence of the public interest , and that this strong position has to be acknowledged by the Commission and the Council .
This issue is particularly relevant at a time of launching a legislative package of six proposals which are extraordinarily sensitive and on which Parliament has codecision powers .
We will be equally active , but without concessions .
Our spirit is one of dialogue , but not of going beyond the objectives that we intend to defend .
Mr Feio underlines some aspects that are related to this issue in his report .
One of these is that economic governance is more than just a set of penalties .
Growth and employment need their own initiatives .
Initiatives are needed to combat the growing internal divergences in the European Union .
Specific proposals are needed on the European Monetary Fund .
Stable solutions are needed for sovereign debt .
We are at a point when confidence depends on the ability of the Commission and the Council to respond to the public 's real anxieties , and those are unemployment , growth and cohesion .
Mr President , better economic governance is required with earlier warnings and earlier actions .
Traditional debt and deficit targets have been breached by many countries , but would not have warned us about the crisis pending in Spain or Ireland .
Other measures are needed too .
Economics , however , is not an exact science and it is not just about numbers .
Soviet history reminds us that central counting of tractor production does not , in itself , bring a strong economy , and centralised taxes or a centralised treasury are not a Utopian solution either .
There are many questions about what actions to take now .
Threatening to fine a nearly bankrupt nation feels like an empty threat , and promises of continual eurozone bailouts will always bring moral hazard .
I am aware that people are concerned about Franco-German deals , but perhaps they have a point .
If the market lends the money , then maybe the market should take the loss , not the taxpayer .
Mr President , as usual , there is both good and bad in our reality and in what we do .
It is important to understand the past and the causes of the crisis , and I think the Union has done its homework on that , but today , the focus must be on the future .
The global and European economic governance we build is for tomorrow , so it is not just a question of addressing this crisis .
Europe does not exist in a vacuum .
When fixing Europe , we are doing so against the backdrop of a world which is very different today from 2008 .
The G20 was united in favour of the fiscal rescue two years ago , but its unanimity was driven by fear .
Today it is divided .
The common global good does not exist .
There are many forces at work in leading the global recovery and rebalancing the world economy .
A major role is played by fundamental structural change , which strongly influences European competitiveness .
However , the role of currencies and exchange rates as global adjustment mechanisms has skyrocketed .
A new global monetary system is emerging at an unprecedented speed , and the number of players is increasing .
To avoid the disaster of asymmetrical adjustments , we urgently need dialogue and collective action .
If we achieve this , the question is whether Europe will be able to play its role in this collective action .
What is clearly lacking for this is a bold , streamlining reform of the external representation of the euro area .
By delaying this reform , we are foregoing potential influence .
In the current global circumstances , Europe cannot afford to do that .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Europe is in a bad way and the world is not fairing any better .
Earlier on , the President-in-Office of the Council stressed that globalisation means we have to act at European level and at international level .
However , if we look at what is going on in the European Union and internationally , it is quite clear that it is precisely this concrete action that is lacking .
Summit after summit , the great and the less great who are supposed to be governing us parade their inflated egos and wallow in their own pompous words , whilst the main conclusion of each summit is that it will meet again .
What is more , this so-called global governance that the G20 is supposed to embody has absolutely no basis in international law and operates outside the United Nations system .
The G20 is self-proclaimed ; it operates without written rules and is a club of rich nations which have surrounded themselves with a few so-called emerging countries , including such exemplary democracies as Saudi Arabia .
Earlier , Martin Schulz quoted an extract from one of these hollow declarations by the G20 .
We could do the same with the statements published after our European summits .
Endless promises and empty words , never followed up with action .
To crown it all , Europe is subjected to Franco-German mini-summits where this strange couple Merkel and Sarkozy claim to be showing us the way .
Guy Verhofstadt spoke just now about casino games .
I am tempted to add , ' no more bets ! '
The Commission and Parliament need to unite so as not to squander Europe 's chips and to preserve the Community method .
( PT ) Mr President , I will begin by congratulating the rapporteur , Mrs Berès , on the report we are discussing today , as well as everyone else who worked on it .
As part of the Special Committee on the Financial , Economic and Social Crisis , I made a contribution on the issue of small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) , stressing their crucial role as a driving force for the European Union 's recovery , and its future growth and welfare .
In fact , there are more than 20 million SMEs in the European Union .
Therefore , if each of those could create one job , that would mean an equivalent reduction in unemployment .
This report sets out recommendations as economic strategies for emerging from the crisis : I will now highlight the main ones .
The first is the need to strengthen the social market economy , avoiding restrictions to competition and ensuring access to credit for SMEs .
Then there is the awarding of fiscal incentives and even subsidies to SMEs in order to maintain and create jobs .
Next is the creation of a new Small Business Act with a stronger social dimension .
Then there is the establishment of a European network of senior consultants to spread their knowledge .
Next is innovation as the most powerful engine for economic growth and , therefore , the essentiality of a fundamental link between industry and innovation .
Then there is the establishment of new partnerships between industry and the academic world .
Finally , there is the creation of an education system that meets the demands of the labour market , but also that of the need to create new qualifications for new jobs .
( FI ) Mr President , Commission President Barroso said at the start that economic governance has made such very rapid progress that just two years ago , no one could have even forecast it .
That is correct , and that is why it is always worth checking to see if the train is on the right tracks , when speed is not an end in itself .
The Berès report conducts such an analysis , and it is excellent .
Now that Mrs Berès ' Committee is continuing its work , it may also be worth listening to the economic policy dissidents : for example , the Nobel prize winner , Paul Krugman .
He claims that finance ministers are witch doctors who are sacrificing jobs at the altar .
We should listen to these people if we want to move away from an imaginary economy to a real one , and then we also need indicators of the real economy , which are employment and poverty .
I was disappointed with Mr Schmidt 's suggestion that capital transfer tax could not be tried out and introduced across Europe .
That is a big disappointment , especially as his conclusion was ' more Europe ' .
( BG ) In the report from the Special Committee on the Financial , Economic and Social Crisis we call , above all , for a European response , strong political and intellectual leadership with a European dimension , far-reaching integration and completion of the single European market for the benefit of European citizens .
We reached a compromise of paramount importance on key issues such as the Stability and Growth Pact , its penalty mechanisms , the path of structural reforms , budgetary consolidation and the European Union 's strategic investments .
The priority actions of particular importance include those relating to the cohesion policy and small and medium-sized enterprises .
The cohesion policy must be one of the basic pillars of our economic policy .
It will support the development of energy efficiency and trans-European networks which , in turn , will help revitalise the European economy and promote its sustainable growth .
Small and medium-sized enterprises are , for their part , vitally important to our future development , growth and prosperity .
A new definition must be coined for small and medium-sized enterprises which will also provide opportunities both for a more targeted policy supporting entrepreneurship and for proper action to be taken to reduce the administrative burden and red tape .
I sincerely hope that our proposals and recommendations will be reflected in concrete actions taken by the European Commission and mainly by Member States because we have no time to lose .
We owe our citizens a suitable , rapid response so that we can emerge from the crisis more quickly and strongly .
( BG ) The economic recession hit Member States with varying degrees of severity .
However , the difference does not extend beyond the borders of the euro area , which might be assumed to be the case from an economic perspective .
Unfortunately , the single currency has not resulted in economic alignment so far .
In fact , precisely the reverse has happened .
There are currently far more differences between the countries in the euro area than there were when the euro was introduced .
This is extremely dangerous .
The Stability and Growth Pact indicators are clearly not accurate and do not work .
This is why automatically imposing sanctions will not , in itself , yield positive results .
This will have even less of an impact on all 27 European Union Member States .
Even the opposite might happen , with the economic stereotypes which are ends in themselves creating new problems .
The solution is clear .
Member States ' economies must converge as far as possible so that the same measures can be used to achieve the same results everywhere .
This means more EU-wide policy , more instruments for European institutions , a higher budget and greater budgetary independence for the European Union , including through increasing the proportion of its own revenue .
( FR ) Mr President , the crisis is far from over and the unrest in countries such as France is a witness to this .
In Europe , I think the crisis has become one of integration .
A perfect example , once again , is the ' Deauville deal ' , which undermines the Community method and is a reflection of the delusions of grandeur still had by some Member States .
At the end of the day , however , which of us is still great ?
In 2050 , I understand that Europe will still account for 6-7 % of the world 's population , and its economic power will be crumbling .
Will continuing to compete with each other in this way help us to take up the challenges of international competition , or will it be by allowing ourselves to be governed by the Community method and acting together that we will be able to meet these challenges ?
Europe will need resources in order to do this : new and innovative resources .
The debate on the future financial perspective is a good opportunity to discuss these resources and try to identify them : in terms of research and development , and in terms of the external action service also .
What is the point of creating a 28th European diplomatic corps if it is just added to the existing bodies without thinning these out ?
We should do this to allow Member States some slack so that they can consolidate and we should give Europe the resources it needs so that it can finally conduct policies that mean something to our citizens .
This is what they want from us .
( DE ) Mr President , without wishing to appear presumptuous , listening to the debate here this morning , I think we can conclude that some amount of work has been done in recent months .
The Special Committee on the Financial , Economic and Social Crisis has also completed a great deal of work in the past year .
That is apparent from the 1 600 amendments to the original draft report that have been tabled .
The Committee has now been extended by a further year .
In my view , this is quite correct .
The crisis is far from at an end .
Ireland has only just escaped bankruptcy , the state budget in Greece is certainly not yet back in good shape and the overall situation gives no reason to sound the all clear .
The financial and economic reforms must therefore continue and it is too early yet to bring to a close the debate on the causes of the crisis and the conclusions that must be drawn .
It would therefore be incorrect to declare the work of the Crisis Committee more or less done and to end its mandate .
Instead , we must carry out further work based on what has been achieved to date .
That is why I feel that the interim report that has been tabled is acceptable to all .
This is also demonstrated by the broad approval it has enjoyed in the Crisis Committee .
Certainly , the text could have been worded somewhat more concisely and succinctly at some points , but we should see the report for what it is - an interim answer .
What is much more important than the wording of individual passages is that in the second half of the Committee 's work , we build on the preliminary work that we have done .
We need to consider how and where the discussions of the Crisis Committee can be supported in the forthcoming debates by the legislative committees .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I listened to the various speeches this morning very carefully but I believe we could do with shedding a little more light to distinguish between instruments , that I incidentally consider to be well-defined and aligned , and strategy and our internal unity as the European Union .
As far as instruments are concerned , I believe that decisive progress has been made and that we are therefore going in the right direction .
What I cannot understand is the strategy .
In other words : are we all following the same approach ?
We have always spoken about stability but now , the time has come , in fact , it is overdue , to speak of growth .
I am fully in agreement when we speak of stability and sacrifices but if we do not aim for growth at the same time by creating employment - the crucial topic during this period - I believe that we will not have done a good job .
President Barroso came here not long ago to give a State of the Union address , and I think we should remind him of this , clearly stating the Union 's strategy with regard to the financial market .
This morning , I have not heard anyone talk about this strategy .
Allow me also to say that it would be an unpardonable error to seek to camouflage the obvious anarchy between Member States behind the concept of subsidiarity , which is referred to all too often and usually inappropriately .
( LV ) Mr President , Commissioner , members of the Council , in the last two years , very many people in the European Union have suffered , suffered directly as a result of the crisis .
No small number of people in my own country , Latvia , have also suffered .
A 20 % reduction in economic turnover , and an equally steep increase in unemployment .
My countrymen and women understood that in these extraordinary circumstances , extraordinary solutions had to be adopted .
What have these solutions been ?
In order to restore our public finances , the people of my country , Latvians , have patiently suffered a reduction in salaries of more than 30 % , coupled with tax increases .
As a result , stability in our finances has been brought about in Latvia .
So why my indignation ?
I am indignant when I read today that Germany and France , far from wishing to strengthen financial supervision in the European Union , wish , in fact , to weaken it .
Would this then mean that my countrymen 's and women 's work would have been in vain ?
Ladies and gentlemen , we cannot allow such a situation , in which some large Member States wish to continue to live irresponsibly , to prevail .
We must strengthen the Commission 's proposal , so that Europe can have strong financial supervision . Thank you for your attention .
Mr President , I think we should be clear about one thing , namely , that the global economic crisis is mainly focused on the US and European economies .
There are high levels of growth in other parts of the world , but not in Europe and not in the US .
More than anything else , this is rooted in overspending and lack of growth .
I think that is one of the most important challenges .
We need to kick-start growth but , in doing so , we need to have stability in public finances .
That is why I find it worrying - adding to what has already been said by previous speakers - that some European leaders are now talking about more lax and flexible rules regarding the Stability Pact , and opting for a change to the treaty .
I do not think that what Europe needs is a decade of discussions about treaty changes .
That is more of a policy for disintegration than integration and competitiveness .
We need to strengthen the Stability Pact with as many automatic sanctions as possible .
We need to ensure that budget deficits are reduced , in confidence and in good order , at the same time as we are reforming in order to open ourselves up for more economic growth - opening up European borders and opening up for more competition .
That is the way ahead and what we should stand up for in the G20 .
That is also the aim for the European agenda .
( EL ) Mr President , the Berès report on the economic crisis , which is the subject of one of our debates today , notes in paragraph 32 that some Member States , obviously implying my country , Greece , do not currently have opportunities to create real recovery plans and that all the options until the year 2012 are limited to public expenditure cuts , tax increases and debt reduction .
This position is of huge significance to Greece , and others , because there are forces within the country which are arguing the very opposite .
I personally would like to support this position in the Berès report , as countries which have a huge deficit and debt and , in particular , countries which no longer have access to the international capital market , must reduce their deficits before recovery can take hold .
There is no other way .
Without deficit reduction , there can be no access to international markets .
Without access to international markets , there can be no recovery .
It is a bitter pill to swallow , especially for the citizens , but we must have the courage to tell the citizens the truth .
Mr President , one minute it shall be .
There were two statements made here this morning that I want to focus on .
One by Danuta Hübner when she says that Europe does not exist in a vacuum , and the second by Mr Chastel who said Europe cannot grant all concessions alone .
I think it is time for the European Union to get tough , particularly with the G20 countries and the United Nations .
We are in a position where we have 11 % unemployment , 20 % youth unemployment , massive public debt and millions in poverty , and unless the other countries around the world are prepared to share the burden , then we should say we are not going to allow our countries to become uncompetitive and increase poverty within the European Union .
Secondly , I want to say that , within Europe , we not only need to speak with one voice but also act as one body ; the self-appointed board of governors which was mentioned here this morning cannot be allowed to continue .
They have an opportunity to make their case to the Council .
( PL ) I would like to begin by expressing my satisfaction with the report on improving the economic governance and stability framework of the Union , and my gratitude for the outstanding work the rapporteur , Mr Feio , has put in .
I am convinced that new initiatives , such as the financial supervision package and the European Semester , will allow us to avoid future crises , or at least dampen their impact .
However , I believe that the key issue is persisting with measures aimed at improved coordination and increased transparency of political strategies concerning the economies of the Member States .
I would like to underline the importance of creating a good framework for budgetary cooperation at EU and Member State level , including the alignment of spending categories of the national budgets with those of the EU budget .
This would make it possible to carry out insightful and systematic analyses of European public expenditure .
( FR ) Mr President , to begin with , I would just like to say a few words about the Franco-German proposals .
I think our reaction should ultimately be a positive one .
We are often saying that since 2007 , our Franco-German engine has been missing .
At the same time , it is regrettable that there is an element of enslavement for France in these Franco-German proposals , given that they were devised to help prevent France from getting into difficulties in view of its poor financial and economic health .
It is also important to point out that , unlike the Berès report , these proposals make no positive suggestions that would actually allow us to have genuine economic governance in the European Union .
( SK ) Crisis is a very complex phenomenon ; so allow me just a few comments since there is little time .
Firstly , too great an emphasis is placed on the criterion of public debt within national economies when other indicators are equally important .
At the same time , a certain amount of public debt is inevitable in times of crisis , inasmuch as the governments must compensate for deficits in the private sector with economic activity in the public sector , or more precisely , by public stimuli for the private sector which may slow down growth in unemployment .
This is because , ladies and gentlemen , in all these numbers , we are forgetting about the people who did not cause the crisis ; we are forgetting about unemployment and the worsening social situation .
I would also like to emphasise the fact that without Europe-wide coordination on economic policies and finance sector regulation , the way out of the crisis will be very difficult .
In conclusion , I have one final appeal or request .
Commissioner . For several years , I have been calling for real action to be taken as regards the situation concerning tax havens .
Mr President , I propose that in future , we have one representative for economic issues .
We should have a high representative for economic affairs in the same way as we have a High Representative for Foreign Affairs .
In future , we could merge Mr Rehn 's and Mr Barnier 's posts .
On another issue , it is a shame that we cannot speak with one voice at the G20 meetings .
The European Union is helping France , Sarkozy and the chair of the G20 .
In future , the European Union should have one post , one person at this meeting , and we should speak with one voice .

Mr President , yesterday evening , I was really suffering with Mr Rehn during the press conference when I saw how he had to present this deal , which was not really based on his proposals alone .
After what we learned from the supervisory package , I think we have seen how Parliament and the Commission can work together in order to get a good result .
I think this is really what we have to do now .
When we look at the deficit and debt procedures , as well as your good proposals on macro-economic imbalances , it is really crucial , in order to have a good deal , for countries with both surpluses and deficits to bear their share in order to get the euro back on track .
I can only say that a majority in this House is ready to support the proposals you are making .
( PT ) Mr President , as the Franco-German directorate is no longer seated in this Chamber , I will direct my three questions on the recent frenzy of penalties to the Commission and Council .
The first is on the idea of deposits with interest : how on Earth do you rationalise adding one deficit to another deficit in order to combat the deficit ?
The second question is on the possibility of suspending the Structural Funds , the only consequence of which will be jeopardising medium- and long-term growth , thus increasing the interest on the debt , thus increasing the short-term deficit .
That leaves me with question three : how about having penalties for stupidity and the sin of arrogance ?
Mr President , we have been promised economic growth , but the competition that European countries face from the developing economies will lead to the destruction of the manufacturing bases and jobs of our countries .
We can only compete with them by driving down the living standards of our workers .
We must reject globalism , protect our economies and stop building up the strength of our competitors .
We have been promised improved economic governance in Europe .
However , the economies of Member States are very different and a single economic prescription will not suit 27 different countries .
Each country must prescribe the form of governance that it needs .
The economic crisis started with the activities of the banks , but the response of governments has been to rush to their rescue .
We need to control the credit-creating activities , i.e. the money-making activities , of the banks .
The banks must serve our economies and not be allowed to follow their own agenda , and they must certainly not be our favoured beneficiaries .
( HU ) We have experienced the most serious social and economic crisis in the history of the European Union , the chief causes of which include global inequality , lax financial regulation and the permissive financial policy of the United States .
I think that the European Union was a little late in responding to the consequences of the crisis .
The first reactions of Member States were not in harmony with each other .
In future , we will need appropriate economic management mechanisms in order to deal with times of crisis .
For the sake of our security , we must ensure that the European Union can rely on its own strength .
In my opinion , the work of the Special Committee on the Financial , Economic and Social Crisis is still necessary , since the crisis is not yet over and the financial markets have not yet stabilised .
Member States must harmonise their budgetary policies and share these with each other .
The internal market is one of the indispensable levers of growth , and hence the EU 2020 strategy must focus on long-term investments and employment .
We need to strengthen the position of SMEs , since their essential work is the driving force behind research , innovation and growth .
( EL ) Mr President , the European Union is indeed at a crossroads .
The international economic crisis has limited growth and exacerbated unemployment , poverty and social exclusion .
The rescue measures were positive , despite serious weaknesses .
However , we clearly need more Community solidarity and coordination between national recovery plans .
The European Parliament wants more Europe from the Commission , less bureaucracy , support for small and medium-sized enterprises , more new jobs , more funds for financing projects in vital sectors and a stronger system for regulating , supervising and coordinating the economic , fiscal and social policies of the European Union .
I , too , support the establishment of a common Monetary Fund for the purpose of effective control of European economic governance .
Finally , I am so proud of the Cypriot Nobel prize winner , Christoforos Pissalides , that I call on the European Parliament to invite him to present his views as to how unemployment and the challenges of our times should be addressed .
( FR ) Mr President , I would like to address the Commission and the Council , simply to highlight the three failings , as we see it , in the European governance proposals .
The first failing is that there is extremely strict discipline concerning deficits and debt and extremely loose discipline concerning investment , and I am thinking about Europe 2020 .
We really need equally strong discipline in both areas , as austerity on its own will not regenerate economic activity .
The second failing is that if we are so keen to exercise control over expenditure , we should also ensure that we are bringing in the necessary income .
I have emphasised this many times before : we cannot have coordination on the budget if we do not have coordination on tax .
The third failing is what we see to be a democratic failing , and I find this particularly striking in the proposals by the task force .
It appears that as far as the task force is concerned , Parliament does not exist , and I find this unacceptable .
( FR ) Mr President , I should like to focus my speech on the preparations for the forthcoming G20 summits .
The previous speakers have said everything there is to say on European economic governance , the need to strengthen European economic governance , to strengthen the Stability and Growth Pact , and to involve the European Parliament and , of course , also the national parliaments more closely in the process .
I should like quickly to mention two challenges facing our nations and the members of the G20 ; challenges that must , in my opinion , be tackled during the course of the forthcoming G20 meetings .
Those are the currency war and commodity price volatility .
As regards these two issues , which pose a genuine threat to global growth and which cause significant imbalances on our planet , I believe that the European Union must unite around common positions , so that it is able to speak with one voice at the forthcoming G20 summits , both the one in Seoul and also at those that follow , and in a more all-embracing manner on the world stage .
( RO ) The effects of the crisis seem to be far from over at the moment .
This is why I would like to remind you , in this context , of the important role played by the economic and social cohesion policy and , last but not least , of the absolute prerequisite which it represents .
This policy has become a key feature of the economic recovery package , providing added value and supporting efforts promoting modernisation and sustainable economic growth , thereby demonstrating European solidarity at the same time .
I think that we require , first and foremost , major investments in every kind of infrastructure , be it transport , energy or telecommunications .
We need significant capital investment from a number of funding sources , both public and private , as well as through public-private partnerships , which , I feel , are still not used to their full potential .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should first like to congratulate our colleague , Mr Feio , on the quality of his report and the ambitious proposals that it contains .
This also demonstrates that the European Parliament is playing a full part in a debate that is decisive for the future of Europe , and we can only be pleased that this is the case .
Furthermore , the Greek crisis has revealed the shortcomings that are undermining the economic governance of the European Union .
On this point , I therefore take note of Mr Feio 's proposal to establish a permanent mechanism for financial stability .
We must also deal with this problem at its source .
I believe that the solution for this also lies in strengthening the Stability and Growth Pact and particularly its sanctions .
That is essential if we wish to achieve a lasting rehabilitation of national budgets , something that is not always popular .
It is restrictive , but we have no choice .
( LT ) The financial , economic and social crisis has affected every citizen of Europe .
However , the hard times have highlighted even more the fact that the various national economic recovery plans were poorly coordinated and not effective enough .
Furthermore , certain Member States really did not have opportunities to create genuine national economic recovery plans , including measures to stimulate growth and employment , because they reduced public spending even more during the recession and increased taxes in order to reduce national debt .
Unfortunately , in some Member States , this is being done at the expense of ordinary people .
I would also like to draw attention to the fact that the crisis highlighted very clearly the social inequality between different social groups .
For instance , women are at much greater risk than men of finding themselves below the poverty line .
Thus , the European Union must learn the lesson of this crisis and implement the initiatives it adopted in all fields by coordinating joint action with the Member States .
( DE ) Mr President , scarcely have we half regulated the financial sharks of the stock market monopoly than we are faced with the problem of a global race to devalue currencies which , despite China 's slight accommodation today , has not yet been averted .
Something that is anathema to us in Europe - namely , devaluation or intervention in the currency markets - is now a problem forced upon us by globalisation .
The US wants to reduce public debt , the Japanese want to boost the economy and the Chinese want to increase exports .
This soft currency policy conducted by other economic powers naturally harms Europe , as well as other countries , and therefore must , in my opinion , be an important topic of debate at the G20 summit .
After all , flooding of the world 's markets with cheap Chinese imports is easy if the currency is artificially undervalued .
This kind of enduring intervention distorts the market ; an extremely dangerous game which , in a worst case scenario , could bring the entire global economy to its knees .
Even if the prospects of success are doubtful , it is essential that plans for a financial transaction tax are broached at the summit .
Mr President , I should like to thank Members who spoke for their contribution .
I should like to reply to two or three of those speeches .
First , to Mr Zīle .
I think that what he said is very important when we come to reform cohesion policy .
We must make an assessment of this cohesion policy , to establish whether , over the course of the years that have elapsed since accession , the gamble that internal inequalities could be partly evened out by the application of these funds has proved to be correct , and to make an objective assessment so that we can learn lessons for the future .
Many Members - and I thank them - have spoken about the representation of the European Union and about world governance .
This is entirely a question of strategy for our European Union , again at a time when currency wars seem on the verge of breaking out .
We need to speak with one European voice , both internally and externally .
Let us use our internal strength to be strong and united in our representations to the outside world .
Next , to echo what my colleague , Robert Goebbels , said , it is true that the G20 is not the solution we ultimately aspire to for world governance , where everyone has his or her place and where there is room for the arbitration authorities that we need .
This harks back to the speech made by the Secretary-General of the United Nations yesterday , to the effect that we must follow our future course within the United Nations , through a root-and-branch reform of that institution and its governance .
Finally , Mr President , to round off this debate , I should like to return to the topic of public investment , and come back to what my fellow Member , Mr Lamberts , was saying .
In our report , we call for an annual review by the Commission of public and private investment needs and for the introduction of performance indicators that will actually enable us to have a long-term investment strategy for the benefit of jobs , and hence , for the benefit of European citizens .
This strategy would be founded on a sustainable vision and the concept of solidarity , which is at the heart of the European Union .
( Applause )
Mr President , I should like to start by thanking all the Members who have been contributing , even those yet to speak before the end of the debate .
It is time to move from words to actions .
From now on , following this vote , which I hope will be in favour , Parliament will have its own position on the subject of economic governance .
This position will advocate the spirit of the Union : greater transparency and more publicity .
It will advocate economic governance as a goal for the growth of all 27 Member States of the European Union and better coordination between them , with greater economic and monetary union .
In short , it will advocate a Europe of greater solidarity , preparation and effectiveness ; a Europe for all , with different voices but singing from the same hymn sheet ; a Europe with Council , Commission and Parliament positions .

The Europe of economic governance is not the Europe of two-party summits : it is the Europe of institutional voices , of the European Parliament and of the public having a voice .
What stands out is the crucial role that this House and the national parliaments must have in this area .
They must have their own vision on the necessary macro-economic supervision of Member States , they must have their own voice regarding how the Europe 2020 strategy is implemented , and they must pay close attention to the issue of reinforcing the Stability and Growth Pact .
Parliament has a series of different proposals in relation to the other institutions .
Therefore , we have reached - Mr President , I will stop here - the time to debate the issues on the table in a strong and unified way .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , let me start by thanking rapporteurs Berès and Feio and the honourable Members for this very substantial and substantive debate .
I do appreciate that the volume of the contributions corresponds to the importance of the issues discussed .
I want to make a few comments , responses and remarks on the debate and reports , and I will begin with the international scene .
In the world economy , the pre-crisis imbalances are re-emerging , which threatens a sustainable recovery and job creation .
It is therefore essential that the G20 , first the ministerial meeting this week , and then the summit in two weeks , is able to pursue effective international policy coordination to rebalance global growth .
All countries must play their part in rebalancing : surplus countries by reinforcing domestic demand , and deficit countries by focusing on export growth .
This is a matter of millions of jobs in the world economy and in the European Union .
The European Union is working for a strong and stable international financial system in which exchange rates should reflect economic fundamentals .
This is an essential element of the G20 goal of rebalancing global growth for the sake of sustainable recovery and job creation .
For the same reasons , it is essential for the EU to reform and reinforce its own economic governance .
The reports prepared by Mrs Berès and Mr Feio are important contributions to this effect , and the Commission 's legislative proposals , once adopted , will make a quantum leap towards a true and effectively functioning economic and monetary union .
There were some questions about the Commission 's views on levies and taxes on financial institutions .
I discussed this with President Barroso and we thought it would be useful to clarify our position in this regard because there were some confusing statements made concerning this issue .
We are in the midst of a fundamental reform of our own financial system and we need to keep up the momentum at the G20 as well .
The Commission has put forward a proposal , first of all , on a stability fee or a bank levy so that the private sector , the banking and financial sector , would and will participate towards the costs caused by the crisis and towards the resolution of future crises .
This is on the table and , in some Member States , this is being implemented .
Secondly , the Commission wants the financial sector to play a part in covering the costs of the crisis and that is why the EU - and the Commission - are committed to pushing for a financial transaction tax at global level .
Thirdly , the Commission has , in the meantime , tabled as one option for own resources in the EU budget a proposal that the financial sector should make an equitable contribution at EU level , such as a financial activities tax .
This is our view .
We have proposed a bank levy or stability fee ; we have raised the possibility of a financial activities tax as a source for own resources ; and thirdly , we are committed to pushing for a financial transaction tax at the global level .
In the report by Mr Feio , there is a proposal on establishing a European monetary fund .
The Commission is in favour of establishing a permanent mechanism for crisis prevention and crisis resolution which must have two sides , two elements , two dimensions .
There needs to be an accent on crisis prevention as well as on crisis resolution , because it is better to be safe than sorry .
As regards crisis resolution , we have clearly stated already in May that a robust framework for crisis management for the euro area is necessary , and the Commission intends to make proposals for a permanent crisis resolution mechanism in due time .
A few general principles have emerged , especially that crisis prevention and resolution must go hand in hand and that any financial assistance must be subject to strict conditionality .
Such a permanent mechanism must minimise moral hazard and provide incentives for the Member States to pursue a responsible fiscal policy and incentives for investors to pursue responsible lending practices .
Mr Schmidt proposed an amendment concerning voluntary participation of non-euro area Member States in the sanctions regime .
You know that at the first stage , we are proposing a regime for the euro area Member States and , at the second stage , for all 27 Member States .
The Commission can accept and endorse this amendment , which aims at involving the non-euro area Member States in the sanctions regime on a voluntary basis .
We have made satisfactory progress in the context of the task force and achieved convergence towards the Commission 's initiatives to reinforce economic governance , notably focusing on prevention and pre-emptive action , putting an emphasis on debt sustainability , agreeing a method to address macro-economic imbalances and establish an effective enforcement mechanism .
Even though there has been a convergence of views towards the Commission 's proposals in the task force , the normal legislative process is only just starting .
So far , we have only seen the beginning .
We are perhaps at the end of the beginning , but now the real normal legislative process is just starting , and the European Parliament , as the colegislator , has indeed the crucial and decisive role .
We want to work together with you , and we call on the Council and Parliament to deliver the legislative decisions by the summer of next year so that we can have the new system of economic governance in force by next summer , 2011 , when we have the next major round of assessment of effective action .
This is really a matter of credibility for the European Union in terms of reinforcing economic governance , and I fully agree with you that it is indeed the Community method that makes the European Union work and deliver .
I listened to you very carefully on this .


I appreciate your firm commitment to the Community method , starting with the speeches by Mr Daul , Mr Schulz , Mr Verhofstadt and Mr Cohn-Bendit , although I cannot stretch to such oratory elegance as the ' Deauville deal ' or the ' casino compromise ' .
Anyway , let us demonstrate together once again that the Community method can deliver , and now it must deliver , the new system of economic governance , and let us thus complement the strong monetary union by a strong and effective economic union to make a real and complete economic and monetary union .
Mr President , I shall be brief and begin by thanking the two rapporteurs , Mrs Berès and Mr Feio , on behalf of the Council .
They embody Parliament 's involvement in a subject area as important as this .
I should also like to say that I urge you to analyse without delay initiatives in relation to economic governance - Commission initiatives that should enable us to implement European economic governance - and particularly in relation to the principle of codecision .
I consider the Council to be at Parliament 's disposal so that real progress can be made on these proposals .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today , Wednesday , 20 October 2010 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
I would like to express my appreciation for the important contribution that this work will make in identifying a set of measures to be taken to overcome the current crisis and prevent the possibility of further crises .
After the limits of a system of self-regulation were highlighted to a worrying degree by the recent financial crisis , it is becoming increasingly necessary for us to choose a global control system .
The current phase of economic and financial instability , the most severe for decades , has led to an employment and social crisis on such a scale that decisive action is required to eliminate its negative repercussions and prioritise the opportunities that open up in a globalised economy .
The crisis in recent years has sorely tried most of the advanced economies .
Recovery is still slow for some countries even today , and the ongoing fragility of financial markets makes global coordination and the choice of appropriate economic and industrial strategies key aspects in combating the financial crisis .
Global supervision should , in fact , promote the stabilisation of solid financial markets and sustain the current recovery , guaranteeing strong growth in demand and employment levels .
The current economic crisis proves that the economic governance model currently used in the EU has not worked sufficiently well , thereby failing to achieve full convergence between Member States .
This situation requires an improvement in the economic framework and the development of ambitious monitoring instruments which are more clearly defined and better targeted .
It is vital for Member States to abide by the regulations and decisions stipulated at European level , especially those relating to the Stability and Growth Pact .
With this in mind , I wish to welcome the initiative tabled by Mr Feio , intended to encourage such actions as devising more controls and monitoring more closely trends in public debt and revenue .
I would like to end by adding that the Romanian Government recently adopted its fiscal budgetary strategy for 2011-2013 , which includes the measures required to restore the budget deficit to under 3 % and maintain debt below the 60 % mark .
This reform process will create the conditions required for economic recovery .
The financial , economic and social crisis has now been raging for two years .
It has resulted in an unemployment rate of more than 10 % in the EU and in the risk of a new recession .
This is a crisis that we are unable to bring under control .
The next G20 summit will take place on 11 and 12 November in Seoul , under the Presidency of France .
Establishing the G20 was the brainchild of President Sarkozy , who believes that nowadays , the global economy is no longer regulated by the 8 , but by all the major developing countries , too .
This framework allows for the development of an ambition grounded in a long-term vision .
This crisis demands that we have genuine economic governance , rules restricting social dumping in developing countries , financial regulation , and a reform of the international monetary system .
To achieve this , Europe must know how to speak with one strong and determined voice .
Mr President , one of the most eye-catching features in these recommendations is the tax on financial transactions .
Such a measure will enable us to kill several birds with one stone : it is an effective instrument against speculation and the revenue will enable us to address government deficits and the funding for pressing social projects ( the environment , development aid , infrastructure projects , etc . ) .
Parliament has now made it clear that we in Europe must persist with this action , even though the rest of the world may , for the time being , be holding back because they have got cold feet .
The next step is the European Commission carrying out a feasibility study .
What we have decided on today is a specific intervention and an answer to the financial crisis .
It also sends out a clear signal to European citizens that we have learned from all the things that have gone wrong over the past few years and that we are tackling the crisis in order to make Europe stronger , in the interests of European citizens , in particular .
The regulatory structures which existed prior to the economic and monetary crisis in the European Union and United States showed a lack of consistency and were overwhelmingly based on disparate macro-economic analyses .
Due to the lack of any global consistency in these regulatory structures , countries responded off their own bat .
They failed to take into account that , in a globalised world , monetary policies adopted nationally have a significant impact on other economies .
The creation of the European Systemic Risk Board and European Financial Supervisory Authorities strengthens financial supervision within the EU .
However , there are still insufficient regulations available at international level for managing crises in the finance sector .
The EU must stress at the G20 meeting in November the importance of having a supervisory and regulatory system whose actions will include making it compulsory to register financial transactions and instruments .
We have a responsibility to the economy and we must first of all be strong at European Union level to enable us to lead the way globally .
Once and for all , the EU and its leaders will have to recognise that the severe crisis we are experiencing did not come from the US !
It is a systemic crisis resulting from capitalism in its current phase of development - neoliberalism .
In view of this , the crisis in the EU comes from the very foundations of the EU itself , which has neoliberalism as one of its main tenets .
Faced with the disastrous results of its policies , the powers that have essentially determined the direction of the EU are showing signs of a worrying arrogance and aggressiveness , seeking to impose unacceptable setbacks on progress , particularly for workers and people from the most vulnerable countries , through an intolerable attack on their sovereignty .
This is the meaning of the joint declaration that Germany and France decided to make in Deauville before the meeting of the G20 and the European Council .
They seem to be ignoring the fact that forging ahead on the path that brought us here can only lead to disgrace .
This is the message that is echoing across Europe in the protests of workers and the public .
It is time for them to listen !
The real response to the crisis lies in giving value to work and in a fairer distribution of income , namely through taxation , thus benefiting work as opposed to capital .
in writing . - We are in the middle of a crisis , which has , to a large degree , damaged the financial , economic and social sectors and has had a negative impact on the integration process of the internal market .
The single market might be the necessary catalyst to initiate a real European economic and financial recovery from the crisis and rebuild much needed confidence among the citizens .
The crisis , in itself , may serve as a window of opportunity to implement measures which will stimulate economic growth , competitiveness and social progress in Europe by putting citizens at the heart of the European economy .
I support the rapporteur 's commitment to give clear indications for a way out of the crisis : taking concrete measures and initiatives focusing on the importance of the internal market , employment and the role of SMEs .
Moreover , a new holistic and inclusive approach has to be adopted whereby citizens ' goals , particularly those related to economic , social , health and environmental concerns of citizens , are fully integrated into the economy .
We need a new paradigm of political thinking , making the European citizen the main political variable in the determination and formulation of Union legislation and policy .
The economic recovery is under way in Europe . However , the climate remains uncertain .
Global economic recovery is still fragile , with the pace of the process varying from country to country .
The top priority is still to create a stable basis which will systematically promote sustained , balanced economic growth .
To this end , we must create a system which will support simultaneously the response to the crisis , prevention and medium- and long-term cooperation .
The European Union must be a strong partner , capable of not only applying its experience in economic and political integration , but of also making a significant contribution to global economic governance .
We need to devise credible and viable economic policies in the medium term and coordinate a macro-economic policy which will be based on a framework for sustained , balanced growth , drawn up by the G20 .
A strategy for the EU 's economic policies must include the following : an action plan on using the structural reforms to reinforce economic growth and employment , consolidated fiscal reform and increasing economic governance of the EU and euro area .
A G20 development agenda must be adopted , with a multiannual action plan , which will promote economic growth and flexibility for developing countries .
In the situation that has developed , the major and most important thing is to find a diagnosis and the causes that led us to the crisis .
People in various EU states have experienced the fall-out from the crisis in different ways .
It is essential to pinpoint the mistakes , malpractice and unprofessional conduct of national governments in order to prevent the situation their people find themselves in from getting worse in the future .
Latvia 's government has , for example , already borrowed an amount exceeding twice its annual budget from international financial institutions .
With each passing day , the Latvian Government adopts measures relating to the tax system and fiscal policy in general that disadvantage the people and are leading to business liquidations and the emigration of Latvian entrepreneurs .
The Latvian Government is constantly trying to amend the pensions legislation so as to reduce payments to pensioners .
This is leading to a social explosion and comprehensive injustice .
We have to send a strong signal to national governments that reducing social payments and pensions in a time of crisis is a crime against the population .
I am convinced that the unprotected and needy strata of society must not bear the responsibility for the mistakes of governments .
I would like to thank Mr Feio for his work on the draft report .
It seems to me that we are returning to business as usual rather too quickly as far as the threats facing Europe are concerned .
We are not giving proper attention to the warning signals from the financial markets , or from people such as President Trichet , who indeed called the Commission proposal a good but inadequate step towards strengthening the Stability and Growth Pact .
Our role today , as the European Parliament , is to defend the European Commission 's proposals against the governments of the Member States which have not , apparently , learned any lessons from the crisis .
If the European Council had properly adhered to the provisions of the pact , the scale of the European crisis in public finances would have been much smaller .
If , today , we allow governments and , in particular , the governments of Germany and France , to water down the Commission 's proposals , the crisis will deepen , and we will have to wonder whether the entire common currency project has any point in its current form , and whether we will inadvertently prove that the euro was a failed experiment .
Parliament faces a major task .
We must defend the euro , and oppose any short-term political aims .
We must force all Member States to conduct responsible budgetary policies , painful though it may be .
Thank you for your attention .
The word ' crisis ' comes from the Greek word Krino that literally means ' to decide ' , ' to choose ' .
It therefore indicates a moment that separates one stage from another .
We must look beyond and consider the past in order to implement the structural changes that will make our small and medium-sized enterprises more competitive and able to face up to the greater pressure that will come from a globalised environment .
In doing this , we must also guarantee employment for a good proportion of the more vulnerable part of our workforce and their families .
The European Union needs new economic governance that will ensure the stability and rigour of national public finances .
A financial and economic crisis such as the one we are currently experiencing must never happen again .
Europe 's new economic governance must take into account not only the level of government debt , but also its sustainability in the medium to long term .
Private debt and the sustainability of social security systems are just as important as government debt as such for the stability of public finances .
Indeed , countries that controlled government debt have plunged into a deep crisis precisely because of the serious indebtedness of families and companies , while countries with high government debt have come through well .
The economic and financial crisis has revealed all too clearly the shortcomings and weaknesses of the existing instruments and methods for coordinating economic and currency policy .
In the past , some Member States , particularly France and Germany , were too hesitant at introducing stricter regulation .
Overcoming the economic crisis is one of the greatest challenges we have faced and one to which there can only be a European answer , not a national answer .
This also applies to sanction mechanisms , which are still being blocked by some Member States .
Under the new rules of the internal financial market , however , it is high time that the currency union were strengthened and , at the same time , public debt , in particular , reduced in order to secure the future of the European economic area .
The national parliaments , in particular , need to be more intensively involved in this process in order to Europeanise the debate in the Member States .
Only then can a European answer be found with which to overcome the crisis and achieve a robust , strong economic union .
Since the financial crisis of 2008 , the G20 Heads of State or Government have been meeting regularly every six months to discuss economic and financial issues and to bolster cooperation in order to achieve stable and sustainable growth for the world economy for the benefit of all .
However , I believe that , in order to find a sustainable and appropriate response to the financial , economic or social problems of the crisis , we need a broader-based approach and a more balanced perspective on these problems .
The Finance Ministers of the Member States are not in a position to evaluate the situation on the labour market and to come up with answers to the pressing labour and social policy issues that give due consideration to the needs of workers or the people in general .
I therefore call for regular meetings of the Ministers for Employment and Social Affairs in the G20 .
Moreover , I call on the EU and those Member States that are also members of the G20 to develop this idea further and to cooperate more closely with one another in the field of employment and social policy and to aim for a more balanced approach at summit level .
We cannot allow competition to undermine the protection of workers ' rights .
We need to enforce these rights , not only for the citizens of the European Union , but also for the citizens of other countries around the world .
in writing . - ( RO ) The EU , with its 500 million citizens , accounting for 7 % of the world 's population , produces 30 % of the global GDP .
The latest statistics show that the EU posted a trade deficit of EUR 17.3 billion in August 2010 .
During the first half of this year , the EU recorded the highest increases in exports with Brazil ( + 57 % ) , China ( + 41 % ) and Turkey ( + 38 % ) , while the highest increases in imports were with Russia ( + 43 % ) , China and India ( both + 25 % ) .
In order to achieve the EU 2020 strategy objectives , the EU should reduce its energy dependency on its traditional suppliers .
During the first half of this year , the EU-27 's trade deficit in the energy sector rose by EUR 34.3 billion compared with the same period last year .
Furthermore , the European Union needs an eco-efficient industrial policy which will guarantee the link between innovative capacity and the EU 's production units , thereby helping create jobs across the whole EU and maintain its global competitiveness .
This is why the European Council should include on its agenda , during its meeting on 28 and 29 October , future industrial policy and EU energy security , as well as proposals on how to reduce the impact of climate and demographic change .
( PL ) Yesterday , in Łódź , Poland , an employee of a European Parliament constituency office was murdered at work .
He was my assistant , Marek Rosiak .
What the murderer said while he committed the crime left no doubt that his motive was hatred for the Law and Justice Party , Poland 's main opposition party .
The hate campaign waged against this party for some time now has culminated in tragedy .
Apart from the crime itself , the European Parliament must also condemn hatred and violence , which have no place in European politics and European democracy .
Mr President , I ask you to hold a minute 's silence in memory of Marek Rosiak , a man who died while working for the European Parliament .
( NL ) Mr President , we have just shown how dignified we , as a Parliament , can be .
However , on entering the Chamber just now , I was , first , harassed by people who think that we ought to sign certain resolutions and , then , surrounded by balloons promoting certain amendments .
Mr President , I find such behaviour detrimental to the dignity of this Parliament and I would ask that you think twice about this and look into how we can keep the corridors clear .
Mr President , may I ask you to make a ruling please ?
We see that balloons are displayed in the Chamber .
Can you make a ruling on whether that is permissible or not .
If it is not , may they be removed ?
If it is , my colleagues and I have some very tasteful UKIP balloons in purple and yellow which we would like to bring along next time .
( Applause )
Dear colleagues , we will vote today on this very important issue .
This issue is connected with your demonstration here .
I ask you to leave this demonstration until the vote , which will be in about 40 minutes ' time .
I ask you to do that .
It is a small gesture for all of us .
Generally speaking , I support you , but please do not demonstrate in the Chamber .
( Applause )
1 .
Revision of the framework agreement on relations between the European Parliament and the Commission (
2 .
Adaptation of Parliament 's Rules of Procedure to the revised framework agreement on relations between the European Parliament and the Commission (
I would like to mention that this has been the result of our lengthy negotiations with the European Commission .
I would like , above all , to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Rangel , and also Mr Lehne , who negotiated on our behalf with the European Commission .
Mr Swoboda , Mrs Wallis , Mrs Harms , Mrs Roth-Berendt and Mr Rangel also took part in the work , and I would like to thank them very much for the outcome of the negotiations .
My thanks also go to President Barroso and to Vice-President Šefčovič .
We were all very frank with one another .
The result has been very good , so I congratulate both sides .
I am looking forward to good collaboration in the future .
3 .
Financial Regulation applicable to the general budget of the European Communities as regards the European External Action Service (
4 .
Amendment of the Staff Regulations of Officials of the European Communities and the Conditions of Employment of Other Servants of those Communities (
5 .
Draft amending budget No 6 / 2010 : Section II - European Council and Council ; Section III - Commission ; Section X - European External Action Service (
Ladies and gentlemen , we have now completed the legislative process on the European External Action Service .
Above all , I would like to thank the many people who are now with us in the Chamber , the MEPs , for their exceptionally hard and challenging work .
The chairs of several committees of the European Parliament played a leading role in this work .
I would like to thank the chairs for their sound work , but would like to extend my thanks , in particular , to a number of people who represented this House both as negotiators and as rapporteurs , and whose names I would like to mention here .
Their names are : Elmar Brok , Guy Verhofstadt , Roberto Gualtieri , Ingeborg Gräßle , Crescenzio Rivellini and Bernhard Rapkay , as well as the MEPs who worked on the budget , László Surján and Sidonia Jędrzejewska .
I have named them , in particular , because they put an enormous amount of work into ensuring that we obtained a good agreement on the European External Action Service .
We believe that this agreement will be useful to the European Union .
I would like to congratulate everybody but , in particular , let us also congratulate Lady Ashton and those who negotiated alongside her , and congratulate the Council on the result .
Also among us is Ambassador Christoffersen , who also took part in the negotiations .
Applause , please .
( Applause )
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes )
Formal sitting - Mid-term address by Jerzy Buzek , President of Parliament
Colleagues , I have a short speech , as I promised you one year ago .
We are at the mid-way point of my Presidency .
At the very beginning , I promised that I would inform you of my activities .
As the President of the European Parliament , I represent all of you .
Wherever I go , whatever I do , I have always felt the honour and responsibility of acting on behalf of this prestigious Chamber .
But this speech is not about me : this speech is about you and about your activity .
It is about all of us , what we have achieved together at the European Parliament in the last 15 months , and what is ahead of us .
1 .
Draft amending budget No 3 / 2010 : Section III - Commission - BAM ( Banana Accompanying Measures ) (
2 .
Draft general budget of the European Union - 2011 financial year ( vote )
rapporteur . - Mr President , in the Committee on Budgets , we voted on more than 1 600 amendments to the 2011 draft budget .
Inevitably , there are some technical adjustments that should be voted in the plenary .
As far as the integration of Letter of amendment No 1 for 2011 in Parliament 's reading is concerned , some technical adjustments need to be made in both the new European External Action Service section and that of the Commission , following the proposed transfers of appropriations between sections .
In the European External Action Service section , these concern notably the budgeting of the 1.85 % salary adjustment for the new Service , as is the case for the other institutions .
The amounts affected by the letter of amendment in the Commission section will also need to be modified accordingly .
This also applies to some Parliament amendments on administrative lines , which need to be aligned with the final amounts presented in the budget lines of Section III .
For the agencies , the remarks following certain agencies ' budget lines will be technically adjusted to make them consistent with the final figures adopted .
In line 02 01 04 04 , remarks adopted in Amendment 996 should be added as such to Amendment 1010 on operational line 02 02 01 ( as part of the package on pilot projects and preparatory actions ) .
In line 19 05 01 , the words ' other than the United States ' should be deleted from the heading and the remarks , as decided by the Committee on Budgets .
In line 19 09 01 , an oral amendment adopted in the Committee on Budgets should be inserted in the remarks .
The following words should be added : ' part of this appropriation is intended to support , amongst others , initiatives such as the EU-LAC Foundation decided at the summit of EU-LAC Heads of States and Governments and the Biarritz Forum ' .
It is necessary to renumber some budget lines in order to avoid contradictory numbering of some lines created and to follow nomenclature rules .
This will affect neither the multiannual financial framework headings nor the budgetary chapter of the amendments adopted in the Committee on Budgets .
This concerns Amendments 386 , 389 , 521 , 833 , 997 , 998 , 999 , 1016 , 1018 , 1021 , 1022 , 1023 and 1024 .
( ES ) Mr President , I am sorry , but it is impossible to follow the vote at the speed at which you are reading the amendments .
I am only too happy to go more slowly ...
We will try to reconcile the need for speed with the rights of all MEPs to discharge their duties and to vote .
Before the vote on block 3 :
Mr President , I ask the forgiveness of the House but the PPE Group 's voting list is wrong regarding Amendment 967 .
The right vote is ' yes ' .
This applies to a subsequent vote .
Very well .
This is internal information for the group .
- Before the vote on Amendment 987 :
Mr President , like my colleague from the PPE Group a little while ago , I also have to point out a mistake in our voting list .
The S & D voting list should read : minus , plus , plus .
Nothing else .
This is also internal group information .
- After the vote on the budget :

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this satisfaction is due to the fact that you have just passed amendments to the Council 's position on Draft amending budget No 3 / 2010 and on the draft budget for the financial year 2011 .
As a result , I have taken due note of the differences between our two institutions and , in accordance with Article 314 ( 4 ) ( c ) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , I do , of course , agree to the Conciliation Committee being convened by the President of the European Parliament .
This is not a case of the Council granting a favour but of observing the terms of the treaty .
We , as Parliament , will obviously play our part in full .
3 .
Parliament 's position on the 2011 draft budget as modified by the Council - all sections (
4 .
Parliament 's calendar of part-sessions - 2012 ( vote )
( FR ) Mr President , yesterday evening , my group discussed amendments that the services have told us are unacceptable .
As a result , and following the discussion I had this morning with the heads of delegation and the group leaders , I request that the vote on the calendar be postponed .
( DE ) Mr President , we have had no opportunity to discuss this as a group .
I was informed about it by Mr Daul a few minutes ago , during this morning 's debate , and I have discussed it with the chairs of other groups , namely Mrs Harms and Mr Verhofstadt .
I also want to address this point to my group , as we have not , so far , had the opportunity to discuss this .
I believe that , with a postponement , there would be a very good chance of reaching a broad consensus over the calendar for 2012 .
I therefore believe that we should vote through this postponement today .
Mr Schulz spoke in favour of Mr Daul 's proposal .
I will now give the floor to Mr Fox , who is against this proposal .
Mr President , I was in the Chamber on Monday evening when the Green Group asked for a postponement .
Mr Daul and Mr Schulz were here and they both voted against that postponement .
( Applause )
So what has changed ?
Is it really some important legal issue , or is the truth that they realise they are in severe danger of losing Amendment No 4 and they want to postpone it so as to apply pressure to members of their own groups ?
( Applause )
This has nothing to do with the fictitious reason we have been given , and I would urge colleagues to vote against this delay and vote in favour of Amendment No 4 .
( Applause )
I will put the request to postpone the vote tabled by Mr Daul to the vote .
( Parliament approved the request to defer the vote )
5 .
Improvements in the safety and health at work of pregnant workers and workers who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding (
( SV ) There are several translation errors in the Swedish version of this report .
Among other things , there is confusion between the terms barnledighet ( parental leave ) and mammaledighet ( maternity leave ) .
However , in Amendment 125 in particular , there is a very serious translation error .
The Swedish version of Amendment 125 states that paternity leave should be on full pay .
It does not say this in other versions .
This means that there is no difference between Amendment 50 and Amendment 125 in the Swedish version .
It would be good if this could be corrected .
6 .
Combating late payment in commercial transactions (
7 .
Role of minimum income in combating poverty and promoting an inclusive society in Europe (
8 .
Financial , economic and social crisis : recommendations concerning the measures and initiatives to be taken (
9 .
Improving economic governance and stability framework in the EU , in particular , in the euro zone (
Mr President , this is an important oral amendment : ' whereas , as far as possible , all 27 Member States should follow to the maximum all the economic governance proposals , recognising that , for non-euro area Member States , this will in part be a voluntary process ' .
It has been accepted by the PPE Group , it has been accepted by the S & D Group and even the Commissioner has accepted it .
I hope that you all can accept this oral amendment .
It is important for me , it is important for the ALDE Group , and it is especially important for my country , Sweden , if we are ever going to join the euro .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
That concludes the vote .
Because the voting has gone on so long , as a result of your excellent work , I would like to ask those who have requested to give explanations of vote to change these explanations from oral to written or postpone your turn until tomorrow , because 62 requests have been put forward and we are unable to deal with them all .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate you on the excellent job you did today .
I really appreciate the way you exercised your chairmanship today , and I hope you will share your wonderful skills with other vice-chairs of Parliament .
Mr President , I have voted today and my constituents can see how I voted today , so therefore , they should have the opportunity to have my explanation of vote today .
I made a request that you should change your oral explanation into a written explanation .
This will still allow you to give your constituents the reasons that prompted you and others to vote in a certain way on the various issues .
We do not wish in any way to deprive you of any rights .
I only ask you to join the other MEPs who are giving up their right to make an oral explanation in order to give a written explanation .
That is all .
( IT ) Mr President , I will comply with your request : Mr Mastella and I will put our explanations in writing .
Secondly , I join my fellow Member in again congratulating you , Mr President .
( IT ) Mr President , if you agree , and to keep everyone happy , we can defer the oral explanations to tomorrow .
Yes , I most certainly agree .
If Mrs Sinclair is also in agreement .
I count on the goodwill of the MEPs , calling on them to make oral explanations tomorrow or written explanations today and we will allow Mrs Sinclair the opportunity to make hers now .
Voting time ( continuation )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
Mr President , I have the following comments for my fellow MEPs .
Today was the first time post-Lisbon that we have voted on the budget .
You all applauded yourselves and you think you have done a good job but , in fact , while countries across the European Union are having to cut public services and having to cut their public budgets , you wanted to increase yours .
You have increased your entertainment budget by EUR 2 million , an 85 % increase .
Is this the real message that you want to send to the people of Europe ?
You have also passed provisions on maternity pay that are going to have a severe impact on my constituents within the UK .
This is going to cost jobs ; this is going to affect public services .
I hope you are proud of yourselves today .
This is not the way to run Europe .
( IT ) Mr President , at this point , for the sake of fairness , I will give an explanation of vote in favour of the result achieved on the Estrela report .
Let us not draw this out any longer now , however .
We have given the floor to two MEPs .
For the other explanations - there are 61 , we still have 59 to go - decide either to give them in writing or give them tomorrow at the end of the vote .
Written explanations of vote
I voted in favour of the revision to the framework agreement which will govern relations between Parliament and the Commission , in the light of the Treaty of Lisbon , as I believe that this revision creates a relationship of greater transparency and dynamism in the relationship between Parliament and the Commission .
Before the Treaty of Lisbon and in accordance with the legal basis of Article 295 of the Treaty of the Functioning of the European Union , the treaties did not explicitly encourage the EU institutions to conclude interinstitutional treaties .
I therefore believe that this revision to the framework agreement reflects the institutional balance that has been created by the Treaty of Lisbon , and consolidates the achievements made with this new treaty .
This text thus represents a compromise between the two parties and ensures a more coherent and sensible implementation of the Treaty of Lisbon .
In all democratic systems , parliamentary scrutiny of the actions of the executive is a fundamental issue , just as concentrated reciprocal communication between government and citizens ' representatives is of great importance .
This interinstitutional agreement between Parliament and the Commission satisfies - as far as is possible in a complex and continually evolving system like the European Union 's - some requests legitimately put forward by Parliament regarding the European Commission .
It is therefore a good thing that Parliament 's scrutiny of the Commission is facilitated , as the latter is a technical body that cannot be the political brains of an entire continent and must answer for the substance , reasons and methods of its actions .
It is also , without doubt , positive that the chance for yet greater involvement of the Commission in Parliament 's work is being sought , in particular , in plenary sittings , in order that it may respond to the requests of representatives of citizens of the European Union and answer for the position of the Commission on current political , economic , social and international issues in a timely fashion .
What is certain is that if the EU wishes to move towards a democratic structure different from that of today , relations between the Commission and Parliament will have to improve and intensify .
I voted in favour of the report by Mr Rangel .
This proposal achieved the first constructive framework agreement .
The European Parliament 's increased powers following the Treaty of Lisbon are very important for further cooperation with the European Commission and for future relations regarding the implementation of further agreements .
Thus , this document lays down further guidelines for cooperation between these two institutions .
The European Parliament and the Commission will be able to develop a close dialogue on the Commission 's Work Programme and international agreements .
Parliament will have the right to obtain confidential documents .
Parliament will be informed on the progress of international negotiations and , furthermore , Parliament will also be able to become an expert to provide proposals to the Commission on these issues .
The framework agreement also provides for comprehensive Parliamentary scrutiny , strengthened provisions on the election of the President of the Commission and of the latter as a body , and on its composition , its possible modification and reshuffling .
Parliament is striving for better and more transparent cooperation with other institutions .
I welcome the fact that closer cooperation between these two institutions will help the Member States to transpose European Union legislation into national law as quickly and effectively as possible .
The constitutional architecture of the European Union is increasingly taking on the form of a nation state .
Besides the resulting considerations about the future of the Union , we need to acknowledge the acceptance of this similarity .
In fact , the modelling of relations between the Commission and Parliament is - rightly , in my view - derived from this , in the manner that has already been tested and whipped into shape over decades ( if not centuries ) in each of the Member States .
In particular , the supervisory and interrogatory role of Parliament should be appreciated , as it helps reduce the so-called democratic deficit and makes the relationship between citizens and the Commission more transparent .
I welcome the success of the negotiations and the compromises reached in this new framework agreement , the fifth interinstitutional agreement between Parliament and the Commission .
This new agreement undeniably marks an important step forward in terms of relations with the Commission .
Although the agreed compromise falls short of all that Parliament was aiming for , we have an agreement that ensures a coherent and sensible implementation of the Treaty of Lisbon .
I would like to highlight the importance of the negotiations on the interinstitutional dimension of the EU 's international relations , allowing Parliament to be fully informed in good time so that it can have a say on the international agreements during the negotiation process .
Lastly , with regard to the duty to supply information , I would like to emphasise that early cooperation with Parliament in relation to requests for legislative initiatives based on citizens ' requests will be crucial to securing the bond between Parliament and the public .
I am therefore voting in favour of the bulk of the proposals in this report .
The draft report on the revision of the framework agreement on relations between the European Parliament and the European Commission aims to achieve the institutional balance between Parliament and the Commission advocated in the Treaty of Lisbon .
Although the interinstitutional agreements do not alter the enactment of primary law , in this case , they clarify relations between EU institutions .
The final version of the proposal is , according to the rapporteur , a balanced compromise between the views and positions of both institutional parties , whereas the trickiest negotiations were in the EU 's international relations .
Parliament should be fully informed so as to facilitate the awarding of consent , and so that we do not once again have a lack of international agreements .
Negotiations on them have already been completed .
Parliament acquired new powers from the Treaty of Lisbon for the better and closer monitoring of the transposition of EU legislation into national law , and its application , which is very welcome .
Common European legislation does not mean much if certain Member States fail to implement it at national level .
I agree with the wording of the report , and I will vote in favour of its adoption .
The interinstitutional agreements within the European Union are crucial for effective monitoring , control and balance of powers .
Thus , following the necessary adaptations established by the Treaty of Lisbon , I am pleased to see Parliament 's increased powers in its relations with the Commission .
As reflected in the report , this means greater and more effective control over the Commission 's proposals , along with greater transparency in the legislative process .
This was therefore one more step towards effectively wielded democratic power , and it will contribute to a Europe that is closer to its citizens .
In addition , I should not neglect to point out the great powers of negotiation that this proposal required , particularly on the part of the rapporteur , Mr Rangel .
I would like to offer him my congratulations at this point .
I welcome the adoption of this report and the excellent work accomplished by the rapporteur , Mr Rangel .
This report reflects and gives form to the institutional balance established by the Treaty of Lisbon , resulting in a clear and important improvement in relations with the Commission .
The revised draft framework agreement on the relations between Parliament and the Commission is the fifth agreement of its kind to be signed between the two institutions .
In terms of the legislative process and scheduling , it is important to point out the changes relating to the ' Better Regulation ' approach and the announcement of a revision of the interinstitutional agreement on this issue , along with the new regulations regarding the impact assessments carried out by the Commission .
Regarding the interinstitutional dimension of the EU 's international relations , Parliament 's aim is having the right to be informed so that it can give its approval with full knowledge of the facts , and prevent the non-agreement of international agreements when negotiations have already been completed .
I would also like to point out the allocation of observer status to MEPs at international conferences , who can now also attend all the relevant meetings .
This role is crucial for strengthening Parliament 's democratic powers , especially during the negotiation of major international conferences such as United Nations conferences on climate change .
Last Wednesday , we voted for the revised framework agreement on relations between the European Parliament and the European Commission , a revision that sets , within this agreement , Parliament 's new powers resulting from the Treaty of Lisbon .
These new powers of the European Parliament are essential and represent a radical change in the European institutional procedure .
Enhanced parliamentary control over the Commission , Parliament 's approval power for international agreements , Parliament 's participation in the Commission 's working programme , Parliament 's participation in electing the President of the European Commission are so many crucial developments in the building of a more democratic European area .
What also appears fundamental to me are the additional guarantees that we are obtaining in terms of obligations to inform Parliament : we will have better access to confidential documents relating to international agreements and negotiations .
The European Parliament must and should be involved in these ' international procedures ' , before and afterwards .
This agreement therefore lays down a new balance for a more democratic European area and it is a good thing that all this is drawn up in an official agreement .
Passed with a large majority , the revised framework agreement signals indisputable progress in relations between the European Parliament and the Commission .
It is indeed time for the institutional balance put in place by the Treaty of Lisbon to be rigorously reflected .
Among the key elements of this revision , we especially need to welcome the equality of treatment between Parliament and the Council , particularly when exchanging information and accessing meetings .
In this respect , I can only be glad about the provisions introduced concerning the negotiation of international agreements .
How could Parliament give its approval in full knowledge of the facts if it is not informed throughout the negotiation procedure ?
MEPs are well and truly determined to implement fully the increased powers at their disposal since the Treaty of Lisbon came into force : evidence of this was the rejection in February of the Swift agreement .
One thing is certain ; we will have to remain vigilant in order to maintain this new institutional process .
The Treaty of Lisbon allows the European Parliament a considerable measure of new powers of codecision .
As a result , there should , not least , be a deepening of democracy in the European Union and improved participation by European citizens .
By codifying and realising these rights , the new framework agreement takes account of these entitlements and the new balance between the Commission and Parliament .
This is very much to be welcomed , as Parliament will now be better able to do justice to its role as the representative of the EU 's citizens .
It is now up to us to use these new rights responsibly .
in writing . - This is a great achievement for the Parliament and a positive framework for relations between Parliament and the Commission .
I particularly welcome the acknowledgement of Council and Parliament 's ' equal footing ' and the implications that has for Parliament 's access to confidential documents , its right to be informed of Commission meetings with national experts and its participation in international conferences .
I am also pleased that Parliament will have a strong role in legislative programming and will have frequent opportunities to debate and question these issues with the Commission in plenary and committee .
Relations between Parliament and the Commission have been much altered following the adoption of the Treaty of Lisbon , with greater powers for Parliament in various matters , particularly those that relate to ordinary legislative procedure and budgetary issues , and a stronger role as regards EU foreign policy .
These changes mean that the European public now has a new role in relation to decision making at EU level .
It is therefore necessary and expedient to review the framework agreement that governs relations between Parliament and the Commission .
I fully agree with Mr Rangel 's report .
Until now , the European Commission has , on many occasions , taken no notice of the resolutions of the European Parliament .
This , to my mind , is unacceptable .
For example , the resolution of the European Parliament of 11 March 2004 , in which the European Parliament recommends that the Republic of Latvia grants non-citizens the right to vote in local elections and simplifies the naturalisation process for elderly people has hitherto not been implemented .
I should like to know why the relevant European commissioners have yet to address questions to the Latvian Government .
Why is this resolution of the European Parliament being ignored ?
Perhaps as a result of the signature of the new agreement on relations between the European Parliament and the Commission , this type of inactivity on the part of the Commission will be appropriately judged by the European Parliament , and people who do not do their work properly will , on the next occasion , be excluded from membership of the Commission .
I warmly welcome the preparation of the report on the revised framework agreement on relations between Parliament and the Commission .
I also welcome its adoption in plenary , to which I contributed , as an essential framework for the further democratisation of the European Union through a division of powers between the Commission and Parliament which better respects their respective abilities .
This framework agreement is particularly important as it is the first since the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , which gave increased powers to Parliament , especially at a legislative level .
I believe that under this new framework agreement , Parliament is a more active partner in building the European project , as it can fulfil its powers more completely , effectively and responsibly .
Despite the significant measures that Mrs Figueiredo 's resolution is proposing on the role of a minimum income in tackling poverty and promoting an inclusive society in Europe , I regret that the majority of the European Parliament was not more ambitious .
As a socialist , I do believe that a framework directive is indispensable for effectively tackling poverty , which affects 17 % of the European population .
This framework directive , proposed by my colleague , Frédéric Daerden , would lay down the principle of a suitable minimum income in Europe , established on the basis of criteria that are common to all Member States and in accordance with national practices for collective negotiation and with national law .
It is our duty to be ambitious for a more social Europe .
Before the Treaty of Lisbon and the new legal basis for Article 295 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , treaties did not specifically encourage European Union institutions to conclude interinstitutional agreements .
These agreements cannot alter the provisions of primary law but they often clarify them .
I am convinced that this draft strictly reflects the institutional balance established by the Treaty of Lisbon .
I give my consent because this agreement represents a clear and significant improvement in relations with the Commission .
Like all agreements , the final text tends to be a compromise between both parties ; this final compromise nevertheless offers a balanced judgment and a reasonable and consistent application of the Treaty of Lisbon .
in writing . - The Rangel report points out the most important achievements for the European Parliament contained in the revised framework agreement with regard to the following :
On ' Legislative procedure and planning : mutual cooperation ' it includes improving the involvement of Parliament , the review of all pending proposals at the beginning of a new Commission 's term of office , taking due account of the views of the Parliament , and the commitment by the Commission to report on the concrete follow-up to any legislative initiative requests pursuant to Article 225 TFEU .
On ' Parliamentary scrutiny ' , it includes new rules of participation of Commissioners in election campaigns , the Commission 's obligation to seek Parliament 's opinion when it intends to revise the Code of Conduct , and nominees for the post of executive directors have to come before the responsible parliamentary committees for a hearing ,
It also sets out the obligations to provide information and requirement for the Commission to be present in Parliament .
The entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon has given both the European Commission and the European Parliament new rights .
The draft of the amended text of the framework agreement is an expression of a more effective implementation of the changes arising from the treaty based on the relations between the two institutions .
It introduces beneficial changes to legislative procedure , parliamentary scrutiny and the obligation to provide information .
It represents major progress in relations with the Commission and is an important step towards closer cooperation .
Exchanges of information and constructive dialogue will allow us to achieve more effective and transparent results , which is a key issue from the point of view of the EU citizens whose interests we represent .
That is why I regard it as so important that priority is given in the agreement to the participation of members of the Commission in plenary sittings and other meetings related to Parliament 's activities .
I am particularly pleased that the Commission has undertaken to cooperate closely with Parliament on motions for legislative initiatives proposed by citizens at an early stage .
Thanks to this , we in Parliament can be closer to our citizens , which will strengthen our democracy .
Nevertheless , in order to operate effectively in the interests of EU citizens , the Commission should give MEPs observer status at all international conferences and , where possible , facilitate our presence at other significant meetings to an even greater extent , as well as inform Parliament of the negotiating positions adopted by the Commission at such meetings and conferences .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the Rangel report .
However , I strongly disagree with the rapporteur 's assumption that ' the Treaty of Lisbon significantly deepens democracy in the EU , giving to citizens of the Union , mainly through the Parliament , a reinforced power of scrutiny of the Commission ' .
This new framework agreement on relations may potentially consolidate the achievements of the Treaty of Lisbon and this could represent a significant breakthrough .
Particularly important are the amendments improving legal procedures and strengthening parliamentary scrutiny .
I agree with all the amendments which contribute to improving information exchange and promoting the effectiveness of relations between the European Parliament and European Commission .
It is important to ensure that this institutional partnership has as little red tape as possible .
The new framework agreement on relations regulates the ' special partnership ' between Parliament and the European Commission .
We must not forget that the most important partnership of all is the partnership between the European Union and its citizens .
The European Union must try harder to find common ground with its citizens and prove its importance in their daily lives .
The rapporteur rightly indicated that this agreement represents a ' new interinstitutional balance ' , i.e. a healthy compromise .
However , there are some issues on which the European Union cannot negotiate - fundamental human rights and freedoms .
Greater powers mean greater responsibility .
It is one thing to talk of common values , but implementing and defending these values is a different matter .
Unless this is achieved , the various branches of the European Union institutional system will be unable to fully realise their potential .
To be a cohesive force , the European Union must have credibility .
Now that the revision of the framework agreement on the relations between Parliament and the Commission has been adopted , a subsequent adaptation of Parliament 's Rules of Procedure to the aforementioned framework agreement is a natural step .
I am therefore voting for this report .
I agree with the amendments to Parliament 's Rules of Procedure with a view to their being adapted to the revised framework agreement on relations between Parliament and the Commission .
Given the Commission 's openness in giving more information to MEPs , there is agreement that MEPs are obliged to respect the rules of Parliament on the handling of confidential information .
The openness of the Commission in providing more information to MEPs requires the chairs and rapporteurs of the committee responsible and of any associated committees to jointly take appropriate action to ensure that Parliament is provided with immediate , regular and full information , if necessary on a confidential basis , at all stages of the negotiation and conclusion of international agreements , including the draft and finally adopted text of negotiating directives .
Relations between Parliament and the Commission have been much altered following the adoption of the Treaty of Lisbon , with greater powers for Parliament in various matters , particularly those that relate to ordinary legislative procedure and budgetary issues , and a stronger role as regards EU foreign policy .
These changes mean that the European public now has a new role in relation to decision making at EU level .
It is therefore necessary and expedient to adapt the Rules of Procedure to the revised framework agreement on relations between Parliament and the Commission .
The adaptation of Parliament 's Rules of Procedure to the revised framework agreement on relations between the European Parliament and the European Commission follows on naturally from the revision of the framework agreement on relations between the European Parliament and the European Commission , allowing the framework agreement to be passed immediately so that it can be put into effect as is required , and as will thus be ensured .
The background and agreement that the two reports share also warrant my approval of the latter .
in writing . - The Rangel report points out the most important achievements for the European Parliament contained in the revised framework agreement with regard to the following :
On ' Legislative procedure and planning : mutual cooperation ' , it includes improving the involvement of Parliament , the review of all pending proposals at the beginning of a new Commission 's term of office , taking due account of the views of the Parliament , and the commitment by the Commission to report on the concrete follow-up to any legislative initiative requests pursuant to Article 225 TFEU .
On ' Parliamentary scrutiny ' , it includes new rules of participation of Commissioners in election campaigns , the Commission 's obligation to seek Parliament 's opinion when it intends to revise the Code of Conduct , and nominees for the post of executive directors have to come before the responsible parliamentary committees for a hearing ,
It also sets out the obligations to provide information and the requirement for the Commission to be present in Parliament .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the Rangel report .
However , I strongly disagree with the rapporteur 's assumption that ' the Treaty of Lisbon deepens significantly democracy in the EU , giving to citizens of the Union , mainly through the Parliament , a reinforced power of scrutiny of the Commission ' .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the Rangel reports and .
However , I strongly disagree with the rapporteur 's assumption that ' the Treaty of Lisbon deepens significantly democracy in the EU , giving to citizens of the Union , mainly through the Parliament , a reinforced power of scrutiny of the Commission ' .
in writing . - I abstained in the votes on the Rangel reports and .
Despite supporting many measures mentioned in the reports , such as increased role for the Parliament in the drawing up of the Code of Conduct for Commissioners and the enhanced role of the Parliament in international negotiations , I strongly disagree with the rapporteur 's assumption that ' the Treaty of Lisbon significantly deepens democracy in the EU , giving citizens of the Union , mainly through Parliament , a reinforced power of scrutiny of the Commission ' .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the Rangel reports and .
However , I strongly disagree with the rapporteur 's assumption that the Treaty of Lisbon significantly deepens democracy in the EU , giving citizens of the Union , mainly through the Parliament , a reinforced power of scrutiny of the Commission .
Mr Rangel is proposing very important amendments to the Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament .
It is possible that , directly as a result of these adjustments to the Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament , the problems that we debate will be resolved more quickly .
I should especially like to see that the decisions and recommendations of the European Parliament are carried out in EU Member States .
Only when we put our own house in order will the EU 's recommendations to third countries carry considerably more weight .
For example , the recommendations in the European Parliament resolution of 11 March 2004 on the situation of non-citizens in Latvia have still not been implemented .
I hope that the revised Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament will help EU institutions to form a clear picture of the violations of basic human rights taking place in Latvia .
Through this agreement , Parliament has ' improved ' and strengthened itself and the democratisation of the European Union has been reinforced .
The adoption of this report is a strong signal of the desire to consolidate the principle of separation of powers .
The framework agreement is of great importance since it defines the relationships between Parliament and the Commission at a time when Parliament has obtained greater powers , particularly in the legislative process , now at the same level as the Council .
Indeed , notwithstanding the supplementary and application treaties and protocols , further legislation aimed at specifying and better defining some issues was required .
In particular , I applaud the fact that the framework agreement clarifies the points relating to the political responsibility of both institutions , the circulation of information , external relations , enlargement and international agreements , the implementation of the budget , the political and legislative programme of the Commission and the European Union 's multiannual programme , the legislative competence of the Commission and the exercise of its specific powers , monitoring the implementation of EU law and the participation of the Commission in the work of Parliament .
I voted in favour of this regulation .
This includes technical , financial and administrative details and explains the interinstitutional relations which this European service and its structures need to have .
It has been , and still is , our desire for the EU to be a powerful , acknowledged player in foreign policy .
To achieve this , we also need rules and European regulations tailored to the job .
When the European External Action Service was set up , it was necessary to amend the financial regulation in order to improve control and follow-up of the EEAS 's implementation .
The Gräßle-Rivellini report increases budgetary and financial responsibility , improves transparency and promotes the EEAS 's effectiveness .
The proposed improvements will contribute to creating a culture of financial integrity necessary for promoting confidence in the proper functioning of the EEAS .
I also welcome the parts of the report demanding that Parliament be granted significant power of control .
Thus , I agree with the rapporteurs in asking that Parliament be able to exercise its discharge rights fully and that the heads of delegations submit their budgetary implementation reports to the Committee on Budgetary Control .
I am voting in favour of the bulk of the measures proposed in this report , which aim to give the European External Action Service ( EEAS ) a culture of financial integrity necessary for trust in the smooth and unquestionable future functioning of the EEAS .
The different backgrounds of the staff members will make the EEAS a melting pot of corporate cultures , and it will gradually have to establish a culture of its own .
In defining the structure of this new service , it is important to establish its financial rules and ensure the maximum safeguards from the beginning in such a way that financial probity will be ingrained in the corporate culture of the EEAS .
I would also like to stress that in order to ensure democratic scrutiny and improve the confidence of European citizens in their European institutions , every year , Parliament should be presented with a statement of assurance on the internal management and control systems put in place in the Union Delegations .
The European External Action Service ( EEAS ) is now well set to become an operational diplomatic corps .
Parliament ensured that 60 % of staff are to come from other European institutions , which will ensure a certain degree of independence from Member States .
The principle of geographical balance was introduced so that a suitable and significant presence of nationals from all Member States is guaranteed .
This vote has strengthened Parliament 's role : the heads of delegations of the European Union appointed in ' strategically important ' regions will indeed be heard by Parliament 's Committee on Foreign Affairs .
Furthermore , Parliament will have a right of scrutiny on how the EEAS 's budget is used and its staff will have to follow specific training on budget management .
The European Parliament has been asked to give its opinion on the proposal for a regulation tabled by Ingeborg Gräßle and Crescenzio Rivellini pertaining to the creation of a general budget of the European Communities for the European External Action Service ( EEAS ) .
It is impossible to support the creation of a future European diplomatic service that will be under the administrative , budgetary and political control of the Commission .
France , which can pride itself on having the oldest diplomatic service in the world , will have to yet again hand over diplomatic prerogatives to a European Union whose citizens are totally indifferent to the positions it adopts .
This diplomatic service , for which the Commission has called so enthusiastically , will be a total departure from national heritages .
EEAS officials will be unable to receive instructions from Member States and will have to work for the ' greater ' good of a European Union that is a reference only for Eurocrats themselves .
in writing . - Mr President , I have always been opposed to the creation of the EEAS - nothing would have changed my opinion on it .
But I am aware of the assurances given as the EU went about its campaign of persuasion , garnering support for the EEAS .
We were told that the EEAS would be budget-neutral .
Yet where are we now ?
Budget neutrality is now but another EU promise whistling in the wind .
We are now 34 million over the planned budget due to demands for yet more staff and other start-up costs , and the EEAS isn 't even operational !
The EEAS represents yet another example of wasted taxpayer 's money , for a service my constituents do not want but have forced upon them by bureaucrats who seek to squeeze more and more power away from national governments towards the EU .
Such bureaucracy is unacceptable and must be cut back in these times of economic crisis , not enhanced .
The proposal for a regulation aims to amend the financial regulation applicable to the general budget of the Communities due to the institutionalisation of the European External Action Service ( EEAS ) resulting from the adoption of the Treaty of Lisbon by the Member States .
This new entity lacks a budgetary framework , hence the need for this amendment .
The assimilation of the EEAS as an institution allows it to have budgetary autonomy and gives it the power to deal with its own administrative expenses , subject to the discharge to be made by Parliament .
I hope that the EEAS will carry out its activities in a competent , effective , complementary and , above all , non-competitive way with the diplomatic representations of the Member States .
On this matter , the Commission has stated that it wishes to ensure that the EEAS can fulfil this task of a unified external action without leading to a weakening of sound financial management , accountability and the protection of the financial interests of the Union .
I hope that this will come about .
The European External Action Service ( EEAS ) will be the future foreign policy mouthpiece of the European Union .
In this service , our different positions will find one voice - communicating a strong message - and it is important to give it our support .
In order for the EEAS to be able to work effectively , efficient financial control is necessary .
Only if the EEAS forms part of the Commission can the best possible control be ensured .
The clear distribution of rights and obligations will allow it to work smoothly .
I support Mrs Gräßle 's and Mr Rivellini 's successful report , and I have , of course , voted in favour of this constructive contribution from the European Parliament .
I voted in favour of the report by Mrs Gräßle and Mr Rivellini establishing the Financial Regulation applicable to the general budget of the European Communities as regards the European External Action Service ( EEAS ) , because I believe that the promotion of financial integrity is important in order to ensure that the European institutions are managed properly and transparently .
The creation of this new diplomatic service , as provided for by the Treaty of Lisbon , represents a great step for the European Union , which can finally benefit from a single diplomatic body that has the task of facilitating actions aimed at making the European Union 's external relations more coherent , safe and efficient .
Lastly , it is important to emphasise that the European External Action Service will manage its own administrative budget and will also be responsible for those parts of the operating budget which fall under its mandate .
The new European External Action Service , created following the adoption of the Treaty of Lisbon , requires a budget in order to carry out its activities and achieve the objectives outlined in the treaty .
In view of this , it is necessary to amend certain provisions in the appropriate financial regulation , with the aim of taking account of the changes introduced by the Treaty of Lisbon .
I voted against this European Parliament legislative resolution , because creating the service that they want to finance represents another step towards the militarisation of the European Union 's foreign policy .
As well as my opposition to this militaristic foreign affairs philosophy , my reason for voting against it is that the most basic principles of transparency and democracy have been absent throughout the process of creating the European External Action Service ( EEAS ) .
The organisation and financing of this service do not include the necessary strict control over staffing and financing by the European Parliament , meaning that the EEAS is worryingly lacking in democracy and transparency .
It is therefore no surprise that the proposed structure for the EEAS relegates the European Parliament to a secondary , irrelevant position in EU foreign policy , which my group and I firmly reject .
I have therefore voted against it .
I cannot be in favour of the proposed budgets for this type of service with its militaristic tendencies .
In addition to the duplicated structures that will be created by the European External Action Service ( EEAS ) , personnel costs will also rocket in the wasteful and bureaucratic way that is typical of the EU .
Of the 1 643 posts that the EEAS will start off with on 1 December , 50 are , believe it or not , director-general posts , and during the initial phases , there will be barely more than 30 members of staff under one director-general .
When the final structure is complete there will not even be as many as 80 .
The aforementioned directors-general will , on average , earn EUR 17 000 per month .
Below these directors-general , there is another level containing 224 directors and 235 heads of unit .
In addition , we are still waiting for specific tasks and objectives to be defined for the EEAS staff .
We want the EU to have a strong voice in the world , but this surely does not require a bloated administrative apparatus that will cost EU citizens billions as a result of duplicated structures and members of staff who will enjoy a very lucrative source of income .
I therefore voted against this report .
In negotiations with representatives of the European Council and the Commission , Parliament and , in particular , negotiators from the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats , managed to ensure that the budget for the EU 's new diplomatic service would be used more transparently .
Parliament will approve its budget discharge annually and the Commission will have to provide MEPs with detailed information about its expenditure on a regular basis .
I voted for this report because it underlines that when employing citizens of EU Member States , greater geographical coverage would be ensured along with proper and meaningful representation for the citizens of all Member States .
I agree with the rapporteur that we must aim to ensure that employees are chosen according to their abilities and also that gender equality is taken into account .
It is important for the European External Action Service due to be launched on 1 December to quickly become effective and to embody , above all , the EU 's interests and , where necessary , national interests .
The European External Action Service ( EEAS ) will manage its own administrative budget and be responsible for it .
In fact , in establishing the new service , and particularly in drawing up its financial rules , it is necessary to provide the appropriate economic safeguards from the beginning .
Therefore , in order to promote their financial probity , it is important to ensure the smooth interaction of the various services responsible for supervision of financial matters , especially in EU delegations .
By means of strengthening these safeguards , we hope to enhance the confidence of European citizens in European institutions .
Consequently , the structural improvements presented in this proposal aim to impose the financial integrity necessary for trust in the smooth and unquestionable functioning of the EEAS .
in writing . - It has been a bumpy ride , but thanks to Parliament 's efforts , the EU 's External Action Service now has the potential to be the driving force for a more effective and more legitimate EU foreign policy .
We welcome that key Green concerns - such as on gender balance and common training to create an ' esprit de corps ' - have been largely addressed , and that Parliament will have greater democratic scrutiny on the functioning of the EEAS , notably through the introduction of individual budget lines for the EU 's major overseas operations .
The EP also succeeded in safeguarding the Community method and , thanks to Green pressure , development priorities .
In order to be able to represent the interests of European states on the international stage in a more effective manner , foreign policy actions must be discussed in advance and then communicated to the outside world with one voice .
An attempt is now being made , through the European External Action Service ( EEAS ) , to bring the Union 's external policy instruments into a coherent framework - the existing resources are being brought together and complemented by new resources .
In view of the novel nature of this structure , ambitious provisions with regard to transparency and budgetary and financial accountability need to be applied .
Since Parliament 's budgetary authority includes the EEAS , the service must be integrated into the Commission structure .
Otherwise , it will be impossible to grant discharge within the meaning of the treaties .
The annual activity reports are also provided to the budgetary authorities .
I , too , believe , as my fellow Members do , that the EEAS needs to have autonomy within the staff regulations for European officials .
I support the provision which stipulates that EU officials and temporary agents who come from Member States and diplomatic services must enjoy the same rights and be eligible to apply for new posts .
I hope that recruitment on the widest possible geographical basis , and by that , I am alluding to the new Member States , will become a reality .
The European External Action Service is an essential instrument for an EU that is more open to the world and able to establish fruitful contacts with many different regions and countries .
In order for this service to function , it is essential to give its officials proper roles and to clarify their status and that of temporary staff from the national diplomatic services who have a role within it .
This amendment of the Staff Regulations of Officials of the European Communities and the Conditions of Employment of Other Servants of those Communities shows that it is , therefore , fully justified .
I hope that the service will operate in tandem with the national diplomatic services and act as a positive factor to enhance their performance .
I hope that the main priorities of European policy will not neglect their external component and that , in the course of their action , the service does not neglect the crucial role of European languages in universal communication , nor the global European languages which are most suitable for establishing direct communication with large parts of the world .
The European External Action Service is now an integral part of the European administration : it is open , efficient and independent , under the terms of Article 298 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ( TFEU ) .
In the modification of the Staff Regulations and Conditions of Employment of Other Servants , I would like to highlight the equal status given to EU officials and temporary staff from the diplomatic services of the Member States , in particular , with regard to eligibility to take on all tasks under equal conditions and in promoting equal opportunities for the underrepresented gender .
in writing . - I abstained on the occasion of the final vote on the Rapkay report on 20 October 2010 .
I fully support the formation of the European External Action Service and value highly the efforts of Elmar Brok and other MEPs who have managed to successfully balance the original draft presented by the High Representative .
My intention was to draw attention to the fact that the amendment on geographical representation , which was supported by the AFET and BUDG committees , has not been adopted in the JURI committee .
As a result , there are doubts whether the final version of the report can provide the European Parliament with a legal basis with regard to geographical balance .
I wish you , Lady Ashton , and the new EEAS , on which we are pinning great hopes that yet another European dream will come true , every success , and hope that Europe will address the world with a strong , authoritative single voice .
This is what a huge section of our Parliament wants .
You can be sure that we will help you .
I wish to explain why I abstained from voting on the amendment to the Staff Regulations of Officials of the European Communities .
I think that indicative targets for geographical balance are beneficial to the new institution .
We need a highly qualified diplomatic service which has people from every Member State so that they can enhance the representation of the EU in the world .
I am sure that the service will be a success if it can benefit from the experience of all Member States .
I realise that the number of Member States has increased more than fourfold since the start of the European integration process .
It is understandable that the countries recently admitted lag behind at this stage in terms of level of representation .
However , there must be determination and clearly defined legislative texts to overcome this .
I believe in your desire and determination , which you have expressed to us on numerous occasions , to work towards genuine , suitable geographical representation for the new service so that you can be the High Representative of the whole EU .
We will follow its activity closely .
I appreciate the fact that we managed to put some safeguards , in the form of amendments , into the report , which will guarantee that when it comes to filling positions in the European External Action Service , officials from certain Member States will not have an advantage over officials from other states .
European Union foreign policy is , after all , only one specific area , and therefore , in addition to qualifications and broad geographical representation , a principle must apply according to which state officials from all Member States will be appropriately represented among the staff of the European External Action Service .
I therefore think that it is very important that Parliament has proposed to delete provisions that allowed the transfer of officials from the Council or the Commission to the European External Action Service without competition for the vacancy .
The European External Action Service works in collaboration with the diplomatic services of the Member States and is made up of officials from the relevant services of the General Secretariat of the Council and the Commission , as well as staff seconded from the national diplomatic services of the Member States .
Thus , for the purposes of the Staff Regulations and the Conditions of Employment of Other Servants , the EEAS should be treated as an EU institution .
In view of this , EU officials and temporary agents from the diplomatic services of the Member States should have the same rights and obligations and be treated equally , particularly as regards the eligibility to assume all positions under equivalent conditions .
The amendment provided for in this resolution is therefore necessary .
I supported this report which was preceded by very serious debates , primarily as regards filling the posts of the European External Action Service .
The principle of geographical balance was the main cause of these debates , a principle that - along with the priorities of institutional and gender balance - was eventually included in the report in a much attenuated form .
The new Member States are undoubtedly not entirely satisfied , but it is nevertheless a good thing that a compromise has been reached , and we trust that in future , this may be revised to be even fairer .
To this end , we must do everything possible to ensure that the diplomats designated by the individual Member States have comparable and high qualifications .
We should be pleased , however , that we have taken an important step towards a unified and effective foreign representation of the EU , since given the current and future challenges , this is one of the most important aspects of EU policy .
in writing . - We have adopted with a big majority the compromise package reflecting the Green position , to which our group has substantially contributed .
in writing . - To those of us from the new Member States , the omission of any legally binding commitment to geographic balance in the European External Action Service is a disappointment .
It is true that there have been several political statements promising that the interests of the new Member States will be taken into account .
However positive a political commitment might be , the absence of a legal provision is regrettable .
Without legal provision , it is hard to see how voters in the new Member States will feel that they own the service .
This is why a number of us have had misgivings about giving our full support to the Rapkay report .
We are coming to the end of the rather tumultuous work on the form to be taken by the European External Action Service , on which we are about to vote today .
We have talked a lot about sustainable development in terms of gender and geography and a lot about transparency of recruitment based on pre-defined rules and regulations , but the most important issue is how good and effective the EEAS will be , which is why meritocratic criteria are so important when it comes to staff recruitment .
I would like to stress the requirement , indeed the necessity , of ensuring that employees from the Directorates of the European Commission that are relevant in terms of subject matter , as well as from the Council and Parliament , participate in these services .
The point is not the representation of European institutions , but the fact that these persons should have the right qualifications in various spheres of EU activities , such as complex aspects of energy , trade , agricultural and other issues , not to mention human rights or terrorism .
I have concerns that most of the people involved in the EEAS will have general diplomatic skills , but no familiarity with the complex factual issues they will have to deal with .
Abstaining from voting is not a solution .
Those who are absent are always in the wrong .
I think that in the resolution as a whole , there are many more good measures than those which are of less value .
We need the European External Action Service .
It should begin its work as soon as possible , to increase Europe 's importance in the world .
The resolution which has been adopted says that all Member States will be represented in the service .
Now we have to take care that this does really happen .
This creates confidence in the process of establishing the External Action Service .
It should be remembered that it was on mutual trust that the European Union was built , and that Poland has greatly benefited from this .
I am going to be watching the process very carefully .
Only a year ago , introduction of the concept of geographical balance to the debate on the European External Action Service met with huge opposition , even from within the European Parliament .
Today , no one at all is in any doubt that this is a problem and that it has to be solved .
The commitment found in all the most important documents related to the EEAS to take steps to ensure equal representation of all the Member States of the European Union in the new Union diplomatic service is a success .
The review planned for 2013 will allow us to judge if these steps have been taken .
in writing . - The results of the vote on the Rapkay report show that a considerable number of MEPs from new Member States either abstained or voted against it .
I was one of the MEPs who abstained .
My main concern was the lack of ambition of its wording on the principle of geographical balance within the employment policy and staff of the future European External Action Service ( EEAS ) .
The report failed to introduce a legally binding commitment to geographical balance in EEAS , thus relying only on political promises made by key EU decision makers on foreign affairs .
This is why most new Member States do not feel reassured by the proper application of the principle of geographical balance in the future EEAS .
It is regrettable that the rapporteur chose such a minimalist line , while the reluctance of the Council to explicitly accept this binding commitment raises even more concern .
I am calling on the Council and the Commission to examine the voting result on this report closely and deliver on their promises of respecting the geographical balance principle while recruiting the future staff of the EEAS .
It will be one of the MEPs ' priorities to monitor this process closely in future .
I voted in favour of the Parliament resolution as I agree that it is vital that the EU is able to use all of its external instruments within a coherent structure , and that the provision of budgetary resources in 2010 in order to establish this structure , in its initial phase , is the political purpose of this report .
I voted against the report , which refers to the European External Action Service set up on the basis of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Financial and any other form of aid for this service is unacceptable because it deploys political and military resources for misguided actions under the Union 's foreign policy , ultimately resulting in further militarisation of the European Union .
At the same time , it moves Europe away from the independent and pacific role which it should play in settling international problems .
This makes it part of the tension and a participating force in divisive , military interventions in war zones .
It is becoming necessary to adapt the budgetary instruments to the new reality of the European External Action Service ( EEAS ) .
However , I believe that efforts to ensure adequate funds for its capabilities and efficient and effective operation in line with what was intended , along with the effective monitoring of its costs , are broadly justified .
In the early days of its effective existence , the European institutions and Member States should pay special attention to the EEAS so that they can properly monitor its activities and identify its main problems .
This proposal for an amending budget comes under the realisation of the Treaty of Lisbon in order to facilitate the implementation and operation of the European External Action Service ( EEAS ) .
I therefore support this initiative , and it is important to ensure that it is implemented within the principles of efficient management of European resources , while highlighting a good relationship between cost and benefit , along with the requirements of budgetary restraint , due to the impact of the economic crisis on public finances .
Our vote against this report , which represents another step towards establishing and employing the European External Action Service ( EEAS ) , is a position consistent with our opposition to the creation of this service .
A central point of the Treaty of Lisbon and a fundamental element of federalism in the European Union , it will involve more than 5 000 people in the future 130 EU embassies in various countries .
A diplomatic mega-structure that will inevitably subordinate the representatives and interests of the Member States , imposing on them , and here too , the interests of the powers that have been determining the course of the EU .
Moreover , there is no guarantee that the EEAS will not be linked to military and intelligence structures .
There is , therefore , the prospect of a worrying militarisation of the EU and of international relations , which we will fight vigorously .
It should also be asked , as the EU 's budget is extremely reduced , where will the contributions come from to cover this expenditure ?
All this at a time when the effects of the crisis are getting worse , with the so-called ' austerity ' policies putting enormous pressure on national budgets ; when salaries and social security benefits are being cut , and taxes on income from work are being increased .
Following the amendment to the Staff Regulations and an amendment to the Financial Regulation so that the creation of the European External Action Service is encompassed in those documents , it is now necessary to approve a budget for its proper functioning .
Hence , for this service to function properly and achieve the objectives for which it was created , it must be given a budget that is sufficient to provide the human and material resources necessary for it to perform its activities well .
I voted against this European Parliament legislative resolution , because creating the service that they want to finance represents another step towards the militarisation of the European Union 's foreign policy .
As well as my opposition to this militaristic foreign affairs philosophy , my reason for voting against it is that the most basic principles of transparency and democracy have been absent throughout the process of creating the European External Action Service ( EEAS ) .
The organisation and financing of this service do not include the necessary strict control over staffing and financing by the European Parliament , meaning that the EEAS is worryingly lacking in democracy and transparency .
It is therefore no surprise that the proposed structure for the EEAS relegates the European Parliament to a secondary , irrelevant position in EU foreign policy , which my group and I firmly reject .
I have therefore voted against it .
I cannot be in favour of the proposed budgets for this type of service with its militaristic tendencies .
Consideration surely does need to be given to the precise form of the European External Action Service ( EEAS ) that is to be established .
A system in which each of the 50 directors-general would initially have 30 and later a good 80 staff members would mean bloated and expensive administration .
Similarly , the establishment of the EEAS is expected to bring with it a wave of promotions .
A few issues have not yet been cleared up sufficiently .
Possible effects on the building costs must be subject to prior scrutiny .
Other factors , such as actually giving proper weight to German as a working language , as laid down in the treaties , have been ignored .
For these reasons , I feel that , in its present form , the funding for the EEAS must be rejected .
I voted in favour of the Parliament resolution as I agree that it is vital that the EU is able to use all of its external instruments within a coherent structure , and that the provision of budgetary resources in 2010 in order to establish this structure , in its initial phase , is the political purpose of this report .
in writing . - The setting up of the European External Action Service ( EEAS ) necessitates an amendment of the 2010 budget and of the proposed 2011 budget .
A new Section X has to be created in the budget and the 2010 budget has to be modified in order to provide 100 additional posts in the EEAS establishment plan and a financial envelope for financing an additional 70 contract staff .
The bulk of resources necessary will simply be transferred from the sections of the European Council , Council and Commission .
The prevailing feeling in the Committee on Foreign Affairs ( AFET ) is that the HR , Baroness Ashton , has not entirely lived up to the promises she made to the EP on the setting up of the EEAS .
AFET considers that the EP should be consulted on staffing priorities within the service ( e.g. when it comes to geographical balances ) and that the issue of gender balance would be better addressed in the recruitment procedure for the EEAS .
From a Green / EFA point of view , the fact that until now , Baroness Ashton has not transferred the Commission staff in DG RELEX dealing with peacebuilding and crisis response to the EEAS is considered a major shortcoming , especially as the HR has given messages of assurance to the EP on this transfer .
We firmly oppose the creation of a European External Action Service .
Foreign affairs and diplomacy come under national sovereignty , and that is why we voted against all the reports on this matter .
A common foreign policy conducted in the sole interest of the European Union will necessarily find itself , sooner or later , in contradiction with the fundamental interests of one , several or all Member States .
For instance , if there is a conflict where countries are asked to get involved , but their citizens are opposed .
Or if a policy that is particularly hostile or particularly favourable towards a country or group of countries is promoted , going against the age-old traditions of some diplomatic services or the vital interests of some Members .
Worse still : the treaties already stipulate that , whatever happens , all this will be subject to other commitments or constraints on an even greater , possibly global , scale : NATO , the UN , goodness knows what else .
Therefore , it is not even a strong and independent diplomatic service that is being proposed here , but an instrument of submission to non-European leadership .
Given that the annual allocation for financial assistance for monitoring measures in the banana sector amounted to EUR 75 million in 2010 , where the major portion of this financial assistance stemmed from a reallocation of heading 4 of the budget , which equated to EUR 55.8 million , and that in 2011 , this heading is only EUR 875 530 , we agree with Parliament 's proposal to invite the Commission to submit a new proposal to deploy the flexibility instrument for the remaining amount of EUR 74 124 470 .
This proposal is justified by the fact that there is a need for financial assistance for monitoring measures in the banana sector , particularly when we consider that EU financial assistance to ACP banana supplier countries affected by the Most Favoured Nation ( MFN ) liberalisation in the framework of the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) must be ensured if the EU wishes to maintain its influence as a global player .
We should also mention that it makes complete sense to implement this proposal , given that these measures are provided for in point 27 of the interinstitutional agreement on the use of the flexibility instrument .
I voted in favour of the resolution as I agree that EU financial assistance to ACP banana supplier countries affected by the Most Favoured Nation ( MFN ) liberalisation in the framework of the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) should not be questioned , and that the budgetary effort is not held up .
I therefore agree with the Commission proposal to amend Regulation ( EC , Euratom ) No 1905 / 2006 in order to allow the financing of Bananas Accompanying Measures ( BAM ) over the years 2010 to 2013 , with an overall budget of EUR 190 million , with a potential supplementary EUR 10 million , if margins allow .

The banana sector is a vital sector for some EU regions , especially the French overseas départements and territories ; that is why , faced with competition from Latin American countries exacerbated by agreements under negotiation , Parliament has adopted funding measures aimed at helping this weakened sector .
MEPs would like to see the flexibility instrument mobilised to the tune of EUR 74.12 million .
This is a strong signal from Parliament to the Commission and the Council , which only made provision for 18.3 million .
Similarly , it is an opportunity for Parliament to point out that it is time to stop dipping into the budget for EU external action to finance the Banana Accompanying Measures .
The EUR 190 million in aid promised for the 2010-2013 period shall have to be financed by new funds , which is what Parliament will demand during the new financial perspective .
The Commission is proposing an amendment to Regulation ( EC , Euratom ) No 1905 / 2006 in order to finance Bananas Accompanying Measures ( BAM ) over the years 2010 to 2013 , with an overall budget of EUR 190 million .
The proposed annual breakdown provides an amount of EUR 75 million in 2010 .
It is worth noting that the margin available under heading 4 is only EUR 875 530 .
The most important part of this financial assistance in 2010 comes from a reallocation within heading 4 of the budget , namely EUR 55.8 million from a total of EUR 75 million , which affects instruments and actions that the EU , and Parliament in particular , deem to be of major interest .
In addition , the need for financial assistance linked to accompanying measures for the bananas sector was not provided for in adopting the multiannual financial framework ( MFF ) in force .
However , EU financial assistance to ACP banana-supplying countries affected by the Most Favoured Nation ( MFN ) liberalisation in the framework of the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) should not be questioned , and the fiscal effort should not be held up .
I therefore agree with the change to the draft amending budget No 3 / 2010 , as proposed by the rapporteur .
The report aims to establish the measures necessary for financial assistance to countries of the African , Caribbean and Pacific Group of States ( ACP ) that will be affected by the liberalisation of the banana trade between the EU and 11 Latin American countries , under which the EU is committed to not applying quantitative restrictions or equivalent measures on banana imports to its territory .
When the Geneva Agreement was signed , which provides for this liberalisation , the EU committed to channelling EUR 200 million to ACP countries by way of compensation for the impact that this measure would have on their exports to the EU .
We criticised this agreement at the time , as it will mainly benefit the US multinationals that dominate the global market in the sector .
Several ACP countries , as well as several banana producers in those countries , expressed their concern about the agreement 's consequences , believing that the sum of EUR 200 million will not offset all its effects .
Now , the report provides for ' an overall budget of EUR 190 million , with a potential supplementary EUR 10 million , if margins allow ' .
Furthermore , there were no proper warnings of the impact on the banana-producing countries and regions of the EU , such as the Autonomous Region of Madeira .
For these reasons , we abstained from the vote on the report .
The European Parliament proposal for a resolution on Council 's position on Draft amending budget No 3 / 2010 of the European Union for the financial year 2010 , Section III - Commission , allocates new resources to finance the Banana Accompanying Measures for ACP ( Africa , Caribbean , Pacific ) countries .
The Commission proposal , made in fact without the involvement of any branch of the budget authority , provides for an appropriation of EUR 75 million to be entered into the reserve pending the adoption of the relevant amending regulation .
I am bound to point out that Parliament and Council have failed to reach an agreement over this matter .
Parliament had , in fact , considered using the flexibility instrument , which has proved excellent for dealing with similar situations , because the funds in question are ready for mobilisation and have a legal foundation .
Council , on the other hand , had a different idea , due to the reluctance of Member States to use the flexibility instrument , which led to an increase in their contributions as a consequence For these very reasons , the Committee on Budgets acknowledged the impossibility of reaching an agreement over the 2010 budget .
The EU has always focused on helping developing countries , particularly the ACP countries .
The specific case that is being handled in this amending budget proposal is that of the ACP banana-producing countries .
This special aid takes the form of the liberalisation of the banana trade between the EU and 11 Latin American banana-producing countries .
This kind of aid is , in our opinion , better and more effective than direct aid whereby funds are applied without discretion .
By helping the banana sector in these countries , we are helping them develop their economy , create jobs and fight poverty .
The thinking is that , in order to overcome the economic crisis , as much money as possible should be made available to fund the EU 's priorities for 2010 .
This was made possible by reallocating budget funds .
Financial support for accompanying measures for the banana sector were not envisaged when the current multiannual financial framework was being drawn up .
To cushion trade liberalisation at the WTO level and the associated reduction in most favoured nation status tariffs , we are told that EU financial support for ACP countries that supply bananas is now to be maintained .
Especially in times in which the EU itself is wrestling with the economic crisis , this kind of utilisation of the flexibility instrument must be rejected .
in writing . - Due to changing trade arrangements , notably the liberalisation of trade within the WTO , the reduction of the preferential margin for ACP banana-exporting countries has had a negative impact .
The European Commission proposes therefore to support the main ACP banana-exporting countries by establishing Banana Accompanying Measures ( BAM ) with a budget of EUR 190 million over 4 years ( 2010-2013 ) .
The objective of this assistance is to help ACP banana exporters to launch adjustment programmes .
Although the banana question is a long-standing issue , financing the BAM remains problematic .
The Commission and the Council did not integrate it into Heading 4 of the multiannual financial framework ( MFF ) for 2007-2013 , and the Committee on Development considers that the proposal is not compatible with the ceiling for Heading 4 of the MFF and asks the Commission to make substantial amendments or replace it with another text .
I am pleased with the 2011 draft budget , which is being discussed today , as it dwells precisely on the stated priorities .
For the first time , Parliament is on an equal footing with the Council on these matters .
This is the first budget following the Treaty of Lisbon .
For this reason , and due to the crisis that Europe is experiencing , it is important that the reconciliation process is successful .
It is vital that the EU is given a budget for the implementation of priority areas and the new powers that were bestowed upon it by the treaty .
It is important to fight for our convictions and for a budget that is visionary in a time of crisis .
Parliament 's proposal reflects this ambition .
On the other hand , the values proposed by the Council mirror the austerity of budgets adopted at a national level within the EU .
The EU , however , must have the ability to react to policy changes caused by major challenges .
The EU has a duty to present an ambitious European budget which can assist economic recovery .
Only by strengthening areas such as science and innovation , and by contributing to economic growth and to more and better jobs , can we make Europe a more attractive place to live and work .
We , the Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament , have voted in favour of Amendments 700 , 701 and 706 to the budget .
We have done so , even though the comments contain a passage stating that the EU should move towards a low carbon economy .
We are well aware that the supporters of nuclear power are attempting to use this term to conceal the fact that they are really talking about an economy in which nuclear power plays a prominent role as a source of energy .
We would like to stress that we believe it to be a very bad idea to spend EU resources on nuclear power , and it is with this proviso that we voted in favour of the amendment .
In the vote on the EU 's 2011 budget , the Danish Liberal Party voted against a number of amendments relating to the removal of money for export refunds .
The expenditure for export refunds is determined by law and will therefore be paid regardless of what amount is specified in the budget .
However , if the expenditure is not specified in the EU budget it will have to be paid out by the individual Member States .
At a time when the national budgets are being cut back , it would be economically irresponsible to burden the Member States with this significant additional expenditure .
The Danish Liberal Party is pleased about the considerable reduction in the EU 's export subsidies in recent years and will continue to work to bring about a change in the underlying legislation so that the phase-out can continue .
The Danish Liberal Party also voted against a statement that prevents the payment of a special male bovine premium for bulls used for bullfighting .
The reason why the Danish Liberal Party voted against this proposal is that this premium is only paid in Denmark , Sweden and Slovenia , where , as we know , bullfighting does not happen .
Finally , the Danish Liberal Party voted against allocating DKK 300 million to a European dairy fund .
Dairy prices have risen over the last year and , against that background , the Commission has concluded that , under the current rules , it will not be possible for money to be paid out from such a fund .
I voted in favour of the amendment on the budget which places a portion of the 2011 budget for the European Police College ( CEPOL ) in reserve .
I welcome the vote in plenary which , with 611 votes for , 38 against and 6 abstentions , strengthens Parliament 's position on CEPOL .
Indeed , Parliament will release the appropriations set aside if it receives satisfactory information from the agency on the follow-up to the 2008 discharge .
These requirements are clear : inform Parliament of the results of the OLAF inquiry ; publish the list of members of the Governing Board ; provide a final external auditor 's report on the appropriations used to finance private expenditure ; and ensure that changes are made within the Governing Board in order to avoid a repeat of this situation in the future .
I very much hope that CEPOL will react swiftly and provide evidence of its willingness to cooperate fully with Parliament .
A strong and modern Europe needs a future- and growth-oriented budget , while , at the same time , the economic situation demands reflection and restraint .
We have therefore chosen to keep to a budget-restrictive line with the focus on broad investments in research , development and innovation that create growth and jobs in accordance with the Europe 2020 strategy .
Since we want to see a Europe that is sustainable from the point of view of the economy , social matters and the climate , we voted in favour of investments in the environment and in human capital and control of the financial markets , but always within the bounds of existing resources .
An unjustifiably large proportion of the budget is still utilised for the EU 's agricultural policy , and tomorrow 's challenges will not be met by applying yesterday 's policy .
We therefore voted against the proposed dairy fund of EUR 300 million and our own proposal to abolish the EU 's export subsidies for agricultural products , for example , as well as subsidies for tobacco cultivation .
Since everyone has to do their bit in these difficult economic times , we also voted in favour of reducing the EU 's administration costs .
In view of the fragile recovery of the euro area and the weak public finances in many Member States , if the budget is used wisely , it can stimulate economic recovery , but it is necessary to know how to make the most of it .
With regard to citizens , it is worth noting the increase within the Competitiveness for growth and employment heading and the ' Cohesion for growth and employment ' heading , although there is a reduction for education and training .
There is a notable increase in the European Social Fund ( ESF ) , but it is regrettable that only 1.4 % of the funds are earmarked for the implementation of social policy , in which health sees a reduction of EUR 15.77 million in relation to 2010 .
In the field of regional development , there is an increase of about 3.2 % , which is considered essential .
Regarding agriculture , it is worth noting the extreme volatility of the dairy sector , highlighting the need for a permanent approach to address this issue , namely , through a fund for the dairy sector .
With regard to fisheries , there is a regrettable reduction in the allocations to the common fisheries policy ( CFP ) .
The EU budget for 2011 is designed to underpin the profitability of big business and the savage attack by the monopolies and bourgeois governments on workers ' labour and social rights .
It provides even more hot money , subsidies and facilities to monopoly groups , in addition to the 5 trillion or so already given to them by national bourgeois governments , in order to bolster their position in the inexorable competition between the imperialists , with a clear view to reviving the capitalist system .
Its basic approach is , on the one hand , to give out money to capital and , on the other , to slash any - already paltry - spending on workers , small commercial and handicraft enterprises , poor medium-sized farm holdings and young people , and to provide even more money for imperialist intervention by the EU and for the mechanisms which it uses to repress and persecute the people .
The first budget approved by the European Parliament , with its allegedly enhanced powers under the Treaty of Lisbon , is worthy of its reactionary nature .
It proves once again that the European Parliament is faithfully serving the needs and interests of the monopolies and is deeply hostile to the workers and grassroots needs .
The working and grassroots class movement needs to step up its fight , so that the workers do not pay the price for the capitalist crisis .
There has been increasing volatility in international dairy markets in recent years .
The EUR 300 million of exceptional funding given to the dairy sector in the 2010 budget was especially beneficial for dairy farmers , who were suffering greatly because of the crisis .
We voted in favour of a new budget line , so that there would be a dairy fund to support innovation , diversification and restructuring and to increase the bargaining capacity of dairy farmers in order that imbalances in the food supply chain could be addressed .
In addition , we welcome what the report says on the support being given to the School Milk Scheme , and the Commission 's proposal in relation to increasing the funding of this scheme and the funding of the School Fruit Scheme .
The aim of the common agricultural policy is to ensure the security of the food supply , to protect the environment and biodiversity , and ensure a proper income for farmers .
In this regard , we welcome what the report says about asking the Commission to include a cash buffer in the 2011 budget lest there be increased market volatility in 2011 , to reduce red tape , and to improve and clarify access to funding .
I agree with my fellow Members who do not support the budget reductions proposed by the Council .
The best argument against this is the situation of the Member States which have proceeded with this action domestically .
I am referring in particular to Romania .
The pressure exerted on consumption by restricting it has not brought us out of the crisis , but has actually created unprecedented social pressure .
I agree then with the EUR 300 million increase in the milk fund .
I have adopted the same stance in support of additional financial allocations for this product throughout the entire period of the European crisis .
I strongly support the idea of the European stabilisation mechanism and the need for the two new budgetary lines created to be specific , with figures provided and not blank , as is the case now , so that this European intervention instrument can become a reality rather than just a theory .
I hope that Parliament 's viewpoint will be respected during the conciliation , that an agreement will be reached with the Council and that we will be able to vote ' yes ' in November to the 2011 EU budget .
The European Parliament , for the first time in its history , has discussed the draft general budget of the European Union for 2011 according to the new rules under the Treaty of Lisbon .
A number of changes that Parliament 's plenary has made clearly show that the degree of control and the democratic functioning of the European Union has increased .
With regard to the improvement of democratic procedures , but also with regard to the structure of the budget , I supported this proposal .
I voted in favour of the Parliament resolution as I agree with Parliament 's horizontal priorities for 2011 in the areas of youth , education and mobility , which require , under the various policies , specific cross-sector investment as a means of promoting growth and development in the EU .
I agree with the proposed increase in funding for all programmes related to these priorities , namely the Lifelong Learning , PESSOA and Erasmus Mundus programmes .
I also agree that the mobility of youth employment is an essential tool for ensuring the development of a competitive and dynamic labour market in Europe , and as such , it needs to be strengthened .
I welcome the increase in funding for the European Employment Service and therefore strongly support the launch of the preparatory action ' Your First Job Abroad ' , which aims to help young people enter the labour market or gain access to skilled jobs in another Member State as a first step towards a specific non-academic programme for the mobility of young people .
This budget does not measure up to what the European Union needs for it to come out of the recession , bring about recovery and face up to its responsibilities in terms of solidarity .
In this respect , I regret the fact that the proposal by the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament for creating a line of ' own resources ' funded by a tax on financial transactions was quite simply rejected by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) .
This inconsistency between what the right says and does is outrageous given that they have been saying for months to citizens and to the media that they support such a tax .
However , when it comes to voting , and when the European Parliament has the power to make it happen , these are the very people who want to see this proposal buried .
While the EU is expanding , and more and more powers are being entrusted to it , the resources at its disposal are dwindling .
This is a bad signal for the recovery of growth and employment in Europe , in general , and for European citizens , in particular .
We would like the EU 's priorities for the budget to be focused more on the future , increased competitiveness , investments in infrastructure and research , rather than propping up agricultural policy .
We have today adhered to our priorities by voting for legal certainty , increased appropriations for research and more money for climate measures , but also for a reduction in appropriations for agricultural subsidies , export subsidies , tobacco cultivation and dairy funds .
Even though it did not contain all of the priorities that we would have liked to have seen , we have , of course , voted in favour of the EU budget for 2011 .
We have just adopted the 2011 budget that the European Parliament wanted .
This vote has enabled us to reaffirm our priorities towards the poorest , for whom a EUR 100 million package has been requested , and also towards dairy producers for whom we would like to see the milk fund continue .
Struggling businesses should also carry on receiving support from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund which should be permanent and have its own budget .
Finally , we would like to see the European budget be given its own resources and a tax on financial transactions finally introduced .
At a time when States , local communities , taxpayers and businesses are accepting financial sacrifices , the Union cannot exempt itself from this virtuous process .
Disproportionate increases in the Union budget , which some wish to see , are not acceptable .
That does not mean that the time has come to cut strategically essential expenditure , such as the common agricultural policy , thanks to which we enjoy independence in terms of foodstuffs and benefit from a source of exports ( and hence of earnings ) .
On the other hand , this would be a good time to question the contribution derogations enjoyed by certain States for historical reasons , and which have no grounds to exist today .
The idea of a European tax cannot be contemplated in the present context : the fiscal pressure bearing on Member States should be reduced first .
The European Parliament has spoken on the draft legislative resolution on the Council 's position on the draft general budget of the European Union for the financial year 2011 .
The European Parliament 's examination of the general budget of the European Union has always provided an opportunity to see more clearly how this Union 's powers have been extended over the years and , vice versa , how the Member States ' sovereignty has been lost .
This report lays open the fiscal pressure that will be brought to bear on taxpayers .
Even though citizens ' disillusionment with the European Union is clear , the latter is still increasing its budget by 6 % to finance policies that it has arrogated to itself .
Why this increase , when 10 % to 15 % of resources remain unused and the Commission is demanding restraint in all Member States ?
in writing . - I believe any proposal to increase the EU budget to be unacceptable , on the basis that I cannot justify to my constituents increasing EU spending by nearly 6 % in 2011 .
Today , the UK Chancellor is outlining drastic public sector cuts - cuts that the EU have urged Member States to make .
Yet , at the same time , the same EU deems it appropriate that the budget of this place increases by 6 % .
Do as I say , not as I do , seems to be official EU policy .
I find that unacceptable .
I could not look my constituents in the eye , some who will undoubtedly lose their jobs as a result of cuts in UK spending , and say that MEPs spent even more of their money wisely - and remember it is their money - by boosting the coffers of the EEAS , Europol and regulation of financial services .
And I certainly could not justify increasing the entertainment budget of this place either .
That is why I voted against this budget .
It is for others to justify why they endorsed it .
A strong and modern Europe needs a future- and growth-oriented budget while , at the same time , the economic situation demands reflection and restraint .
I have therefore chosen to keep to a budget-restrictive line and have focused on broad investments in research , development and innovation that create growth and jobs in accordance with the Europe 2020 strategy .
Since I want to see a Europe that is sustainable from the point of view of the economy , social matters and the climate , I therefore voted in favour of investments in the environment , in individuals and in control of the financial markets , but always within the bounds of existing resources .
A large proportion of the budget goes to the EU 's agricultural policy .
Unfortunately , the current structure of the common agricultural policy is rarely focused on meeting the challenges of the future .
Thriving rural areas are very important .
However , continuing with export subsidies and subsidies for tobacco cultivation are not the right way to go .
What we need instead are reasonable conditions for food production in Europe , decent animal protection and incentives for farmers to produce green energy .
Since everyone has to do their bit in these difficult economic times , I also voted in favour of reducing the EU 's administration costs .
We Swedish Social Democrats have today voted in favour of the draft EU budget for 2011 .
It is a restrained budget , but it also contains necessary investments in research , energy and initiatives for young people , and it enables the establishment of the EU 's new External Action Service and new authorities for financial supervision .
However , it is also a budget in which many of the EU 's new priorities lack reasonable financing , for example , the EU 's new strategy for growth and employment ( EU 2020 ) , climate policy and the EU 's foreign policy and aid policy , particularly the aid for Palestine .
In order to keep the budget down , we proposed more cuts in the EU 's agricultural aid , but this was rejected in the vote .
We also voted for an examination of the system of the EU 's own resources , including a tax on financial transactions .
Irrespective of the form that a new system for the EU 's revenue might take , it must be budget neutral and respect the Member States ' competence in the sphere of taxation .
With regard to Parliament 's own budget , we believe that those committees that are gaining a heavier workload as a result of the Treaty of Lisbon need to be strengthened .
This justifies an increase in staff for Parliament 's and the groups ' secretariats .
However , we do not believe that MEPs need more staff .
Parliament has now decided to maintain the appropriations for an increase in the assistants allowance in reserve , and this should not be released unless all conditions are met .
We would have preferred to have seen Parliament 's resources being increased by means of redistributions and measures to increase efficiency , rather than increasing the total budget .
The EU budget is vital for the development of EU activities , and , especially in times of crisis , for the effective allocation of funds relating to cohesion policy .
I believe that the Council should not reduce these funds arbitrarily , as observed for priorities such as funds allocated to innovation , and for objectives of growth and competitiveness .
The Council has cut commitment appropriations by 0.55 % and payment appropriations by 2.77 % , approving a final budget of EUR 141.8 billion for commitment appropriations and EUR 126.5 billion for payment appropriations , which may be especially critical if it impacts on European growth and competitiveness .
I therefore support Parliament 's maintaining of the initial funding allocated to these areas .
With the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , the distinction between compulsory expenditure and non-compulsory expenditure has been suppressed , which means that Parliament and the Council are becoming jointly responsible for all EU spending , and that they decide upon it together .
In addition , the annual budgetary process is becoming a special legislative procedure with the budget approved through a regulation , which is liable to be seen as a special codecision procedure or , to avoid confusion , as a joint decision by Parliament and the Council .
The 2011 budget which Parliament is proposing is ambitious , intelligent and respects the commitments which it has taken on in a rigorous and realistic way .
We are making a priority of policies concerning young people , education , mobility , training , research , competitiveness and innovation .
I would like to emphasise the preparatory action in which I was personally involved : ' Your First Job Abroad ' .
This will boost the mobility of young people in the EU and help to combat unemployment .
This EU budget continues to amount to about 1 % of gross national income .
This clearly demonstrates the need to revise the multiannual financial framework , given the tight margins for its headings , and particularly for headings 1A , 3B and 4 .
It is also clear that a debate urgently needs to take place on the necessity of new resources for the Union budget .
We agree with the criticisms made of the arbitrary cuts and reductions effected by the Council on the draft budget , leaving it almost EUR 7 billion lower in 2011 than was agreed in the multiannual financial framework ( MFF ) 2007-2013 .
This is all the more unacceptable as the sum agreed in the MFF is already an extremely small amount , which compromises any economic and social cohesion right from the start .
Hence , it accentuates the damaging effects of the policies that the EU has been pursuing .
We are , therefore , also of the opinion that a substantial reassessment of the budget is absolutely necessary , along with an immediate review of the maximum limits of the current MFF .
However , this criticism cannot lead us to accept the intention of ' lisbonising ' the budget that is mentioned in the report which would keep it subservient to the Treaty of Lisbon 's fundamental pillars : neoliberalism , federalism and militarism .
In other words , essentially keeping it subservient to the same policies that caused the profound crisis that the workers and peoples of Europe are currently facing .
What is needed - starting with the necessary reinforcement of the Union budget , based on contributions from the Member States in proportion to their gross national income - is a break with these policies and a genuine commitment to cohesion , social progress and environmental conservation .
The Treaty of Lisbon entered into force on 1 December last year .
It confers new powers on the European Union : hence , new opportunities for spending money .
No one or hardly anyone here has the decency to highlight that there is something scandalous about asking for an increase in resources allocated to the European Union or the creation of a new tax when Member States are being ordered to practise austerity and to slash their social protection .
In France , Europe has an enormous direct cost : EUR 8 billion per year , a figure that is increasing all the time .
In other words , it accounts for a major part of the social security deficit , for example .
The indirect cost is even greater , in terms of unemployment , weak growth , relocations , and so on , linked to European policies .
The European budget is not complementary to national budgets ; it competes with and raids them .
With structural policy cofinancing systems , which are nothing other than a sprinkling of patronage , it is also an incitement to spending .
An aggravating circumstance is this : for 15 years , the European Court of Auditors has been unable to approve the management by the Commission of these tens of billions of euro .
I believe it is time to have done with all this .
I supported the European Parliament resolution on the draft general budget of the EU for 2011 .
If we want to be able to take on the political priorities of the European Union , the new expenditure made necessary by the economic crisis and the new powers conferred by the Treaty of Lisbon , we must support an ambitious draft budget , capable of delivering the investments required for more jobs and a return to sustainable growth , or , in other words , a budget that lives up to the Europe that we want .
The Council would like to reduce the Union 's budget , because Member States are facing substantial deficits .
That is why we have introduced a new budget heading for the Union 's own resources , so that the budget does not depend so much on national contributions .
We deplore the fact that the amendment calling for the establishment of a tax on financial transactions has once more been rejected by the right .
I support the European Parliament 's proposals for the draft 2011 budget .
The important political areas and the individual opinions have been taken into account in the report .
Parliament acknowledges that in future , the European Union cannot manage to fulfil its extensive and varied tasks with fewer financial resources .
That applies , above all , to agriculture .
The Opinion of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development on the 2011 budget already expressed the concern that , in the planning and utilisation of unused resources , the Commission 's assumptions are too optimistic .
Large-scale European research projects are financially coupled to recoveries , the amount of which no one knows in advance .
The Commission is called on to ensure the long-term financing of research and development in future and to draw up precise financing plans .
Financial recoveries from the agricultural pot should be used for their original purpose .
I voted for this report as the European Parliament identifies the most important priorities in its policies in the areas of young people , education and mobility .
I , too , have maintained on a number of occasions that they are vital and necessary components of the EU economic recovery strategy and the Europe 2020 strategy .
Young people , education and mobility require specific cross-sector investments within the suitable policies in order to promote the EU 's growth and development .
I therefore support the need to increase the loans for all the programmes relating to these priorities , such as ' Lifelong learning ' , the ' People ' programme and Erasmus Mundus .
It is also just as important to increase the loans for the European network of employment services .
To this end , I support the launch of the preparatory action ' Your first EURES Job ' , which aims to help young people enter the job market or access specialised jobs in another Member State , as a first step towards a specific non-academic youth mobility programme .
in writing . - On individual votes , I voted against provisions which I believe have negative consequences for EU citizens and people in developing countries .
This includes EU funding for tobacco production , as well as EU agricultural export subsidies which harm developing countries .
I also voted against increases in budget lines relating to expenses , travel and administrative costs .
However , I welcome the positive elements of the Parliament 's first reading , including funding for economic development in our regions , support for crucial research and development and increased overseas aid in line with the UK 's target to increase development assistance .
I believe the EU budget is needed to provide long-term stability against the severe austerity measures which are being introduced by national governments in Europe .
While national governments implement drastic cuts , in some cases , with a short-term vision , the EU budget can provide stability and long-term planning to help - through funds such as the structural funds and cohesion funds - create jobs , provide job training and boost European economies through the recovery , particularly by providing structural funds to deprived areas hit the hardest .
For the first time since the Treaty of Lisbon entered into force , the European budget has been adopted on a single reading .
This is also the first time that Parliament has exercised greater decision making impact than Council .
This increased power must , however , be accompanied by a high sense of responsibility and realism imposed by the persistent economic crisis .
In this regard , the Committee on Budgets has sent out a clear signal by opting to respect the margins imposed by the current financial situation and implementing a tough policy based on priorities to encourage growth with the emphasis on research , innovation and young people .
I welcome this Chamber 's decision to follow the guidelines of the Committee on Budgets and the Member States , which are often forced into debt following excessive EU cash advances .
The Union Budget must nevertheless be reconsidered in the light of the new powers arising from the Treaty of Lisbon and the need for own resources .
These matters require firmness during conciliation in order to provide adequate financial support to such an ambitious project as the EU 2020 strategy .
The entry into force of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ( TFEU ) has strengthened EU policies and created new areas of competence - notably , the Common Foreign and Security Policy ( CFSP ) , competitiveness and innovation , space , tourism , the fight against climate change , social policy , energy policy , justice and internal affairs .
These new powers presuppose a budget that will allow them to be put into practice and thus require all bodies with budgetary authority to be coherent and consistent with respect to their increased financial powers .
We therefore have to provide the Community budget with the necessary funds to make it able to achieve the objectives outlined for 2014 , so that the Europe 2020 strategy is not compromised .
Of course , in this situation of crisis , the Member States are putting up some resistance to the increase in contributions , but they must acknowledge the intentions of the EU and the need not to jeopardise everything that has been achieved in terms of cohesion and integration .
One of the things that the Treaty of Lisbon changed was the financial structures of the EU , in particular , the multiannual financial framework ( MFF ) and the annual budgetary procedure .
The treaty gives the MFF binding legal status and states that it is to be laid down by the Council , acting unanimously after obtaining the consent of the European Parliament .
There is no longer a distinction to be made between mandatory and non-mandatory expenditure , for decisions on which both budgetary authorities are now jointly responsible , with the process being simplified accordingly .
The fact that Parliament now has the right of codecision on the entire budget reinforces democratic control .
Some further steps to simplify the bureaucracy are also envisaged .
It is important that the European Parliament , as the EU 's only directly elected institution , has its budgetary rights strengthened so that it can influence important EU decisions such as the demand for cost savings in the new External Action Service .
However , I cannot support tendencies to centralise .
I voted in favour of the draft budget because I approve of its general position and its contents .
I agree with the re-established ceilings in relation to the cuts made by the Council .
I believe that this vote is extremely important and I applaud the position expressed by Parliament , which really makes use of the new prerogatives .
Indeed , thanks to the new budget procedure brought in by the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , Parliament can assert its importance and its powers in relation to the Council , defending a strong and ambitious budget , which , at the same time , is tough , in awareness of the fact that in order to relaunch the economy of the European Union - sorely tested by the recent economic and financial crisis - important investments in key sectors such as research and technological innovation are required .
The initial draft budget tabled before the Committee on Culture and Education by the Committee on Budgets fell short in that it failed to adopt ambitious measures to achieve the primary targets of the EU 2020 strategy in education , training and mobility .
To be precise , the competent committee initially adopted the position of the Commission and the Council and proposed a freeze on appropriations for lifelong learning , education and young entrepreneurship programmes .
However , it is comforting that , in the wake of the opposition and concerns expressed by the members of the Committee on Culture and Education on the downgrading of policies on education and training , especially at a time when unemployment is on the rise and is causing problems in numerous Member States of the European Union , the Committee on Budgets tabled the necessary amendments , which I supported , and increased the initial planned appropriations ( for example , in the case of Article 150202 on lifelong learning programmes ) .
I voted in favour of the Parliament resolution as I agree with Parliament 's horizontal priorities for 2011 , especially in the areas of youth , education and mobility , which require , under the various policies , specific investment between sectors as a means of promoting growth and development for the EU .
I agree with the proposed increase in funding for all programmes related to these priorities , namely , the Lifelong Learning , PESSOA and Erasmus Mundus programmes .
I also believe that the mobility of youth employment is an essential tool for ensuring the development of a competitive and dynamic labour market in Europe , and that as such , it needs to be strengthened .
I therefore welcome the increase in funding for the European Employment Service and strongly support the launch of the preparatory action ' Your First Job Abroad ' , which aims to help young people enter the labour market or gain access to skilled jobs in another Member State , as a first step towards a specific non-academic programme for the mobility of young people .
EUR 142 650 billion - that is the budget for the financial year 2011 , adopted by the European Parliament at midday today .
A tight budget , which is virtually identical to that proposed by the European Commission and adopted against a background of austerity .
However , we all know that Europe cannot do more and better with less money .
That is why I , along with several other Members and also the Commissioner for Financial Programming and Budget , Mr Lewandowski , am entering a plea for the European Union to award itself its own resources .
A financial mechanism that would guarantee autonomy and room for manoeuvre with regard to the Member States which , crisis situation or no , have long since abandoned the idea of giving Europe the means for its ambitions . I see at least two reasons for not cutting back on the European budget .
The first derives from the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon and the new powers for Europe in the fields of foreign policy , energy , financial supervision , to mention only a few .
The second relates to the new 2020 strategy , which is intended to put Europe back on the track to sustainable growth , major projects and innovation .
New challenges and powers which will need to be well funded .
This leads us back to the one and only solution - direct financing of the European Union .
in writing . - This year 's budget debate again underlines the need to agree a meaningful system of own resources for the EU .
The annual squabbling over the budgets between the European institutions leads to chaotic decision making and creates an acrimonious diversion , which could be so easily avoided through an own resources system , such as allocating part of the revenue from an EU financial transaction tax , a tax on aviation fuel or a carbon tax to fund the EU budget .
Despite this , today 's vote broadly strikes a balance between responding to the extra demands created by the Lisbon Treaty , whilst limiting the growth in the EU budgets , in response to current budgetary difficulties .
I have chosen to abstain in respect of the decision regarding Parliament 's draft budget .
The enhancement of the Daphne programme dealing with violence against women is gratifying .
I am also pleased that Parliament is rejecting the Commission 's and the Council 's proposal for cuts in financial assistance to the Palestinian Authority .
However , I would also like to point out that I think that Parliament is acting irresponsibly by granting the EU system and itself such large sums in the form of programmes and subsidies and aid for bureaucracy , while the Member States are being forced into making brutal cuts in order to meet the requirements of the Stability Pact - in other words , the neoliberal pact that the majority of Parliament wholeheartedly supports .
The main winner is agriculture , particularly the establishment of a dairy fund of EUR 300 million .
This decision will be embarrassingly difficult for us MEPs to explain to those struggling people who are demonstrating in one country after the next .
Why should they suffer while the EU system 's budget expenditure is completely unaffected by reality ?
This is the first EU budget that has been voted upon in accordance with the rules of the Treaty of Lisbon at the very first reading .
Although some sensitive points still remain for conciliation which deal with issues that I consider to be of the utmost importance , such as an allocation for cohesion and agriculture , I welcome this proposal .
The approved document restores the Commission 's initial proposal relating to the section on cohesion for growth and employment after the Council had reduced the amount allocated .
Although the amount for 2011 is already set out in the multiannual financial framework ( MFF ) with an upper limit of EUR 50.65 billion at current prices , it is worth noting that the rapporteur states that this heading will require a higher level of payments .
I also welcome the allocations in the competitiveness section for growth and employment , which includes provision for funding for most of Parliament 's proposals , such as those relating to small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) and programmes for young people , education and mobility .
I am voting in favour of this document , although it does not include the proposals made by the European People 's Party ( EPP ) on intervention measures on the storage of cereals , milk and dairy products and powdered milk , which were unfortunately rejected by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development ( AGRI ) .
Abstaining from voting is not a solution .
Those who are absent are always in the wrong .
I think that in the resolution as a whole , there are many more good measures than those which are of less value .
We need the European External Action Service .
It should begin its work as soon as possible , to increase Europe 's importance in the world .
The resolution which has been adopted says that all Member States will be represented in the service .
Now we have to take care that this does really happen .
This creates confidence in the process of establishing the External Action Service .
It should be remembered that it was on mutual trust that the European Union was built , and that Poland has greatly benefited from this .
I am going to be watching the process very carefully .
in writing . - I welcome the positive elements of the 2011 budget , which include funding for economic development in Wales , support for research and development , and overseas aid .
I recognise that extra expenditure resulting from the European External Action Service and new European supervisory authorities is required and is supported by all Member States , including the UK , in the Council .
However , I am concerned about expenditure in a number of areas that do not reflect value for money or have negative consequences for EU citizens and people in developing countries .
This includes EU funding for alcohol and tobacco production , which conflicts with the EU 's health objectives , and EU agricultural export subsidies , which harm developing countries , as well as increases in budget lines relating to expenses , travel , publications and other administrative costs .
In the current economic environment , it is more important than ever to justify expenditure on our priorities by tackling all wasteful and excessive spending in other sectors .
I did not feel able to oppose this budget .
During challenging economic times , voting against vital funding for a wide range of priorities would be counterproductive .
However , I also believe that some increases were not justified and therefore I took the decision to abstain .
The key points in the EU budget for 2011 are investment in training , research and innovation - a necessity given the current situation on the labour market .
The reduction in current unemployment in Europe needs to be at the heart of every decision - including when it comes to actually implementing the ambitious Europe 2020 targets .
Prioritising youth in connection with the training and mobility programmes is a very worthwhile investment , with good opportunities for development for the labour market .
There are some increases , but also cuts - the budget is a compromise , like every multi-party decision .
Redirecting money into nuclear research , however , cannot be in the interests of the people of Europe and this money would be better spent , for example , on renewable energy sources .
in writing . - The EPLP welcomes the positive elements in the Parliament 's first reading position , including funding for economic development in our regions , support for crucial research and development and increased overseas aid in line with the UK 's target to increase total overseas development assistance .
We also recognise that extra expenditure resulting from the European External Action Service and the new European supervisory authorities is essential to implement these important new activities , and is supported by all Member States , including the UK , in the Council .
However , we are deeply concerned about expenditure in a number of areas that do not reflect value for money or have negative consequences for EU citizens and people in developing countries .
This includes EU funding for alcohol and tobacco production , which conflicts with the EU 's health objectives , and EU agricultural export subsidies which harm developing countries , as well as increases in budget lines relating to expenses , travel , publications and other administrative costs .
In the current economic environment , it is more important than ever to justify expenditure on our priorities by tackling all wasteful and excessive spending in other sectors .
The EPLP voted against the final budget resolution at this stage , to send a clear message ahead of negotiations between the institutions .
I have great pleasure in congratulating the rapporteur , Mrs Jędrzejewska , on her excellently prepared report .
Today , for the first time , we have adopted an EU budget under the provision set out in the Treaty of Lisbon and , also for the first time , we have not exceeded the financial limits set out in the current financial perspective .
I believe that the solutions proposed by Mrs Jędrzejewska express a realistic and pragmatic approach at a difficult time of economic crisis .
I am also pleased to note that the budget adopted today strengthens Parliament 's priorities in financial terms .
The extension of maternity leave from 14 to 20 weeks should be considered a fundamental right .
This new period should not be seen as a threat , even taking into account the introduction of rights for fathers .
Its implications for the legislative framework of the different Member States are negligible , including their impact on the economy , when , for instance , we consider the possibility of creating temporary work vacancies at a European level which promote professional mobility , which can stimulate the sharing of best practice and the continuation of the professional duties of women on maternity leave .
The guarantee of a monthly salary of 100 % while on maternity leave , along with the extension of the period prohibiting dismissal from six months to a year should not be called into question , taking into account both the demographic concerns and the current economic climate .
Other simple yet significant measures are , for example , the possibility of flexible working hours in the period following maternity leave , preventive measures with regard to health and safety , and the extension of these rights to couples who adopt children , thus promoting a fairer legal framework .
Unfortunately , in Europe , the birth rate varies from country to country and often depends not only on the guarantee of rights being protected but also on the social services available to working mothers , such as nurseries , for example .
We still have a lot to do to reconcile working and family life .
The maternity protection system in force in Italy is , on the whole , in line with the new parameters proposed in the directive , not only with regard to the number of weeks of compulsory maternity leave , but also with regard to the payment of 100 % compensation to cover income during the period of absence .
It is significant that the directive clearly introduces paternity leave : an important objective to guarantee equality of rights between men and women and strengthen the responsibilities shared between parents .
I agree with extending the period of maternity leave to a minimum of 20 weeks with full pay , while providing , however , a certain flexibility to the states which already have provisions for this kind of leave .
Workers who take their maternity leave must receive their full salary , which is 100 % of their salary in the last month they worked or the average of their monthly salaries .
The amendments adopted will prevent pregnant women from being sacked from the start of their pregnancy up until six months after the end of their maternity leave .
Furthermore , women must have the right to return to their job or a job with the same remuneration , professional category and career path as they had prior to going on maternity leave
Extended maternity leave , improved working conditions ... women have been at the heart of the debate today in the European Parliament .
Eighteen years after the first directive on pregnant workers and workers who have recently given birth and / or are breastfeeding , the economic and demographic situation in Europe has certainly changed .
We have therefore voted today in plenary to amend the legislation in force on maternity leave , in order to encourage the employment of women while enabling them to have a family in the best possible conditions .
Enabling women to reconcile their family life with their professional life , but also fulfilling gender equality objectives : that is what we are protecting today for all European women .
The European Parliament has , by a majority , supported a fully paid 20-week period of maternity leave .
We shall therefore now have to negotiate with Member States to reach a compromise on this text .
If we had to give a title to the results of this initiative having found out the results of the vote , it would be Rebellion in the halls .
Before the vote , we were aware of the resistance among Members from the various groups to adopting the extension of maternity leave to 20 weeks , the need to pay people in that situation 100 % of their salary , extending the measures in the case of disabled children , and the inclusion of paternity leave .
All the signs were that these measures would not be adopted , but that was not the case .
The fact that many Members did not comply with their group 's voting lists made the miracle possible .
Today , Parliament has lived up to the expectations of the men and women of Europe .
This is also one more step forward along the road towards equality , which we are still a long way from achieving , but which we have to make a reality by working together as men and women .
I welcome the fact that following much anticipated discussions , today , the European Parliament approved this very important directive .
On the basis of this new directive , the length of maternity leave will be extended from 14 to 20 weeks on full pay .
Today , in order to solve as soon as possible the demographic problems we face due to the low birth rate and ageing society , we must share family commitments .
Therefore , it is very important that this directive should lay down the right for men to take at least two weeks paternity leave .
A child also has an undisputable right to bond with both parents .
This proposal will allow us to create a better balance within families and will improve integration in the labour market .
Parliament has shown that it can achieve the objectives laid down in the Europe 2020 strategy of enabling families to balance work and personal life better while striving for economic growth , welfare , competitiveness and gender equality .
I really hope that this directive adopted by Parliament will also be approved by Council as soon as possible .
The EU is currently facing demographic problems caused by the falling birth rate and rise in the number of elderly people .
Improving the provisions promoting a work-life balance is one of the ways which can be used to respond to this demographic decline .
Gender stereotypes obviously persist in society , which pose an obstacle preventing women from accessing jobs , especially high quality jobs .
Women are still regarded as being the principal carers of children and other dependants , which means that they are faced on many occasions with the need to choose between motherhood and a professional career .
Women are frequently seen as ' high risk ' , ' second class ' or ' unsuitable ' workers , given the strong likelihood of them getting pregnant and exercising the right to maternity leave .
It is therefore fundamentally important that the new forms of leave do not reflect or confirm current stereotypes in society .
Parents ' involvement in their children 's lives , from the very first months after they are born , is of paramount importance to the child 's healthy development from a physical , emotional and psychological perspective .
The birth rate in many Member States is still undoubtedly very low .
The institutions must therefore encourage births by means of an appropriate family support policy .
I voted in favour of Mrs Estrela 's report as it heads in this direction .
I consider it right , in fact , that we should harmonise maternity rights between Member States ( always taking into account first and foremost the health of the new mothers and their newborns ) in order to avoid discrepancies and a reduction in the competitiveness of States that adopted advanced measures to protect motherhood some time ago .
In this regard , I appreciate the proposal to extend maternity leave to 18 weeks in all EU countries , a practice which is already in force in several Member States : in Italy , for example , twenty-one and a half weeks ' leave are granted .
Lastly , I consider it essential to guarantee the right to resume the same job or be allocated an equivalent working position .
in writing . - I am against the concept of 20 weeks at full pay and voted against that particular amendment .
Nevertheless , I decided to vote in favour of the final text as amended because of the insertion of a clause that was negotiated by the PPE , allowing for a degree of flexibility during the last four weeks .
I have thus decided to support my political group in the attainment of this compromise .
I am pleased that the European Parliament has made progress on this matter since the debate on the demographic challenge for which I was the rapporteur in 2007 .
This vote proves that it is still possible these days to achieve new social acquis : with mobilisation and political action we can protect the achievements of past victories , but also obtain new rights .
Today , we have strengthened women 's rights , but also those of men , with this paternity leave .
The latter represents a real change in attitudes and , over the years , will contribute to improving the allocation of roles between parents .
in writing . - Regarding Amendment 9 : UKIP voted in favour of this amendment which merely stated that ' All parents have the right to care for their child ' .
UKIP by no means supports the legitimacy of this directive , as it should be for elected national governments to decide welfare and social policies .
However , the UK Government is far too cavalier in taking children into state care , so voting in favour of this recital will be a shot across their bow .
Regarding the proposal in general : UKIP do not accept the legitimacy of this directive as it should be for elected national governments to decide welfare and social policies .
This directive will bring unbelievable costs to employers and the government , which we can ill afford at this time .
This will also further the discrimination of women by making them even more costly to hire than they already are , especially for small businesses , which are the backbone of the UK economy .
UKIP is furthermore sympathetic to parents with disabled children and those choosing to adopt .
However , the EU has no right to create such rules on maternity and cannot be allowed the legitimacy to do so .
UKIP voted against this directive to ensure that legislation is accountable through the ballot box and not through Brussels bureaucrats .
I voted in favour of the report because it is very important for gender equality and to the defence of the rights of workers - men and women - in terms of maternity and paternity rights .
This is an important step forward in defending and promoting women 's rights and equality in general in the workplace , given that , according to the report , ' the vulnerability of pregnant workers and of workers who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding makes it necessary for them to be granted the right to maternity leave of at least 20 continuous weeks , allocated before and / or after confinement , and renders necessary the compulsory nature of maternity leave of at least six weeks allocated after confinement ' .
I also voted in favour of the report on the basis of an additional , very important element in it : the recognition of the father 's right to two weeks ' paternity leave .
in writing . - Regarding the proposal in general , UKIP do not accept the legitimacy of this directive as it should be for elected national governments to decide welfare and social policies .
This directive will bring unbelievable costs to employers and the government , which we can ill afford at this time .
This will also further the discrimination of women by making them even more costly to hire than they already are , especially for small businesses which are the backbone of the UK economy .
UKIP is furthermore sympathetic to parents with disabled children and those choosing to adopt .
However , the EU has no right to create such rules on maternity and cannot be allowed the legitimacy to do so .
UKIP voted against this directive to ensure that legislation is accountable through the ballot box and not through Brussels bureaucrats .
This proposal aims to improve the conditions of security and health associated with parenthood .
On this issue , I would argue that the asymmetries between men and women must be reduced , and that a balanced reconciliation of professional life with family and private life must be promoted .
This will be the only way to promote parenthood with shared responsibilities .
Starting from this presupposition , I agree with the rapporteur 's proposal and believe that extending maternity leave to 20 weeks , six of which must be after giving birth and which may be shared between the parents , would make it an appropriate period .
I also welcome the proposal included in the report that aims to guarantee payment of the full monthly wage during maternity leave , which is 100 % of the last monthly salary or the average monthly salary .
Finally , it would seem appropriate to me to apply the same measures in cases where a child younger than 12 years old is adopted , and to apply them to self-employed women .
I declare that I voted for this report for the reasons outlined above .
Gender equality is often a slogan , an empty statement of rights that is not always accompanied by the shouldering of responsibilities and solid arguments .
This draft directive , on the other hand , strikes a correct balance between the biological role of the woman and the rights owed to those who perform that role to the full .
With demographic matters that are coming more and more to resemble an emergency and an economy that demands higher and higher female employment rates , these measures are a common sense response .
Recognition of equality is complete when certain rights are also extended to fathers , allowing family undertakings to be shared in the most appropriate manner , and when flexibility of organisation is left up to each family .
I voted to improve the safety and health at work of pregnant workers out of respect for the principle of equal gender rights and non-discrimination based on gender , as well as to encourage women to become more involved in the labour market .
One of the upshots of this measure is to create a work-life balance for women .
In addition , women need this legislative support to protect their health and children .
Another important aspect of this measure , aimed at job security for women , is the ban on making them redundant during the period from the start of their pregnancy until at least six months after the end of their maternity leave .
A salary ceiling has also been set for the maternity leave period , which again is intended to meet social security needs .
Last but not least , one crucial argument in support of this vote is to increase the birth rate , which is a particularly serious problem facing EU Member States .
According to the statistics , the birth rate is falling in the EU .
This low birth rate , combined with an ageing population , will pose a real problem for us in the future in terms of paying for pensions and medical care charges in Europe .
Families , particularly women , should not be penalised if they want to have children .
Pregnant workers and workers who are breastfeeding must not carry out activities which , based on assessments , pose a risk of exposure to certain agents or particularly harmful working conditions that jeopardise the safety or health of these workers .
This is why I support the notion of implementing measures to encourage improvements in the safety and health of workers who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding .
These measures must not put women at a disadvantage in the labour market or be detrimental to the directives on equal treatment for women and men .
France is one of the countries of the Union with the highest birth rates .
This is due to a set of measures contained in an all-embracing family policy .
The resolution as it stands after the votes on the amendments does not bring about any real improvement .
On the contrary , it will throw everything into question because the budgetary burden of the measures cannot be borne at this time .
Those are the reasons that led me to withhold approval from the text , which is , incidentally , well meaning .
I broadly agree with the measures proposed in this report , as I believe that this issue is one of the major challenges that Europe will have to overcome in the coming decades : the ageing population .
This is the case in Portugal , for example , where I see it at close hand .
However , like other EU countries , the birth rate is not high enough to ensure that generations are replaced , and this harsh situation is jeopardising the future .
I believe that more flexible policies with regard to maternity and paternity leave can help to reverse these trends .
It is therefore vital to send families a consistent message of support for motherhood and fatherhood , with concrete measures for the better reconciliation of professional , private and family life .
Meeting this challenge is vital in order to achieve the economic and social objectives set out in the Europe 2020 strategy and as a way of trying to reverse demographic ageing on our continent .
In Portugal , too , maternity leave is already paid at 100 % of earnings for 120 days .
I would therefore argue that women 's salaries should be assured during maternity leave in the manner described in this report .
The vote for a legislative motion for a resolution amending Directive 92 / 85 / EEC was taken not only to support new and better measures for the safety and health at work of pregnant workers and workers who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding but also , more generally , to support new measures to promote a better work-life balance .
Even though the Italian legal system is more innovative , the increase in the number of weeks of maternity leave at European level represents a strong boost in favour of family assistance to newborn babies .
The support for paternity leave is also a step in the same direction even though making this compulsory is not perhaps the best way to pursue the laudable aim of ensuring the greater effective presence of both parents at the most demanding time for the new household and ensuring the father is more aware and involved .
Support for and extension of the rights of adopted children allows a reinforcement and , it is to be hoped , also a simplification of the adoption process .
Finally , with a view to striking a better work-life balance , I feel it is also important to have supported the call to Member States to strengthen childhood services with care facilities for children up to the age of compulsory schooling .
The vote on the Estrela report on the rights of pregnant women and young mothers at work will make it possible to harmonise the length and pay of maternity leave with a minimum level .
The European Parliament has chosen to have a strong position to negotiate with the Council and has therefore supported the principle of a 20-week period of leave paid at 100 % ( may I point out that in Sweden , maternity leave can be as long as 75 weeks , with 14 weeks exclusively for the mother , and the remaining can be shared with the father ) .
This is a strong gesture in favour of European parents and as a result , women and men will be helped in finding a better balance between family life and work life .
It is now up to European governments to look into the budgetary possibility for taking on such a change and accepting it .
In the end , it is likely that the minimum leave will be the one proposed by the European Commission and supported by the MODEM delegation , namely , an 18-week period of leave , which would be in line with recommendations from the International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) .
I believe that this vote , which has passed by a large majority , is a strong signal that is being sent to the Council : in addition to the extension of maternity leave from 14 to 20 weeks on full pay , we have voted in favour of the introduction of two weeks ' paternity leave .
It is our duty to ensure that no one will have to choose to give up children for work or work for children .
What is more , I welcome the fact that Parliament has voted for measures that will allow adoptive mothers to be treated equally in law with birth mothers .
This is a parliament that has , at last , given equal rights to adoptive mothers and biological mothers .
Adoptive parents are parents in the full sense of the word and deserve to be treated as such .
Legislation cannot continue to discriminate against this type of parenthood .
This is therefore a great day for the many families that are unable to reconcile their family life with their professional life .
Furthermore , the difficult economic conditions were no reason to decide to leave all those families that also make a significant contribution to our society in the lurch for more decades to come .
Extending the period of maternity leave to 20 weeks on full pay is a false friend .
Such a legislative measure will harm the employability of women in businesses , which will regard it as too great a burden to bear in the event of maternity .
It will , furthermore , compromise a woman 's return to work in exactly the same position as she held before going on leave .
Finally , opting for 100 % remuneration over a long period represents a cost for social security systems ( in a context in which the European institutions are calling strongly on States to reduce their budget deficits ) .
It is for these reasons that I have been unable to support this report , and why I consider that we should retain a sense of realism and allow Member States to keep a certain degree of flexibility on this matter .
Parliament has just voted at first reading for extending maternity leave to a minimum of 20 weeks all over Europe , paid at full salary , except for high earners , and the possibility for fathers to take at least two weeks ' leave following the birth of a child .
This is a victory for the proponents of a social Europe and a step towards more equality between men and women in Europe .
A section of the right used the future cost of these measures as an excuse to reject this progress .
Yet helping parents to reconcile family and work life will make it easier for parents to go back to work , will boost European birth rates and will safeguard the health of mothers and babies .
The left of Parliament , with Portuguese Socialist rapporteur Mrs Estrela , held strong , the European right was divided and the move towards progress won the day .
The battle must now be won at the Council , where several governments are threatening to block this directive .
Members of national parliaments should take this up and intervene with their government so that governments do not undo what the European Parliament is proposing for a Europe that protects its citizens ' rights .
in writing . - Whilst I support the rights of pregnant women , I cannot , in this current economic climate , support this report .
The impact assessment estimate for the UK , if maternity leave is extended to 20 weeks , is almost GBP 2.5 billion per year on average .
This would result in the cost of maternity leave in the UK doubling .
Evidence shows that women are currently benefiting considerably from the provisions already in force within the UK , 9 out of 10 women taking the 20 weeks maternity leave , as well as 3 in 4 women taking all their paid leave .
With such a high uptake , it is clear that more European red tape on top of the current legislation is unnecessary in the UK .
In addition , the proposed requirement for 20 weeks ' full pay would result in social regression . This is due to the fact that women on the highest salaries will receive the highest compensation .
I fully support the need for adequate , flexible maternity leave , but I believe it is for the elected UK Government to decide , with an input from parents and their employers , how much our own economy can afford to give and how a maternity package is to be delivered .
Working to achieve a society in which men and women are equal is a matter of principle that is extremely important - no one should be discriminated against on account of being a parent .
We should add that it is extremely important from a socio-economic perspective for women and men to be able to combine family and working life in order to achieve a high level of employment .
We therefore think it is regrettable that the report does not constitute a clear step forward for equality in Europe .
It reflects an outdated view of equality where the mother is to take the main responsibility for the children instead of both parents sharing the responsibility .
It is also wrong to propose , as the report does , that it be compulsory for mothers to be prohibited from working for six weeks after giving birth .
We have therefore chosen to vote in favour of those parts that we believe to be positive , such as the amendment that protects national systems that have more ambitious parental insurance , the increase in the minimum length of maternity leave and the inclusion of paternity leave in the directive .
However , we abstained from voting on the report as a whole , as we believe that it is too vague , ambiguous and outdated .
The main reason is the lack of a clear and unambiguous gender equality perspective .
We Swedish Social Democrats chose to support Mrs Estrela 's report on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Directive 92 / 85 / EEC on the introduction of measures to encourage improvements in the safety and health at work of pregnant workers and workers who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding .
We would have liked the directive to focus on parental leave rather than maternity leave .
We would also have liked it to be less detailed and more flexible - particularly as this is a minimum directive - for example , with regard to the level of remuneration and the time limit for the period immediately after confinement .
However , we believe that the report is important in terms of improving the current directive , which provides very limited possibilities for combining work and parenthood in many EU Member States .
With this decision , we now have a first bargaining offer , with regard to which the Council must adopt a position .
The Democratic and Social Centre - People 's Party ( CDS-PP ) has long seen the birth rate issue as a state priority and recognises that it is impossible to stimulate the birth rate without protecting parenting .
The chapters dedicated to the family and the birth rate are not a new inclusion in our programmes .
Likewise , our defence of the rights of mothers and fathers to raise a family without this being seen as an extra burden or a cause of work difficulties is nothing new .
Policies that support families and the birth rate , like those that we advocate , are , however , cross-sectional and are not confined to extending maternity leave .
Nonetheless , this is a measure that we applaud , having advocated an extension of parental leave to six months in our 2009 government programme .
That is why we would like to see the Socialist Party at our side in Parliament defending mothers and fathers .
This would be a very different position from the one that this party has taken in national politics , where it is cutting child benefit , the reimbursement of medicine costs for the chronically ill and income tax deductions for spending on education and health , and where it is drastically increasing the tax burden on the public , particularly lower income families with children .
The EU is facing a demographic challenge marked by low birth rates and an increasing proportion of elderly people .
The improvement of provisions to promote a balance between professional and family life helps to address this demographic decline .
In Portugal , the birth rate is not high enough to ensure that generations are replaced , and this situation is jeopardising the future .
I would therefore argue that in order to counter this trend , improved health and safety should be encouraged for workers who are pregnant , who have recently given birth , or who are breastfeeding , which calls for the promotion of a balanced reconciliation of professional life with private and family life .
I agree with the position of the rapporteur and with the changes introduced , such as the extension of the minimum period for maternity leave from 14 to 20 weeks , the principle of pay equivalent to complete earnings , the establishment of health and safety requirements in the workplace , and the prohibition of dismissal .
I also agree that , if adopted , the right to divide a period of parental leave between both members of the couple should be recognised .
The vote in favour of the report on improvements in the safety and health at work of pregnant workers , workers who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding , is the culmination of a long discussion process in the European Parliament , which was already left over from the last session and in which we have actively participated , contributing to the report 's adoption .
Although we are still in the first reading of the directive 's proposal , it is positive in the area of women 's rights because of the signal that it sends out , particularly to the countries that still do not have 20 weeks of maternity leave on full pay and that are still not applying two weeks of paternity leave , also with full pay .
The adoption of this proposal for negotiation with the Council acknowledges the fundamental social value of maternity and paternity , respecting the rights of working women who want to become mothers .
The adoption of this proposal also represents a victory over the most conservative positions that still exist within the European Parliament , meaning that the struggle to defend women 's rights , maternity and paternity rights , and the rights of children , will continue .
We hope that the Council will now accept the European Parliament 's position , which increases the Commission 's proposal from 18 to 20 weeks , and aims to amend the directive that is currently in force and which only sets aside 14 weeks for maternity leave .
I supported my colleague , Mrs Estrela 's , calls for an improvement in the health and safety at work of pregnant workers and workers who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding .
Woman is the future of man , wrote Louis Aragon .
Children are precious .
They must be protected .
So must their mothers .
By voting in favour of a 20-week minimum maternity leave ( it is currently 14 weeks ) with full pay , and by endorsing a compulsory two-week paternity leave in the European Union , the European Parliament has moved in the direction of undeniable social progress .
Having said that , I voted for extending maternity leave to 18 weeks rather than 20 weeks .
Indeed it seems to me that a 20-week period , although an extremely generous proposal , is liable to backfire on women and be used as an additional argument to not recruit them or to complicate their return to work .
Moreover , I regret that the provision that planned the possibility of extending maternity leave in the event of complication ( premature birth , disability , etc . ) was rejected .
I regret the outcome of this vote .
We all share the desire to enable new mothers to form a strong bond with their babies during the period of convalescence after giving birth .
However , I am deeply concerned about the economic impact of such a measure , which will cost our country EUR 1.5 billion .

During this time of economic crisis , it is not demagogy that will pay the bill .
Businesses will not be able to pay it , Member States ' budgets even less so .
Such measures could penalise certain careers or put a brake on the employment of young women .
Perpetuating a traditional system in which the father brings home the pay and the woman looks after the children , as some would like , is a step backwards .
Freedom of choice is also a right for women .
The negotiations that will now begin between the 27 Member States in the Council will be difficult .
I did not wish to support this report insofar as an increase from 14 to 20 weeks on full pay would have catastrophic financial consequences for several Member States .
The OECD study shows that there will be very substantial costs for the social budgets of Member States .
For France , the annual amount is EUR 1.3 billion , and for the United Kingdom GBP 2.4 billion .
In the current economic situation , increases in these budgets cannot be absorbed .
What is more , businesses would have to bear these additional costs , which is impossible .
However , supporting women during maternity is essential .
Applying these measures poses a very great risk to the employment of women .
The OECD study also shows that extending maternity leave would result in a decrease in female employment .
In wishing to help women , there is a risk of penalising them in the job market .
I wish to help women in their employment and to support them during maternity .
The increase from 14 to 18 weeks proposed by the Commission was a real step forward .
Another advance would have been to have progressive measures concerning childcare methods .
I voted for the Estrela report and I am glad that Parliament has taken such a progressive position towards mothers , future mothers and fathers .
The extension of maternity leave to 20 weeks is undeniable social progress , which embodies the social Europe that we earnestly desire .
This text improves the balance between family life and work life .
The introduction of a compulsory two-week paternity leave is also a big step forward in the change in attitudes and in the division of roles between parents .
The argument of additional costs that this measure would incur would be valid if women did not already supplement their maternity leave with sick leave and / or paid leave .
Businesses and social protection systems are already paying these costs .
in writing . - I am proud to have voted for the extension of maternity rights and condemn Conservative and Liberal Democrat MEPs who first conspired to obstruct parliamentary agreement of this directive and today voted to deny decent rights to working women .
I want to record the fact that I wished to vote for a different compromise on the length of the period for maternity pay but respect that this option fell because a majority in Parliament supported 20 weeks .
I recognise there will be a further negotiation on this point before the directive is finally agreed , and that it was vital for this Parliament finally to agree a text to enable the process to move forward .
I fully agree with my British Labour colleagues who seek to protect low paid women in particular and , in this respect , call on the British Government to fully respect the non-regression clause in the directive .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) has pointed out that many of the proposals ( amendments ) put forward exceed the scope and purpose of the directive .
I do agree with them but , in deciding how to vote , I have made an exception this time .
The position of women in the EU in terms of employment , wage levels , exposure to poverty ... is significantly weaker than that of men .
I believe that equal opportunities are one of the basic principles underpinning the work of the EU and , for that reason , I will be using every opportunity to make the positions of women and men equal .
Today 's vote is not a final one , but it will give us a strong negotiating position in the Council .
Extending the period of maternity leave to 20 weeks with full pay for this duration are measures which restore the dignity of mothers .
This is why I voted unreservedly for the proposal in the report , in the confidence that Member States will heed our decision and incorporate it into their national legislations .
Apart from supporting mothers , this report also recommends states to introduce fully paid parental leave , thereby recognising the role of both parents in bringing up children .
We have sent out an important message with our vote today , which calls for a decent living , extending beyond ideological limits and national social systems .
I did not wish to support this report because extending the period of maternity leave from 14 weeks ( as provided by the current directive ) to 20 weeks on full pay would have a considerable financial impact on Member States ( EUR 1.3 billion for France ) at a time of economic crisis that is hardly favourable to budgetary growth .

Second , the additional costs for businesses in Member States where the latter partly finance maternity leave ( for example , Germany ) would be very high .
Third , the negative consequences for the employability of women are real , not least when it comes to returning to the job market .
Finally , the European Parliament , in adopting measures that are not financially practicable and which could even be counterproductive in terms of women 's participation in the job market , is damaging its credibility in the European decision-making process .
Extending maternity leave to 18 weeks , as proposed by the Commission , would have been an important step in improving the situation of women , by avoiding the pitfalls in the text as finally adopted by the European Parliament , when what is really important is to enable women to reconcile their professional life with their family life .
In the face of an ageing population and the difficulties with which the European economy is dealing , we have to use all opportunities available to us to encourage women to have children and to make it easy for them to return to work .
Many women are eminent specialists in their fields , and Europe 's economy cannot do without the services of this highly qualified workforce .
The situation is similar with women living and working in the countryside .
Often , they are not given maternity leave in the full meaning of the word , but have to return to work as soon as possible .
This obviously puts both their health and their child in jeopardy .
That is why they should have the same privileges as women working outside agriculture .
I expressed a different opinion in the votes on the question of leave .
I prefer the Commission 's proposal of 18 weeks .
The proposal is realistic and balanced in relation to market conditions , not only because of the economic crisis , but also because of the demands and professional obligations and ambitions of working women themselves .
Women should not be over-protected beings shunned by the labour market .
Moreover , as I have consistently argued , efforts to reconcile family life with work and raising children basically require social infrastructures and corporate social responsibility throughout a woman 's working life .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted against the Estrela report because extending maternity leave to 20 weeks is , in reality , a good idea only at first sight .
Indeed , this extension is portrayed as granting more rights to women , whereas in my opinion , it would have negative repercussions for women trying to access the labour market .
It is to be feared that this proposal , if it were to be implemented , could backfire on women and would , as a result , make them less employable .
Contrary to what the rapporteur and those who support this text are claiming , there is no obvious connection between birth rates and the length of maternity leave .
What is more , the proposal to extend from 14 to 20 weeks with full pay is not a financially acceptable position for many countries .
Indeed , the extra costs incurred by this extension can be afforded neither by businesses nor by Member States .
The initial proposal by the European Commission , namely the increase from 14 to 18 weeks , was a big enough step forward .
I would like to underline that on Mrs Estrela 's report , I voted in favour of the rules on 20 weeks ' maternity leave , protecting women from unfair dismissal six months after returning to work and in favour of full pay and protection of women while breastfeeding , but in this case , without specific recommendations , as I believe that these rules should stay within the competence of the Member States .
In the case of multiple births , I believe that leave should be extended correspondingly .
I am always in support of any ideas that will help women have a safe maternity experience and guarantee them better conditions for returning to the job market .
The delegation of the Dutch People 's Party for Freedom and Democracy ( VVD ) to the European Parliament has today voted against the proposal for a directive extending ( paid ) maternity leave to 20 weeks .
We are of the opinion that the previously established minimum of 14 weeks is sufficient .
Women who find that they are still unable to return to work at the end of their maternity leave can take leave under the provisions of their countries ' Sick Leave Act .
This proposal would entail an extension of social security , which is a matter that Member States should be able to decide on themselves , certainly in times such as these , when all the Member States have to economise .
There are other , less rigorous ways in which measures allowing a better balance between work and private life could be put in place .
The proposal carries the risk that young , talented women might be left with fewer opportunities in the labour market , because employers will not want to run the risk of having to pay many months ' maternity leave to their female employees .
Nor does an increase in birth numbers in the EU , which is the desired solution to the problem of an ageing population , have to be regulated at EU level .
As far as the VVD is concerned , EU rules to regulate exemption from work for breastfeeding purposes are superfluous .
The VVD Group in the European Parliament : Hans van Baalen , Jan Mulder and Toine Manders
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report .
As all EU citizens have the right to live and work throughout the EU , it is vital we afford women a minimum entitlement to maternity leave wherever they are working at the time of having a baby .
Decent maternity leave is part of a wider issue of female participation in the labour market and tackling the financial implications of an ageing society .
The EU goal is for 75 % labour participation by 2020 , and a crucial element of this will be giving all mothers the ability to take maternity leave which they can afford and then return to work .
In an ageing society , where the demand for social care is increasing and the number of people providing the care is decreasing , more realistic leave such as maternity leave is needed .
Women should not feel that having children is incompatible with their work - our policies need to enable care for younger and older persons .
The implementation of this will not come into force for at least 5 years .
Furthermore , with an increase of just 1.04 % of women 's participation in the labour market , the additional costs of extending maternity leave would be covered .
in writing . - ( IT ) One of the priorities laid down in the EU 's social agenda is the need to promote policies to facilitate a work-life balance , aimed at women and men alike .
A better work-life balance is also one of the six priority areas of action set out in the 2006-2010 ' Road map for equality between women and men ' .
Improving these provisions is therefore an integral part of European policy in response to the dwindling population recorded of late .
Motherhood and fatherhood are certainly inalienable fundamental rights for the purposes of social balance .
It is therefore to be hoped that the review of the directive in question will be to the advantage both of working women and men who wish to take responsibility for their families .
We cannot separate respect for a better balance between the principle of protecting health and safety from that of equality of treatment .
These and other aspects persuade me to support the need , however , to leave Member States plenty of room for flexibility in establishing rules on leave when necessary .
This is only for reasons of economic sustainability , in order to cover the additional costs arising .
The report adopted proposes maternity leave of 20 weeks without any loss of earnings .
This measure alone could mean a big social improvement in women 's lives in about two thirds of EU countries .
This is the case in Portugal , where women are only entitled to 16 weeks fully paid .
The inclusion of two weeks of paternity leave is also an important step in the struggle for equality between men and women .
More importantly , this report has been approved even though it goes against the measures that have recently been adopted as a result of austerity policies which favour cuts in public spending and the reduction of social rights .
I therefore hope that this report can contribute to the strengthening of work and social rights across the EU and in all the Member States .
The unanimous view within the EU is that one of its main problems is low population growth due to low birth rates .
Anything that can contribute to changing this situation is therefore important .
The protection of pregnant and breastfeeding mothers in the workplace and the reduction of imbalances between men and women are important steps in that direction .
In spite of the crisis that we are currently experiencing , the measures approved here today are very important in reversing the decreasing population trend that the EU is facing in the near future .
I voted in favour of the European Parliament legislative resolution on ' the introduction of measures to encourage improvements in the safety and health at work of pregnant workers and workers who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding ' , because I believe that improving women 's rights in the workplace is a real step towards gender equality in an area in which , unfortunately , many barriers exist .
The discrimination suffered by women in the labour market is very worrying because , in most cases , it is they who must take charge of domestic duties and juggle them with their professional employment .
This situation is exacerbated in the months before and after childbirth , requiring greater protection in order to prevent the discrimination women currently suffer .
It is my understanding that the increase to a continuous period of maternity leave of at least 20 weeks allocated before and / or after confinement , with a compulsory minimum of six weeks after childbirth , is a step forward in terms of a woman 's right to reconcile family and professional life .
Extending the period of maternity leave is an important project in terms of the place that is given to babies and parenthood in our society .
I support the proposal to grant 18 weeks of maternity leave and also the principle of paternity leave .
We must avoid the adverse effects of measures that are too generous and risk bringing about discrimination in employment .
I am , moreover , a supporter of more freedom of choice for pregnant women or women who have recently given birth .
They must be able to decide when they wish to take the non-compulsory part of their maternity leave .
That should help them to achieve a better work-life balance and to remain employable .
It is equally important to create a proper status for women who wish to return to work after taking a career break .
I should also like to draw attention to the fact that the right to parental leave and the guarantee of the same job to come back to must be workable for employers , in particular , in small and medium-sized enterprises , or else they may well hesitate to hire or promote women of child-bearing age .
In view of the far-reaching demographic changes and the ageing of European society , the European Union must actively adopt measures to support parenthood .
The extension of the minimum time period of maternity leave will , in my opinion , make provision for the fact that the first months of a child 's life are crucial for his / her healthy growth and mental balance .
Therefore , I support the payment of salary in full for the duration of the maternity leave .
This should have a positive effect on women so that they may become mothers without worrying about the risks of poverty and social exclusion .
The right to return to the same work position or an equal position with equal working conditions after birth must be guaranteed .
Moreover , the possibility to apply for a change of working hours or working arrangements must be granted , as well as the possibility to refuse overtime work shortly after giving birth .
I am opposed to the project of extending maternity leave to 20 weeks with full pay .
The adoption of this scheme would have major consequences on the budgets of the Member States and businesses ; for France , the additional annual cost would be EUR 1.3 billion , an unbearable financial burden at a time of budgetary cuts .
Although it is a nice idea , the consequences on women 's employment could be negative .
We would not want this measure to mean a step backwards for women .
Women returning to work following their pregnancy and young women seeking work run the risk of being heavily penalised by this measure .
In contrast , the proposal for a maximum of 18 weeks was still socially fair .
I am calling for innovative ideas to be implemented as quickly as possible with regard to childcare and work-family balance , in order to enable mothers as well as fathers to play their role of parents fully .
My decision to vote in favour of this proposal arises out of the need to improve the safety and health at work of pregnant workers and workers who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding .
The amendment to the directive is , in fact , aimed at promoting gender equality in the world of work , promoting a better balance between women 's working and private lives .
Women are frequently perceived to be ' at risk ' or ' second choice ' individuals given their high probability of becoming pregnant or taking maternity leave .
It is important to support certain forms of leave to combat certain prejudices and stereotypes .
We must not , however , forget that motherhood and fatherhood are essential rights if we are to ensure the possibility of achieving a work-life balance .
There are clearly certain points connected with some amendments on which I have voiced a contrary opinion .
I believe , in fact , that European law must establish a general framework that offers minimum guarantees and safeguards within which Member States can be left room to decide on the most suitable measures at their own discretion .
There are , in fact , differences linked to culture , to welfare and to social security systems that must be taken into due consideration , and also by virtue of respect for the principle of subsidiarity .
I voted in favour of the report on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Directive 92 / 85 / EEC on the introduction of measures to encourage improvements in the safety and health at work of pregnant workers and workers who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding .
Two important factors determined my vote on certain amendments : firstly , the vital importance of guaranteeing the safety and health of young or future mothers and , secondly , the fact that Greece has specific legislation to protect pregnant women .
I voted in favour of the proposals on the introduction of measures to encourage improvements in the safety and health at work of pregnant workers and workers who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding , which include 20 weeks maternity leave and two weeks paternity leave , both without any reduction in earnings .
These are social measures that fit with the Europe that we want , with the aim of supporting the birth rate , the family , the health of babies , and parents ' jobs .
However , this is a project that is difficult to carry out , and it may , perversely , exacerbate discrimination against women in the world of work because : ( 1 ) it puts extra pressure on social security systems , which , in many cases , are already only just sustainable ; and ( 2 ) it introduces new constraints on the labour market , which already no longer meets the needs of the current workforce .
I am afraid , therefore , that these measures to support working parents may lead to increased levels of unemployment and / or precarious work among young mothers .
Parliament 's negotiations with the Council have to be realistic and pragmatic , and also ambitious , if the future law , when it comes into force , is to really fulfil and promote the values of the proposal that was voted upon in plenary this week .
With my vote , I call for a new global approach that will make it possible to send a powerful message to companies to the effect that human reproduction concerns men as well as women .
The framework agreement on parental leave is an important aspect of the equal opportunities policy that promotes the reconciliation of working life and private and family life , but limits itself to setting minimum requirements and may therefore only be considered a first step .
I agree with the communication that considers children 's rights to be a priority of the Union and calls on Member States to observe the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child and its optional protocols as well as the Millennium Development Goals .
As far as this directive is concerned , this means guaranteeing all children the possibility of receiving care appropriate to their developmental needs as well as access to appropriate , high quality healthcare .
Today , the European Parliament has made an investment in the European Union 's future by promoting motherhood through extending the period of maternity leave to 20 weeks , with full pay .
This can be described as both a quantitative and qualitative improvement .
The simplistic argument of short-term economic benefits did not stand up , with the sustainability of European society prevailing , which is impossible to achieve without healthy demographics and therefore , by extension , without greater protection for mothers and their children .
I drafted the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs and I voted in favour of : motherhood not being penalised and full pay being given ; pregnant workers not being sacked during a period from the start of their pregnancy until six months after the end of their maternity leave ; mothers being entitled to return to their job or an ' equivalent position ' , which means with the same remuneration , professional category and career path as they had prior to going on maternity leave ; going on maternity leave not affecting their pension scheme ; female workers not being obliged to work at night or overtime during the 10 weeks prior to the date they are due to give birth and for the remainder of the pregnancy if this is required for the health of the mother or foetus , and during the whole period of breastfeeding .
I voted against this resolution because I believe that maternity pay is a matter which must be decided at national level , based on the principle of subsidiarity .
Furthermore , I think that , at a time of crisis , adopting this measure may have the totally opposite effect , as it will act as a factor dissuading companies which want to employ women .
I support improving the European minimum standard for maternity protection .
However , in the end , I voted against this report , as I come from a country that has established a particular combination of maternity protection and waged / unwaged parental leave .
Alongside 16 weeks of leave on full pay and an absolute ban on working , women also have the right to unwaged maternity leave with child benefit .
The amount of child benefit drawn during unwaged maternity leave depends on its duration and the most recent level of income .
The Austrian rules go far beyond the minimum standards stipulated in this report .
Moreover , I am also in favour of introducing fully paid paternity leave , although a different legal basis should be chosen for this .
I believe that such paternity leave should not be regulated by the directive on maternity protection , but should instead be regulated by a dedicated directive that is not aimed at the protection of the health of mothers and children .
I voted in favour of maternity leave lasting 20 weeks .
Longer periods of maternity leave are important for the development and welfare of children , who represent society 's best form of capital .
In Finland , there is a viable system for maternity and parental leave .
A system like ours is not , however , available to everyone in Europe .
For this reason , it is important to ensure that women do not have to suffer financially if they decide to have children .
Businesses alone should not be saddled with the financial burden of maternity leave : the public sector must unquestionably share the costs .
Small and mediumsized enterprises , in particular , are at risk of facing difficulties .
Neither should the female dominated sectors have to bow to excessive economic pressure .
The position of women regarding pay is alarming .
It must not be made any weaker .
It is vitally important to see that that does not happen .
Finally , Parliament has done a little justice for working mothers in the European Union , although it is not all the justice that they deserve .
It has been a long process .
At the end of the last parliamentary term , we were on the verge of adopting a text in Parliament that would have meant a giant leap forward for the rights of working mothers .
We could not vote because the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) ( PPE Group ) and the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe ( ALDE Group ) joined forces against it and decided to return the report to the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality .




After months of work , today , we once again voted on a text which , although not as ambitious as the one previously rejected by the PPE and ALDE Groups , is quite brave : it allows mothers to maintain their salary during maternity leave ; it increases their legal protection against redundancy ; it allows greater flexibility in terms of working hours in order to better balance motherhood with work ; it extends maternity leave to at least 20 weeks ( although some of us would have liked it to be 24 weeks , as the World Health Organisation recommends ) ; it facilitates the mobility of working mothers within the EU and it makes progress on joint responsibility for fathers , although not as much as some of us would have liked .
Today 's vote encourages workers who wish to become mothers , marking an important step forward toward greater protection that will help millions of European women to reconcile the role of mother with that of worker more effectively .
Economic interests have not helped : now we are embarking on a path that goes towards meeting the needs of new families .
The outcome of the vote looks toward a society that places growth , training and education at the centre of political action .
I believe that fears that extending maternity leave on full pay from 14 to 20 weeks will penalise women are unfounded : it is our specific duty to protect the weakest workers , allowing them the right to stay at home with their children .
Today 's victory in Parliament also represents a personal satisfaction due to the efforts I have personally made with the aim of ensuring that no breastfeeding workers have to carry out heavy or dangerous duties , exempting them from overtime and night work .
Now we pass the baton to the Member States and I hope they will commit themselves to it to the full .
With today 's decision , the European Parliament has shown that it no longer wants women who are on the horns of a dilemma but women who are free and aware of their role in our society .
In an ageing Europe , policies favourable to women who choose to have children are essential .
With legislation as fragmentary as it is today , there are too many differences between Member States in supporting motherhood , which prevent many women from being able to become mothers .
This directive establishes a minimum period of maternity leave of 20 weeks , of which at least six will be on full pay .
It is obvious that in countries such as Italy , this law is superfluous because the period on full pay is much longer than the minimum period laid down by the directive , and the periods when women can be absent from work to look after their children extend up to eight years of age .
In other countries , however , this finally means laying the basis for guaranteeing dignity to mothers .
The proposal also envisages that fathers may have two weeks of paid leave so that they can be with their wives during the period immediately following birth .
in writing . - Today , I voted to support improved rights and a better work-life balance for working parents .
Of special importance in this report are the provisions for women who are breastfeeding at work .
Breaks for breastfeeding allow mothers the time they need to provide the best and most natural form of nutrition for their developing child .
Nutrition is a key determinant of health throughout life .
I am pleased that this report is favourable to those mothers who have gone back to work and still choose to breastfeed their child and provide them with the nutritional benefits .
We believe that well-developed statutory parental leave is of the utmost importance for every country .
In the final vote , however , we did not want to vote in favour of Parliament 's legislative proposal because it went against several principles that are very important to us .
Firstly , the proposal wants to introduce a mandatory six weeks ' leave just for the mother .
We believe that parents themselves should be able to choose how they take their parental leave and that this proposal would be a step in the wrong direction for gender equality in Sweden .
Secondly , we do not believe that it is reasonable to set the level of remuneration for parental leave at full pay .
As far as Sweden is concerned , this could force a reduction in the length of parental insurance in order to finance such a costly system .
We are of the opinion that the organisation of social security systems is a matter for the national parliaments .
in writing . - The EPLP wholly supports the need to increase protection for women who are pregnant , have recently given birth or are breastfeeding , and therefore voted in favour of a number of the directive 's key proposals .
These include the extension of maternity leave to 20 weeks , full payment for mothers for the first compulsory six weeks after childbirth , and two weeks fully paid paternity leave .
However , the EPLP is concerned that the proposals adopted by Parliament could have unintended consequences in countries which already employ a more complex set of maternity provisions .
In particular , we are concerned that the proposals could allow a regressive government to cut its maternity provision so that the lowest paid working women could actually lose out over the period of their maternity leave .
While some aspects of this report will form an invaluable improvement in Member States with very low levels of maternity provision , these amendments may lead to social regression in other countries .
Today , the European Parliament has adopted a report to ensure the health of pregnant mothers and those on maternity leave .
By adopting a common position in this form , we are sending out a clear signal that we support changes to improve European standards for the protection of young mothers .
Women are guaranteed a minimum duration of maternity leave , which will henceforth be on full pay .
By preventing unfair dismissal , we have also increased protection for the jobs of women returning to work after their maternity leave .
The changes the directive introduces are a step in the right direction , guaranteeing women in Europe a minimum entitlement to maternity leave .
I am also pleased that fathers will be encouraged to care for their children by introducing a two-week paternity leave .
The vote on Mrs Estrela 's report is vitally important .
The position adopted is purely demagogic and irresponsible .
By demanding 20 weeks of maternity leave , we are discrediting the European Parliament .
We are the citizens ' voice ; to adopt such unrealistic positions would not do justice to them .
Very significant costs for the social budgets of Member States would be incurred : as regards France , for instance , the amount would be EUR 1.3 billion .

The current economic situation does not allow us to absorb this kind of increase within state budgets , not to mention the consequences for our companies who will have to bear part of these additional costs .
We need to support and encourage women to better reconcile maternity and work , not scupper their chances of finding a job .
The increase from 14 to 18 weeks proposed by the Commission was a real step forward ; a step that could have been built on by giving some thought to new childcare options .
The message conveyed by this text carries huge responsibility : maternity would clearly become a barrier to personal development in the workplace .
I welcome the adoption of this report on the proposal for a directive on the introduction of measures to encourage improvements in the safety and health of pregnant workers and workers who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding , and of measures aimed at helping workers to achieve a work-life balance .
We have made maternity leave longer and better paid , and we have , for the first time in European history , introduced paternity leave .
This vote will stand out in the history of the fundamental rights of European mothers and fathers .
To all those who wanted to sacrifice social rights on the altar of the economic crisis , I tell them to go and get the money where it is and not to penalise citizens further .
An improved maternity leave and the introduction of paternity leave ; these are also fights for a more human society , whilst the family is increasingly becoming the final safeguard against the upheavals of life .
in writing . - I voted in favour of a legislative proposal guaranteeing enhanced and extended paternity / maternity pay in Parliament today .
I did so after lobbying from supporters and opponents .
I am well aware of the financial conditions in the UK , which will be further worsened by recent budget announcements of more spending cuts .
Nevertheless , the European Parliament was in favour of 20 weeks ' maternity leave at full salary , and 2 weeks ' paternity leave , and I believe that this is a sensible investment in the economy , helping reach the EU target of 75 % labour participation by 2020 .
It improves the health of babies and protects the health and welfare of mothers .
It is a step to close the existing gender pay gap .
On average , in the EU , women earn 17 % less than men .
If we do not guarantee decent wages during maternity leave , women are punished in their earnings for having children .
It is also a positive encouragement to increase fathers ' involvement in caring for children .
Apart from death and taxes , birth is the only certainty in life .
Our children are the future and the improvements voted through today will provide a better and more secure start to their lives .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we need to get more men and women into work , and ensure they stay in work , if we are to preserve our prosperity and be in a position to afford to pay out pensions .
In addition , at a time of stiff international competition and budgetary stringency , we must therefore have the courage to take measures which invest in families and which take some of the pressure off the task of juggling work and family .
Extending maternity leave is one of the means to that end .
For this reason , I support an extension to maternity leave .
However , at a time of budgetary difficulties , we have to be realistic .
A twenty-week maternity leave period on full pay is not a feasible solution for our social security systems and government budgets .
On those grounds , I have abstained from the final vote , even though I support an extension to maternity leave .
On the other hand , I do support the Commission 's original proposal for an extension of maternity leave to 18 weeks , provided the current capped compensation scheme is enforced .
I hope this proposal will stand a better chance in the second parliamentary reading .
I voted for the report on the proposal for a directive on the introduction of measures to encourage improvements in the safety and health at work of pregnant workers and workers who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding .
I believe that it is of paramount importance for workers on maternity leave to be paid their full salary and that the maternity allowance should be 100 % of their last monthly salary or average salary , if the monthly salary is lower than this .
This means that women will not be penalised for the period of maternity leave they have taken when it comes to their retirement pension .
Given the demographic trends in the EU , the birth rate needs a boost by means of specific legislation and measures aimed at contributing to a better balance between professional , private and family life .
In order to help workers achieve their work-life balance , it is vital for longer periods of maternity and paternity leave to be provided , including for the adoption of children under the age of 12 months .
Setting the statutory period of maternity leave to 20 weeks is in line with the recommendation made by the World Health Organisation on 16 April 2002 on a global strategy on infant and young child feeding .
I voted against this report as it fails to stringently observe the principle of subsidiarity and interferes with national payment arrangements and the obligations of the Member States .
Furthermore , it also contains elements such as abortion and the freedom to reproduce for which I am unable to share in the responsibility on religious grounds .
Ladies and gentlemen , women must not be punished because they have decided to have a family .
It is not simply an ethical question , but also a strategic one - the EU is currently experiencing demographic changes due to the low birth rate and greater numbers of elderly people .
During these difficult times in particular , we must not frighten women away from the labour market .
We need more working women if the EU wants to increase its competitiveness globally .
The time has come to combat stereotypes that have taken root in society .
Working women are often perceived to be ' high risk ' or ' second rate ' workers .
It is essential , therefore , that the new leave arrangements presented in this report should help break these stereotypes .
We should also offer more help to women who have been abandoned by society .
EU statistics show that in Lithuania , single mothers face the greatest risk of poverty .
The risk of poverty for working people in this group is 24 % .
It was a long road until the EU legally guaranteed gender equality .
However , we must achieve even more and turn theoretical gender equality into real , tangible gender equality , which is applied in everyday life .
I have voted in favour of the Estrela report because I do not want there to be any misunderstanding about the following : it goes without saying that women have particular needs during and immediately after pregnancy , that it is very much in the interests of society as a whole that these needs are met and that society , therefore , must also bear a great deal of the responsibility for this .
However , I would ask some questions of principle .
First of all , is it really reasonable for us to impose , from our European ivory towers here , mandatory rules which would apply throughout the whole Union , including in Member States which , in economic terms , still have a long way to go ?
Who is going to foot the bill for that ?
That brings me to my second fundamental comment : is it reasonable to impose the burden , so to speak , of these measures exclusively on the shoulders of employers ?
Will this ultimately not lead to a situation which is the precise opposite of that intended ; that is , there will be fewer jobs available for young women , because employers will simply not be inclined to bear all on their own the consequences they risk entailing should their young female workers get pregnant ?
It is all very well to vote ' socially ' in this House , but we are not the ones who have to carry the burden of social voting .
The directive on maternity leave has finally been adopted today , 20 October , by the European Parliament .
I voted for this text , which represents genuine progress for women .
The directive has yet to be accepted by the Council .
The text passed today aims to confer on women in the European Union the right to 20 weeks ' maternity leave , which is four weeks more than in France , where women currently have the right to 16 weeks ' maternity leave .
The text we have adopted also provides a right to 20 days ' paternity leave ( more than the 11 days granted at the moment in France ) .
The directive also provides that women must receive the whole of their salary during their leave : a significant signal in the current crisis situation .
Moreover , the text includes a social non-regression clause , which means that where the law in Member States is more generous on certain points , it will continue to apply .
This is certainly a case of progress therefore , and I welcome it .
I voted in favour of this report , as there is a wide disparity in many countries as regards the payment terms to businesses when the state , small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) , and large companies are involved .
We are well aware that in the current economic crisis , and with its increased difficulties , companies are increasingly struggling with liquidity problems , and that in many Member States , they are even exposed to an increased risk of bankruptcy .
The directive which attempted to regulate this matter had a limited effect , and the proposal that we have now adopted represents an important step in setting and meeting deadlines for payment , not only in relations between the companies and public bodies , but also in the relationships that companies establish with one another .
We will now have legislation that offers us greater effectiveness in meeting payment deadlines , with a clear system of penalties for late payment , and that also represents an effective improvement in counteracting the frequent abuse by the state and large companies of their dominant position over the SMEs .
This directive must now be implemented quickly by the Member States , so that the serious problems caused by the establishment of long payment terms and the dragging out of payments are finally resolved .
Fulfilling contractual obligations in commercial transactions by both public and private administrations is not merely a question of civic duty , but also of taking responsibility for a set of negative conditions that could afflict creditor companies , particularly SMEs .
Being able to count on prompt payment means guaranteeing these enterprises stability , growth , job creation and investments .
Unfortunately , according to European Commission data , late payments represent a frequent occurrence in Europe and damage competitiveness .
Public authorities are particularly to blame for creating difficulties , often due to incorrect management of their budgets and cash flow or as a result of too much red tape in their administrative machinery .
Sometimes , a decision is also made to work on the basis of new expenditure structures , without taking into account undertakings made previously , which should be honoured within the contractually agreed terms .
I therefore consider it our duty to adopt measures that make up for the shortcomings in the previous Directive 2000 / 35 / EC , seeking in this way to discourage the phenomenon of late payment by adopting measures that induce debtors not to pay late and other measures that allow creditors to exercise their rights fully and effectively in the event of late payment .
I voted in favour of this timely report and for the establishment of a 30-day target period for paying bills .
SMEs are a cornerstone of the European economy ; these smaller enterprises constitute 99.8 % of all EU enterprises , and they create 70 % of all employment in the EU .
The measures for tackling late payments contained in the report are practical measures for supporting SMEs and for ensuring that smaller companies do not lose out because of unpaid bills .
The new rules could create better conditions for investment and should enable SMEs to focus on innovation and development .
In addition , I welcome what the report says about ensuring that new measures do not increase the existing level of bureaucracy and that no extra bureaucracy or administrative problems are created for SMEs .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted for this report and am pleased that the European Parliament and the Council managed to reach this agreement , which is very important , particularly for small enterprise .
While small and medium-sized enterprises are the foundation for European Union competitiveness and the largest creator of jobs , the crisis has shown very clearly that , at the same time , the owners of small and medium-sized enterprises are the most vulnerable , and the policy pursued by the Member States is not especially favourable to promoting and developing them , because EU legislation , such as the Small Business Act , is not being fully implemented and applied .
Many companies went bankrupt during the crisis and this is a huge loss .
I am therefore very pleased with this step which , although small , is of great significance to small business , providing clarity on payment periods .
We will begin to really create an environment that is clear and understandable to small enterprises and will help to establish a business culture .
With the adoption of the new directive against late payments , a measure that represents tangible support to companies , and particularly small and medium-sized enterprises , the European Parliament is making a decisive contribution for the benefit of citizens and the European production system .
The recast directive in fact lays down categorical payment terms and appropriate penalties to encourage prompt payments within the Union by both public authorities and private companies .
According to estimates , this measure should put back approximately EUR 180 billion into circulation in the economy : this is the actual sum owed by public authorities to the enterprise system in the Union .
The late payment problem is particularly keenly felt in Italy , where public authorities take 128 days on average to make payments as opposed to a European average of 67 days .
The negative effects of late payments in commercial transactions are therefore considerable .
I hope that this directive is implemented as quickly as possible by national governments in order to remove one of the greatest obstacles to development in the European internal market .
At last , we have got here , after months of postponement : we have voted on the report that is a real breath of fresh air for the future of our companies .
Late payments represent a phenomenon which , especially in Italy , has brought tens of thousands of companies to their knees , costing the Italian economic system in the region of EUR 30 billion , according to calculations by professional associations .
Leaving aside specific considerations and national situations , I am voting in favour of the report , which sets out black and white rules once and for all for both public and private operators .
The economic crisis has already caused dramatic numbers of bankruptcies and closures of plants , companies and the cessation of business activities .
Through this measure , Europe can really give a hand to many small businesses that are permanently strangled by bank loans due to the crisis and may already be sailing through stormy waters due to unpaid receivables that are late in arriving .
When this directive is applied , at least we will avoid many cases where companies are forced out of business due to debt caused by other public or private operators .
In an unstable economic climate , late payments can have an extremely adverse impact on small and medium-sized enterprises which need money to pay their employees and suppliers .
The new regulations on late payments in commercial transactions , which Parliament and the Council agreed on , on 5 October , should facilitate and speed up the process for companies to recover the money they are due .
It is small and medium-sized enterprises which keep the economy going , even during a crisis .
This is the case in every European economy .
The European Parliament has ensured that all parties will be on an equal footing and that the rules will apply to all , which will benefit many European SMEs .
Thanks to this agreement , SMEs will stop operating as banks for public enterprises or large companies .
Along with the European Parliament 's recommendation for SMEs to be charged VAT only after invoices have been paid , setting a definite deadline for paying invoices will help those who are worried about their survival at a time when markets are in decline .
I voted in favour of the report because I feel it is of fundamental importance to deploy all possible actions with the aim of strengthening the competitiveness of SMEs .
Furthermore , combating late payment in commercial transactions , which represents an unacceptable abuse , must be pushed forward , particularly at a time of economic recession such as the one we are experiencing .
The negative effects of late payment are considerable , representing considerable costs for creditor companies , reducing cash flows and the possibility of investment , and impacting on the competitiveness of SMEs .
This directive rightly includes measures to discourage debtors from paying late , measures that allow creditors to exercise their rights , and also identifies specific and precise rules such as default notices , compensation for recovery costs and the 30-day deadline , unless particular derogations apply , for the payment of debts .
These put public authorities under an obligation and discourage them from forms of behaviour that could have negative impacts on SMEs , compromising the credibility of policies adopted .
Fast payments are also a necessary and preliminary condition for investment , growth and job creation .
I also declare myself satisfied with the solution found regarding payment deadlines and I am pleased that the proposal by the Socialists and Democrats allowing a longer timescale for public health services , where complex budgetary procedures result in longer payment deadlines , has been taken up .
Furthermore , if contractual freedom between private businesses is respected , a substantial safeguard is introduced by prohibiting excessive payment deadlines towards creditors , who are often SMEs .
I abstained in the vote on the report because it reinforces the Commission 's efforts to put pressure on debtor states , by proposing strict measures at a time when their public finances are in poor shape .
The pressure for debts to be settled immediately , with the threat of serious monetary penalties in the form of interest , mainly serves the interests of the businesses taking advantage of the crisis to seek cutbacks in social protection and a freeze on or cuts to workers ' wages .
The argument that this will help small and medium-sized enterprises does not stand up because , with the figures quoted in the regulation , the enterprises in question are not small and medium-sized enterprises .
This sort of action would be warranted if preceded by bold support for the real economy of wage-earners and action to promote social and economic cohesion .
I support the need to reinforce Directive 2000 / 35 / EC and identify instruments necessary to eliminate or reduce late payments in commercial transactions .
My focus is on the SMEs that represent an essential part of the European market in creating wealth and jobs .
This political choice by the European Commission is a step in the right direction , with the aim of making the business climate more favourable for SMEs .
With regard to the deterrent 8 % interest rate , I am somewhat concerned about the results from certain regions of my country and other European states that are really struggling to respect the new rules .
I hope that this new approach can be a real opportunity for change .
Now we must concentrate on monitoring implementation of the directive within internal legal systems , with the involvement of regional and local authorities , to ensure that this is carried out everywhere in a standard manner .
I hope that the entry into force of the directive on combating late payment in commercial transactions will benefit most the European Union 's small and medium-sized enterprises , which will therefore be afforded more protection and be provided with resources to increase investments and create new jobs .
At the same time , I hope that the directive will facilitate the development of debt-collecting mechanisms , as late payments from public authorities cause imbalances in the operation of small and medium-sized enterprises and , by extension , of the market too .
Late payments in commercial transactions between undertakings , and between undertakings and public authorities , are one of the things currently hampering the recovery of economic growth .
Approval of the new directive on combating late payment in commercial transactions represents a major innovation that will require appropriate preparation , above all , of the public sector , in both political and administrative terms .
In political terms , so that financial and budgetary planning can take account not only of the impact of European Union rules on the Stability and Growth Pact , but now also of the impact of the new rules on late payments , which , if not satisfactorily managed , could have both a direct and reflex effect on the room for manoeuvre of governments at various levels .
In administrative terms , appropriate preparation is required for the correct financial management of public bodies , beginning with the ratio between liabilities and expenditure , so that tax revenues and , hence , the people , are not weighed down by burdens such as interest payments which could have a significant effect on public finances .
Finally , it seems important for there to be particular awareness and flexibility regarding several sectors , such as the health sector , in which the public authorities have run up significantly late payments owed to undertakings , for regular goods and services provided .
in writing . - In the current economic climate , it is hard enough for small and medium businesses to survive without the added burden of late payments in commercial transactions .
Therefore , any mechanism that helps to protect these businesses from the added costs and financial implications surrounding late payment should be welcomed .
However , I believe it is up to the British Government to regulate on this issue , not the European Union , to ensure firms and government bodies live up to their payment obligations .
This report , while with merit , does require further clarification on certain aspects and therefore I have chosen to abstain on this vote at this time .
I voted for the report on combating late payment in commercial transactions because it will enable the adoption of harmonised measures , which could be particularly important to the performance of companies - small and medium-sized enterprises , in particular - in the current situation of economic crisis .
However , I consider guaranteeing a system of abolitions for the health sector to be positive .
Delayed payments are a problem with extremely serious consequences for the health of the global economy and a particularly devastating impact on small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) .
The effects of this are even more pernicious in the current period of economic and financial crisis .
The bad example given by public administration is unacceptable , as is happening to a particularly severe degree in Portugal .
Measures are needed to rein in late payment in commercial transactions so as to protect the good health of the European economy , avoiding situations where production structures are financially stifled and there is overcharging on financing products , thus increasing dependence on the banking sector .
I would like to highlight the particular case of agricultural producers , who often see settlements that are owed to them delayed by supermarkets and distributors .
The maximum period of 30 days - which may be waived to up to 60 days - for payment after services have been rendered and billed is quite reasonable for the balance of commercial relations , and it will be key to fostering a culture of timely fulfilment of commitments .
in writing . - The adoption of the Weiler report today marks an important shift in the threshold of the payment dimension in business relations .
Currently , it is common practice - and , more worryingly , an accepted practice - for public authorities to pressurise SMEs to sign off agreements allowing the delayed payment of bills .
Malta is a case in point .
Numerous SMEs , which account for over 70 % of employment in the private sector , have encountered serious cash flow difficulties due to delayed payments from undertakings , especially from public authorities , including the government .
In a number of Member States , the 60 day capping on public authorities will serve as an important protective clause for SMEs and citizens .
However , for this provision to be truly effective , there must be correct transposition and implementation of the directive in each Member State coupled with stringent monitoring on the part of the Commission .
It is only then that this new rule can be truly translated into tangible benefits for citizens and SMEs in particular .
Payment terms in business transactions are a priority issue for the proper functioning of the European economies .
Unfortunately , there are considerable disparities between Member States when it comes to complying with terms of payment , and this makes it necessary to verify carefully Directive 2000 / 35 / EC of 8 August 2002 , which is currently in force .
Lack of discipline in transactions is a particular threat to small and medium-sized enterprises in countries which have been hit by the economic crisis .
Late payment frequently causes difficulties both on the internal market and in cross-border trade .
For this reason , I support the rapporteur 's proposal to tighten up legislation , introduce instruments to protect enterprises and introduce mandatory compensation to enforce the late payment of invoices and interest .
I welcome the decision of the report to stand firmly on the side of small and medium-sized enterprises .
Late payment is a massive economic problem in commercial transactions within the EU .
In the agricultural sector , too , it is a serious matter if liquidity problems are shifted on to agricultural undertakings .
Clearly defined payment deadlines will put a stop to these methods .
I support the 30-day payment deadline as standard proposed in the report and also the introduction of a general upper limit of 60 days .
I find it incomprehensible that , in many Member States , payments of public money in connection with transactions with public administrations are delayed .
Late payments seriously impair the business environment and the internal market and have a direct effect on the Member States .
The flat-rate compensation that has been called for , which is to be paid from the first day on which the payment becomes late , represents a tangible method of preventing this .
I voted in favour of Mrs Weiler 's report because I believe it is essential to safeguard the creditors of public administrations , which largely consist of small and medium-sized enterprises .

This measure will allow approximately EUR 180 billion of liquid funds to be put back into circulation : this is the amount of the overall debt owed by public administrations to businesses throughout the EU .
This is a truly important step because enterprises will be granted the automatic right to demand the payment of overdue interest and also obtain a fixed minimum amount of EUR 40 as compensation for the costs of recovering the debt .
Enterprises will also , in any case , be able to demand reimbursement of all reasonable costs incurred for this purpose .
I believe that this initiative will serve as a spur to Member States to draw up prompt payment codes .
They may , in fact , maintain or introduce laws and regulations containing provisions that are more favourable to creditors than those established by the directive .
Among the many proposals contained in the Small Business Act , the one regarding amendment of Directive 2000 / 35 / EC was among the most urgent , in my opinion .
Late payments have become a routine practice for public authorities in many countries ( and this certainly includes Italy ) .
If the European average is 180 days from the due date , we can only imagine the extremes of lateness in some cases and the consequences for those who manage small and medium-sized enterprises .
The paradox is that a State demands prompt payment of duties and taxes , handing out penalties and applying interest from the first day of lateness , but ignores its own commitments when it is the debtor .
The amendment we are voting for is very important , above all , at this time of severe economic difficulty , but it will not be enough on its own to resolve the problem .
If individual Member States do not amend their procedures for recovering debts from public authorities in order to make them shorter and more effective , the approved provisions will be ineffective .
The late payment of commercial transactions , whether between companies or between companies and public entities , is responsible for cash flow problems in small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) , and , in turn , often contributes to further delays in payment , thus starting a vicious cycle that is difficult to counteract .
We are sure that the implementation of the new rules proposed here will represent an important step towards ending this situation and thus help companies to face this period of economic and financial crisis .
The proposed penalties are proportionate and necessary , and it is hoped that they will discourage the improper commercial practices that have been adopted by commercial operators .
It was essential that the resolution on the Late Payment Directive be accepted , and that is why I voted for the resolution .
The debate this morning also revealed that the effects of the crisis , which , in the recent past , did not spare our Member States , either , are still closely felt .
We need to make numerous changes in view of the smooth operation of the internal market .
As part of these changes , the report rightly recommends the transition to a culture of timely payment .
This will make it possible for payment delays to incur consequences which will make them disadvantageous .
According to the impact assessment preceding the review , the authorities of several Member States are known for poor payment practices .
I sincerely hope that today 's decision will be able to change that as well .
Finally , making life easier for SMEs can be at the forefront of our concerns in this regard as well .
The proposed alternative dispute resolution mechanisms can offer a solution , as can making public the practices of Member States .
Making the most of the opportunities offered via the European e-Justice portal can help creditors and enterprises operate with fewer worries .
I welcome the Commission 's proposal tackling the problem of late payments which is becoming a serious issue , particularly in cross-border commercial transactions , because it violates legal security .
In order for the consequences of late payment to be such as to discourage it , it is necessary that fast-acting procedures for the recovery of undisputed outstanding debt related to late payment be introduced within the establishment of a culture of prompt payment .
The amending proposal , aimed at the enforcement of payment of such claims against an enterprise or a public authority via a broadly accessible on-line procedure , will be a positive step towards the simplified and speedier recovery of this kind of outstanding debt .
It will be beneficial primarily to small and medium-sized enterprises which suffer most from late payment and laborious recovery procedures .
Outstanding debts represent a considerable financial risk , especially for small and medium-sized enterprises .
A lack of a payment moral , especially in times of crisis , can severely restrict liquidity .
There is certainly a benefit to be gained from measures that lead to a greater consciousness about payment .
I have abstained because I am not convinced that it makes sense to regulate this at the pan-European level or that doing so would have a positive influence on the payment moral .
The report tackles the problem of late payment , a problem that destabilises the market and , above all , damages small and medium-sized enterprises , for which I have a particular regard .
My vote in favour of the report should be seen as a hope for the birth of a new commercial culture which is more prone to timely payment , and in which late payment is considered as an unacceptable abuse of the client 's position and a breach of contract , and not as a normal practice .
I voted for this legislation because I believe that better handled payment arrangements are beneficial to small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) and business culture in general .
I believe that one of the provisions put forward in this document is particularly progressive : the call to publish lists of reporting entities quickly .
These measures would not only encourage companies ( particularly SMEs ) to pay one another on time , thus reducing the risks of liquidity problems , but would also increase the credibility and , in turn , the competitiveness of such companies .
I voted in favour of Mrs Weiler 's report , inasmuch as I believe that it is essential to establish a maximum ceiling under which enterprises must be paid ..
This need is even more pressing and essential at these times of crisis .
Small and medium-sized enterprises , together with entrepreneurs , play a significant role in all our economies and are key generators of employment and income and drivers of innovation and growth .
Unfortunately , all too often recently , we have seen situations of companies that are owed several millions by public authorities but are unfortunately forced to close down or declare bankruptcy due precisely to these late payments .
I therefore hope that at the implementation stage , other factors are also considered , establishing a loosening of stability pact ties for public authorities and , at the same time , a gradual reduction in payment terms .
This would bring both requirements together and the entire system of the country would benefit .
I hope that the directive is quickly transposed by the Member States so that it may be applied as soon as possible .
It is a duty on the part of we law makers and a right owed to creditor companies .
Late payments can result in financial difficulties , and even bankruptcy for some businesses , especially SMEs : according to the European Commission , late payments cost the European economy around EUR 180 billion every year .
Other studies talk about EUR 300 billion per year , an amount equivalent to the Greek public debt .
In the current economic climate , I am glad that the Council and Parliament have been able to agree from the start on an ambitious review of European legislation in this area .
The European Parliament 's contribution was substantial in this matter .
We were successful in making sure the final text is inspired by the many improvements voted for in the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , in particular : higher legal interest rates payable in case of delay ; for business to business transactions , a default 30-day rule and an extension to 60 days which can be prolonged under certain conditions ; for public institutions , a maximum of 60 days ; greater flexibility for public health institutions and for public medical and social institutions ; and finally , a simplification of the compensation for recovery costs ( a flat rate of EUR 40 ) .
I would like to congratulate Mrs Weiler on her outstanding work .
The European Parliament has given the green light to new laws to limit late payment by public authorities to their suppliers , the majority of which are small and medium-sized enterprises .
Parliament has provided that public authorities must be bound to pay for services or goods acquired within 30 days .
If they do not do this , they must pay interest on late payment at a rate of 8 % .
The principle of paying for work on time is a fundamental principle of correct behaviour but is also of crucial importance in determining the solidity of an enterprise , its available funds and its access to credit and finance .
This new directive , which will now be implemented in national legal systems within 24 months of its adoption , will therefore benefit the entire European economy .
in writing . - Given that late payment is a phenomenon with numerous and interlinked causes , it can only be combated with a wide range of complementary measures .
Parliament therefore considers that a purely legalistic approach with the aim of improving remedies for late payment is necessary , but not sufficient .
The Commission 's ' hard ' approach with a focus on harsh sanctions and disincentives must be broadened to include ' soft ' measures with a focus on providing positive incentives to combat late payment .
In addition , practical measures , such as the use of electronic invoices , should be encouraged in parallel with the implementation of the directive .
Italy is the country where enterprises suffer most due to late payment by public authorities , with an average period for payment to suppliers of 180 days as opposed to the European average of 67 days .
This leads to financial problems , a drastic reduction in investment opportunities and a loss of competitiveness , particularly for SMEs .
The directive we have voted for today discourages debtors from paying late and allows creditors to protect their interests effectively against such lateness , introducing the right to legal interest caused by late payment even when not specified in the contract .
It also forces public authorities to pay within a maximum of 60 days from the payment request , provided the service has been performed satisfactorily .
The adoption of this directive is truly a great help for our enterprises : nowadays , one company in four closes down as a result of problems of insufficient financial liquidity .
These new rules on payments will mean that companies will regain their market competitiveness and no jobs will be lost .
By adopting with a resounding majority the report by my colleague , Barbara Weiler , on the proposal for a directive on late payments , the European Parliament has introduced balanced and clear rules which promote solvency , innovation and jobs .
Small businesses and public hospitals will benefit from the measures that we are proposing .
The former will no longer be faced with financial issues following late payments and the latter will be able to benefit from an extended payment period of 60 days because of their special status , with funding coming from reimbursements in accordance with social security systems .
Moreover , the agreement that we should get with the Council will allow a speedy entry into force of the directive and transposition by Member States as early as January 2011 .
I welcome the effectiveness of this vote .
Over recent years , late payments have become an increasingly important burden in the financial management of businesses .
They represent a serious and dangerous problem that drags down the quality of the tender system , seriously undermining the survival of small businesses and contributing to the European economy 's loss of competitiveness .
The statistics are alarming , above all , with regard to Italy , where the average payment is made at 186 days , peaking at 800 days in regional government with regard to the health sector .
It is a real disgrace , which has very often forced many SMEs to close .
Through this report , we are taking a great step forward by setting 60 days as the limit for payments from the public sector to the private sector .
Of course , the adoption of this legislation will not solve the problem as if by magic , but it definitely represents a starting point to set off a virtuous cycle , above all , with regard to dealings with public authorities .
The efficiency and immediacy of public authorities in paying invoices is an important step that will also have benefits for the European economy .
I hope that the Member States , above all Italy , transpose the legislation very quickly .
This report has made a significant contribution to resolving the problem of late payments in commercial transactions between companies or between companies and public entities .
The initiative is aiming for greater liquidity among the European Union 's companies through harmonisation .
The struggle against late payments is particularly welcome in the current period of crisis , since long delays have negative repercussions on companies ' activities .
The measure aims to contribute to the smooth operation of the internal market by urgently reforming the deadline required and the penalties to apply where it is not respected .
In this context , I welcome the legislative proposal , whose stipulation of a general deadline of 30 days for paying for transactions between companies and between companies and public entities - with the latter able to benefit from 60 days in exceptional cases - garnered widespread support in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , of which I am a member .
I also view positively the establishment of an interest rate to be applied , where payment is late , based on the European Central Bank 's reference rate plus 8 % .
In my opinion , this measure equates to a strong boost for the economic activity of small and medium-sized enterprises , which often see their economic performance seriously damaged because of bureaucratic obstacles .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have just voted on the revised directive on combating late payments in commercial transactions .
I have thrown the full weight of my support behind this agreement .
Excessively long payment periods and , indeed , late payments , are a threat to healthy company management , they affect competitiveness and profitability and could ultimately jeopardise the company 's continued existence .
As the current directive does not appear to be effective enough in discouraging late payments , I also support the strengthening of the existing rules .
As far as maximum payment periods are concerned , we will be putting in place additional guarantees for companies because , in principle , payments have to be made within 30 days .
This is of particular importance for payments between companies and government bodies .
After all , from now on , Member States and governments will themselves have to lead by example .
This is a question of credibility , that is , a question of European institutions in future being required to comply with the same legal deadlines as everybody else .
The fact that the directive clearly stipulates that any contractual deviation from standard payment terms will only be possible for objective and fair reasons will be an important factor in its enforcement .
To conclude , I hope that the fixed compensation in respect of recovery costs will force late payers onto the straight and narrow path and , better still , keep them there .
That would be good for our companies and good for jobs .
I voted in favour of Mrs Weiler 's report on combating late payment in commercial transactions .
Business activities are greatly hindered by debts or late payments that often represent the reason why otherwise solvent enterprises fail due to a kind of domino effect .
Late payments represent a frequent event in Europe that is damaging to enterprises , particularly small enterprises .
Furthermore , in most Member States , public authorities customarily pay late in situations of financial difficulty .
A need has therefore emerged to strengthen existing legal measures by undertaking to combat late payment to support companies , particularly SMEs , and establish exact terms and appropriate penalties for those who are in breach .
I voted in favour of this report , as poverty is a very serious problem which affects 85 million of our fellow Europeans , so no one should remain indifferent to it .
It needs to be at the forefront of our priorities , and it merits a collective response which ensures that those who find themselves in a situation of social vulnerability have a modicum of dignity .
Poverty affects our young people and our elderly , but also , increasingly , our workers .
6 million jobs have been lost in the last two years alone , along with a worsening in the low level and instability of workers ' wages , even if they manage to stay in their jobs .
We need a systemic approach that addresses and resolves the causes of the problems , nipping incipient problems in the bud .
However , at the same time , we cannot currently provide immediate and urgent responses to their consequences .
In view of this , ensuring that those who are vulnerable in our society receive a minimum income for living and are given immediate responses to enable them to get out of this situation is not only a necessity , but also a requirement that we should endorse , and one that must be achieved within a framework of responsibility and exigency .
The EU has shown its commitment to combating poverty in Europe within the framework of initiatives promoted for 2010 , the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion , and with regard to achieving the United Nations Millennium Development Goals .
Considering the severity of the economic and social crisis and its impact on the increase in poverty and social exclusion , some vulnerable population groups such as women , children , old people and young people have experienced the negative effects of the situation more keenly .
In this situation , even though a minimum income may constitute an appropriate system for protecting such categories , it does not take into account the principle of subsidiarity and , therefore , the fact that this subject is the responsibility of individual Member States .
Because inequalities exist between wages and social levels in Europe , it is difficult to establish a minimum common income threshold .
I believe that it would instead be useful to encourage individual Member States to improve policy responses to combating poverty , promoting active inclusion , an adequate income , access to quality services and a fair redistribution of wealth .
Above all , however , Member States should be encouraged to make better use of the Structural Funds at their disposal .
The international community has confirmed its commitment to combating poverty on several occasions .
Such a global approach is required because poverty is not confined to the underdeveloped countries in sub-Saharan Africa or Asia , but to 17 % of the EU population as well .
I believe that last month 's UN summit marks an important development , leading to the adoption of a specific action plan for achieving the Millennium Development Goals .
The EU , for its part , has suggested a 25 % reduction in the number of people living in poverty by 2020 and an allocation of 0.7 % of gross national income to development aid .
Moreover , the European Parliament is encouraging , by adopting this report , the active inclusion of disadvantaged groups and providing effective economic and social cohesion .
I would like to mention the large contribution made by Romania to the UN programmes for combating poverty , amounting to EUR 250 million .
As development aid must be reciprocal , my country will continue to observe its commitments .
However , I think that more attention must be focused on groups at a high risk of poverty , such as the rural population or the Roma ethnic minority .
The aim of this initiative is for various measures to be adopted at European level to eliminate poverty and social exclusion .
The economic crisis has exacerbated the situation of many Europeans .
Unemployment has risen and , under these circumstances , the situation of the most vulnerable people , such as women , children , young people and the elderly , is more precarious .
This is why we need to adopt measures at European and national level , and minimum incomes are a good tool for ensuring that those who need them can live in dignity .
The ultimate objective , however , is full integration into the labour market , which is what enables genuine social cohesion .
In this respect , I hope that we will be able to ensure that economic development is accompanied by social development and , in particular , to influence the development of the social economy .
I also hope that we will be able to fulfil the objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy of reducing the number of people at risk of poverty by 20 million .
I voted for this report because , despite all the statements on combating poverty , European citizens continue to live in poverty , social inequalities have increased and the number of poor workers is also increasing .
The European Union must take more active measures to combat poverty and social exclusion , paying particular attention to people in precarious employment , the unemployed , families , elderly people , women , single mothers , disadvantaged children and people who are ill or who are able-bodied to varying degrees .
Minimum income is one of the basic measures for combating poverty , helping to lift these people out of poverty and ensure their right to have a decent living .
I would like to draw attention to the fact that minimum income will only achieve its objective in combating poverty if the Member States take concrete actions to guarantee minimum income and implement national programmes for combating poverty .
Furthermore , in some Member States , minimum income schemes do not meet the relative poverty threshold .
Therefore , the European Commission should address good and bad practices in the evaluation of national action plans .
Hence , minimum income - the main element of social protection - is undoubtedly important in ensuring the protection of people facing poverty and their equal opportunities in society .
Almost 300 000 families in Romania receive a guaranteed minimum income from the state , under a law which has already been in force since 2001 , and for which a fiscal effort of almost EUR 300 million is made available .
Against the backdrop of the current economic crisis , whose impact is especially being felt by citizens from those countries less developed economically , the recommendation made by the European Parliament for a minimum income scheme to be introduced in all Member States provides an obvious solution .
Although no one can argue against the need for such a guaranteed minimum income scheme , it may obviously be open to abuse .
A good timeframe and control framework for the scheme are required because there is a risk of this scheme encouraging people not to work .
Precisely to ensure that this does not happen , it is recommended that anyone receiving this income is also able to provide some hours of work for the benefit of the community .
As of the end of 2008 , 85 million people were living below the poverty line throughout the EU .
These figures highlight the need for support , especially when we are talking about young or elderly people .
The economic crisis has made poverty considerably worse .
Over 85 000 people are currently living below the poverty line in the European Union .
In the context of the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion , I welcome the political commitment taken by the European Parliament to ensure economic and social cohesion that is strong and effective .
The Figueiredo report points out that introducing a minimum income at national level is one of the most effective ways of tackling poverty .
However , I am against having a minimum income at European Union level .
Such a measure would be demagogic and totally ill-suited in the current situation .
The Structural Funds , too , play an essential role in tackling social exclusion .
The European Social Fund , in particular , is a strong European investment designed to make the labour market more accessible to those experiencing difficulties .
It should remain a strong instrument of the cohesion policy during the 2014-2020 period .
I voted in favour of this extremely good report , because it insists on the need to take specific measures to eliminate poverty and social exclusion , by promoting a fair redistribution of income and wealth , thereby guaranteeing an adequate income and giving real meaning to the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion .
It calls on the Member States to ' take a fresh look ' at policies to guarantee an adequate income , knowing that decent and viable jobs need to be created in order to combat poverty .
It considers that social objectives should form an integral part of the crisis exit strategy and that job creation must be a priority for the European Commission and the Member State governments , as the first step towards reducing poverty .
It considers that adequate minimum income schemes must set minimum incomes at a level equivalent to at least 60 % of median income in the Member State concerned .
It also stresses the importance of the existence of unemployment benefit that guarantees a decent standard of living , and also the need to reduce the length of absences from work , inter alia , by making state employment services more efficient .
It also stresses the need to adopt rules on insurance , so as to establish a link between the minimum pension paid and the corresponding poverty threshold .
We , the Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament ( Dan Jørgensen , Christel Schaldemose , Britta Thomsen and Ole Christensen ) , have voted in favour of the own-initiative report on the role of minimum income in combating poverty and promoting an inclusive society in Europe .
We believe that all EU Member States should adopt poverty targets and introduce minimum income schemes .
At the same time , we believe that these targets and schemes should be adapted to the circumstances of the individual Member States .
We believe that there are many ways to assess poverty and it ought to be up to each individual Member State to find the best way to do this and to construct a minimum income scheme that is tailored to that Member State .
The current economic crisis has had an enormous impact on increasing unemployment , on unchecked impoverishment , and on the social exclusion of people all over Europe .

Poverty and social exclusion have attained unacceptable levels : almost 80 million Europeans are living below the poverty line , 19 million of whom are children - the equivalent of almost two in 10 children - and many others are facing serious obstacles in terms of access to jobs , education , housing , and social and financial services .
Unemployment has also reached unprecedented levels in all the Member States , with a European average of 21.4 % in which one in five young people is unemployed .
This situation is unacceptable and we need to do everything in our power to help resolve the tragedy that these people are living .
To this end , 2010 has been designated the European year for combating this scourge with the purpose of strengthening the EU 's political commitment and taking measures that have a decisive impact on eradicating poverty .
I agree that there needs to be a minimum wage in every Member State , accompanied by a social reintegration strategy and access to the labour market .
Economic and social cohesion is a fundamental prerequisite of any common policy , in Europe as in smaller contexts .
Where there are differing interests , objectives will also diverge and it will be impossible to plan anything shared .
Raising the living standards of those living beneath the poverty threshold is a priority .
Public resources put to use in this context are , without doubt a medium-term investment since , if they are well distributed , they trigger instances of growth which feed themselves .
Transferring fixed sums of money is always an uncertain business , if they are not part of a wider programme of incentives .
Two situations require a different approach .
The first situation , relating to social welfare , is where a worker is unable to earn enough to lead a dignified life due to physical or mental disabilities , or other related reasons .
The second situation , relating to legal and economic issues , involves the rigidity of the labour market , which does not adequately equate productivity and salaries , or which does not allow you to work as much you would like or in proportion to how much you want to earn in order to lead a decent life .
In these two situations , the public sector can and must intervene , leaving an incentive to hard work to be created in the others - and never the other way around .
Approximately one fifth of the EU population lives below the poverty line , with increased rates of poverty among children , young people and the elderly .
The proportion of poor employees is growing hand in hand with the proliferation of precarious , low paid jobs .
In 10 Member States , the material deprivation rate affects at least a quarter of the population , with the proportion exceeding half of the population in the case of Romania and Bulgaria .
All these factors add up to the EU facing a poverty problem exacerbated not only by the recession , but also by the anti-social policies implemented by right-wing governments .
The minimum income can guarantee social protection for broad groups of the population who are now living in poverty .
This minimum income has an absolutely paramount role to play in preventing tragic situations caused by poverty and in halting social exclusion .
In order to combat poverty effectively , there is also a need to improve the quality of jobs and salaries , introduce the right to an income , as well as the wherewithal to provide social welfare benefits , pensions and allowances .
2010 is the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion , continuing the campaign for an inclusive society , adopted by the Treaty of Lisbon .
This provides another reason for me to vote in favour of this campaign .
I believe that action needs to be taken at both European and national level to protect consumers against unfair terms for repaying loans and credit cards and to establish terms for accessing loans which will prevent households from getting into excessive debt and , consequently , from facing poverty and social exclusion .
In Europe , 20 Member States have got national legislation which sets a minimum wage and differences between countries can be very substantial .
Thus , the minimum wage in Luxembourg is approximately EUR 1 682 , whereas in Bulgaria , it is only EUR 123 .
That is why the European Parliament has reiterated its call for a European minimum income .
This minimum income could be one of the solutions to explore to prevent millions of Europeans from sliding into poverty .
We feel it is important to point out that guaranteeing a minimum income should naturally be accompanied by an overall social strategy including access to basic services such as healthcare , access to accommodation , education , lifelong learning , and this for all ages and in a way that is suited to each country .
MEPs have highlighted that the real aim of minimum income schemes should not only be to assist but also to support beneficiaries so as to enable them to move from a situation of social exclusion to a working life .
My support for this report highlights the importance of solidarity within our European societies , particularly in this European Year for Combating Poverty .
Certain Member States , such as France , have played a pioneering role by creating a ' minimum guaranteed income ' 20 years ago .
However , experience has taught us that this system can generate adverse effects and , for example , encourage idleness in some .
That is why the Union must consider measures which , like the French revenu de solidarité active , or earned income supplement , create a sense of responsibility in recipients and encourage them to seek employment , which is the first real element of social inclusion .
I have always called for , and I already included this in my election programme for the 2009 European elections , the introduction of a minimum income equivalent to 60 % of the average income for each citizen of the Union .
Today , however , this House has unfortunately voted against this legislative proposal at Community level .
In this European year 2010 for combating poverty , I am convinced that a framework directive on minimum income could have served as a reference text for national policies and legislation .
I believe this was the most effective way to reduce poverty and to bring 20 million people out of poverty by 2020 .
As a reminder , 80 million people are living below the poverty line in Europe .
I think that the risk of poverty exacerbation in Europe must be avoided at all costs as it can have an extremely adverse structural impact in the long term , from both a social and economic perspective .
I voted for this report because I believe that a reasonable minimum income must be guaranteed to ensure a decent level of social protection , in particular , for the most vulnerable groups of people who have been hit hard by the austerity policies implemented by European governments during the current economic and financial crisis .
Without being insensitive to the severe consequences of the current crisis on the public , as it is creating or exacerbating a situation of poverty for many Europeans , I do not agree with the statist view that aims to solve this problem with more social benefits , as in the case of a minimum income that is fixed at a European level .
More social benefits require more money from the state , and as this does not create wealth , it can only be achieved by increasing tax revenue .
This means more taxes on everyone , making everyone poorer and more dependent on the leech-like state itself .
The fight against poverty must be carried out by employment policies and economic competitiveness .
If Portugal were not seeing several companies closing week after week , it would not be seeing so many Portuguese people unemployed and living in poverty .
I therefore believe that the fight against poverty should be carried out by stimulating the economy and the market , not by way of subsidies , which will always have to be funded by taxes which , as we know , stifle taxpayers and the economy and are an obstacle to economic competitiveness .
As I said in this House a year ago , I advocate a new concept of sociality within the European Union which is able to ensure that everyone has a basic standard of living .
In a Europe that is socially conscious , fair , evolved and cohesive , it is imperative to ensure measures that eradicate and minimise the risk of social dumping and the degradation of living conditions for its people when faced with the devastating effects of the current economic crisis .
In order to make Europe stronger and more united , we must ensure the protection of basic rights for people throughout Europe .
I understand that minimum standards are needed in the areas of healthcare , education and social pensions , and even at the level of pay , ensuring greater uniformity in employment conditions .
In the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion , I welcome this report for its contribution to encouraging all Member States to fulfil their responsibilities for active inclusion by rectifying social inequality and marginalisation .
I would like to stress that there should be a realistic balance and respect for the subsidiarity principle .
In view of this , I am voting for this report and against the proposed amendments .
I would stress the importance of the adoption by the plenary sitting of the European Parliament of this report proposing the introduction of minimum income schemes in all EU Member States , for which I was responsible .
It was adopted in this Chamber by 437 votes to 162 , with 33 abstentions , and has emerged as a specific measure of the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion .
As this report says , ' introducing minimum income schemes in all EU Member States - consisting of specific measures supporting people ( children , adults and the elderly ) whose income is insufficient by means of a financial contribution and facilitated access to essential public services - is one of the most effective ways to combat poverty , guarantee an adequate standard of living and foster social integration ' .
The adopted resolution argues that minimum income schemes must fix minimum incomes at a level equivalent to at least 60 % of median income in the Member State concerned .
It urges the Commission to draw up an action plan , designed to accompany the implementation of a European initiative on minimum income in the Member States .
It calls attention to the increasing number of working poor and to the need to tackle this new challenge , and it calls for a fair redistribution of income .
Rarely have I come across such a demagogic and unrealistic report .
Demagogic , because its aim is to introduce a minimum income equal to at least 60 % of average income in all Member States and for everyone , without any nationality requirement .
Is that gross average income or net average income ?
Is that the average standard of living which is used to calculate the poverty line ?
In my country , that is tantamount to encouraging assisted inactivity and to creating a powerful magnet for immigration .
Because , according to the definition used , this income could be higher than the minimum wage , which is what 15 % of French workers earn ; a record among developed countries .
It is not assistance that Europeans need , but real jobs that pay a decent wage .
Yet , and this is the unrealistic part , the report is silent on the true causes of poverty : the pressure on wages brought about by the external competition of low cost countries where social dumping is practised , and by the internal competition of non-European immigration ; and the explosion of unemployment , relocations and business closures caused by unfettered globalisation .
It also overlooks the extremely worrying case of the impoverishment of Europe 's middle classes .
Priority must be given to fighting these causes .
in writing . - Even though the European Union is one of the richest areas in the world , one still finds a high percentage of European citizens facing the problem of income poverty , limiting their ability to afford the basics in relation to food , health , energy and education .
Poverty affects 85 million people in Europe .
Moreover , following the current financial and economic downturn , there is a higher risk of poverty mainly affecting children , the young and the elderly , putting many households at a higher risk , reducing their access to medicine , healthcare , schools and employment .
We have to ensure that wealth is evenly distributed among rich and poor Member States , among small and big countries , and among their citizens .
More funds have to be allocated to different studies and analyses relating to poverty and social exclusion , comparing the systems of the 27 Member States and identifying which policy works best .
We have to continue combating poverty and social exclusion in Europe and around the world by taking urgent action and , more importantly , by working in solidarity despite the different fiscal or political pressures we might face .
Currently in Europe , 17 % of the population , equivalent to around 85 million people , are living below the poverty line .
Behind these figures , extreme poverty is the most worrying and is making progress , especially in these times of recession , which is why a minimum income is crucial .
As 2010 is the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion , and following the International Day for the Eradication of Poverty , we voted , in the European Parliament , for a resolution that calls for a European minimum income equal to 60 % of average income in each Member State .
Our report emphasises that introducing minimum income schemes in all Member States is one of the most effective measures to fight against poverty , ensure a decent standard of living and encourage social integration , and I welcome the adoption of this resolution .
I supported the report inviting Member States to tackle poverty by introducing minimum income schemes on the model of the RSA [ ' revenu de solidarité active ' - earned income supplement ] , formerly RMI [ ' revenu minimum d 'insertion ' - basic guaranteed income ] , in France .
This type of tool has been clearly recognised as being very useful when tackling job insecurity .
The text proposes that this kind of minimum income amounts to 60 % of the average salary for each country and , above all , is part of a comprehensive strategy for integration , with a lasting return to work and access to public services , primarily accommodation .
The text was adopted , but unfortunately , the alternative versions proposed by the left-leaning political groups , calling for a binding framework directive for implementing the minimum income throughout the Union , were rejected .
The position that we have taken in favour of these minimum income schemes is therefore encouraging , but is likely to be insufficient .
Current data show that poverty levels in the European Union are increasing .
In many Member States , poverty hits children and elderly people the hardest , and the increasing use of short-term job contracts and low , unsecure incomes bring the risk of deteriorating living conditions across the whole of society .
Add to that the demographic crisis that is affecting some countries , and we have a recipe for guaranteed economic decline .
It is our job to secure a decent life for all citizens .
We cannot allow our children and grandchildren to live under the threat of hunger , unemployment and social exclusion .
We must guarantee future generations decent wage levels , career stability , access to public services and social integration throughout their lives - from the earliest age until retirement .
in writing . - There are an estimated 85 million people throughout the EU suffering from or at risk of poverty and I believe that at a European level , everything possible must be done in order to tackle it .
It is vital that procedures such as this are introduced to help reduce the number of people at risk of poverty in the EU , in order to ensure that the EU 2020 goal of removing the risk for 20 million European citizens is met .
The economic and financial crisis has exacerbated the situation which the labour market is in across the whole of the European Union .
Just recently , approximately 5 million jobs have been lost , which has caused poverty and social exclusion in Member States .
I firmly support this report because I believe that urgent measures are needed to reintegrate those affected into the labour market , as well as the guarantee of a minimum income which will be able to ensure a decent standard of living and a life worthy of human dignity .
I think that we must develop relevant indicators to enable us to introduce minimum income schemes in Member States , thereby ensuring an adequate standard of living fostering social integration and promoting social and economic cohesion throughout the entire European Union .
One effective tool for fighting poverty is guaranteeing citizens of the European Union a minimum income which includes salaries , pensions and benefits .
A minimum income should be a universal right , and not depend on contributions made .
We should pay particular attention to social groups which are particularly susceptible to poverty and social exclusion , which include , in particular , disabled people , large families and single-parent families , the chronically ill and the elderly .
An analysis of the experience of several Member States shows us what an important role minimum incomes play in fighting poverty and social exclusion , and that is why I voted for Mrs Figueiredo 's report .
Nowadays , it is essential to include the prevention and combating of poverty and social exclusion in other EU policies with the aim of guaranteeing the respect for fundamental human rights , universal access to essential public services and the right to health , to education and to vocational training .
All this requires social sustainability of macro-economic policies , which implies changing monetary priorities and policies , including in the Stability and Growth Pact , and also all competition policies , internal market policies , and budgetary and fiscal policies .
This report uses the term ' minimum income ' , which is a controversial term defined as an instrument that makes it possible to accompany beneficiaries in moving from situations of social exclusion to active life ; it also underlines the importance of broader policies that also take into consideration other needs : healthcare , education , training , social services and housing .
I voted in favour of this report because I support the idea of the need for a European coordination strategy .
I nevertheless believe that the minimum income is a responsibility of individual Member States , based on the principle of subsidiarity .
It is difficult to establish a minimum threshold in the various Member States when great differences exist between wages and the cost of living in general .
The contents of the Treaty of Lisbon , the provisions of the 2020 EU strategy and the principles included in the Millennium Development Goals do not seem to be reflected , even in terms of future prospects , in the disconcerting reality , which is that great numbers of people live in misery even today .
In Europe alone , nearly 80 million citizens live in conditions of poverty , 19 million of whom are children .
The ambitious policies that the international community has set itself for poverty eradication have all too often proved ineffective and difficult to implement or amounted only to social welfare measures .
The objectives must instead be achieved by considering a more structural approach , evaluating specific initiatives coordinated at European level that have an impact on income , on social services and on healthcare with the aim of alleviating the impact of a financial crisis that has hit those who are most at risk in the labour market , namely women , older women in particular , and young people .
I believe that the valuation of European initiatives aiming to establish a minimum income might represent one of the ways for combating poverty provided the principle of subsidiarity is observed .
The implementation of minimum income in all the countries of the European Union is a pivotal measure for combating poverty .
I am therefore voting in favour of this important report .
The minimum income is , however , calculated for each country , and thus does not contribute to social convergence within Europe .
National inequalities are being maintained in the crisis that we are experiencing at present .
More cross-cutting social policies are therefore needed at a European level in order to ensure a fairer distribution of wealth .
This is an important part of the EU 's role .
The European Union has always proclaimed ' social inclusion ' as one of its founding principles .
It is difficult to combat the many situations that lead to marginalisation , removal and abandonment .
Among these , poverty must certainly come high up on the list .
Unlike causes such as disease , anti-social behaviour , race or gender , this represents a condition for which civilised countries should organise ordinary preventive measures .
A minimum income for citizens is a remedy , not a solution .
In the resolution , I support the Commission 's call to include State actions within a framework of European coordination and ensure that the minimum income is accompanied by an integrated approach that includes healthcare , education and housing .
I also add my own personal appeal to the Commission , in other words , that actions to support inclusion with the aim of prevention should be prioritised in the ' Platform for combating poverty and social exclusion ' .
The Member States cannot be insensitive to situations of extreme poverty , and they must ensure that no one is simply left to their fate in situations that are often deeply degrading .
Extraordinary and exceptional help should be considered in these precise cases .
Nevertheless , experiences such as the Portuguese one of awarding minimum incomes without truly effective monitoring , but with an enormous number of people who are registered as beneficiaries , who could and should work , but neither work nor try to , are a perversion of the approach that must be addressed .
I therefore abstained because of the fact that the aspects of proper monitoring of the system that I have described call it into question , both from a financial and a moral point of view .
The Member States cannot be insensitive to situations of extreme poverty and must ensure that no one is simply left to their fate , in situations that are often deeply degrading .
Extraordinary and exceptional help should be considered , strictly in these cases .
Nevertheless , experiences , such as the Portuguese one , of awarding minimum incomes without any truly effective monitoring , but with an enormous number of people who are registered as benefit claimants who could and should work , but neither work nor try to , constitute a perversion of the logic that should be contemplated .
That is why I abstained : because of the fact that the described aspects of proper monitoring of the system call it into question , both financially and morally .
I voted in favour of the European Parliament resolution on the role of minimum income in combating poverty and promoting an inclusive society in Europe , because I agree with most of the requests and opinions it contains ; for example , the fact that Member States , the Council and the Commission need to implement ' concrete measures to eradicate poverty and social exclusion ' and that ' combating poverty begins with the creation of decent , sustainable jobs for groups at a disadvantage on the labour market ' .
On that point , I consider its advocacy of the establishment of a minimum income threshold in all Member States to be of great value , so that everyone , whether or not they are employed , can live with dignity .
I supported this resolution because , in general , it demands greater social intervention to combat the poverty suffered by millions of citizens .
To that end , it demands that Member States and the European institutions establish concrete measures to promote reintegration into the labour market worthy of those people who are living in poverty .
As a female Member , it particularly disturbs me that in the present economic crisis , women in the EU are threatened by extreme poverty much more than men .
If you look at the figures from Eurostat , 27 % of women today , before receipt of social security , are at risk of poverty .
In European society , the sustained trend towards the feminisation of poverty shows that the existing framework of social security systems and the various social , economic and employment policy measures adopted in the EU are not designed for the needs of women or for abolishing the existing disparities relating to women 's employment .
I therefore support the rapporteur , who says that women 's poverty and social exclusion in Europe require concrete , diverse and gender-based policy solutions , and accordingly , I also supported the raising of this issue with my vote .
I voted in favour of Mrs Figueiredo 's report .
Work represents the greatest priority for the population .
The solidarity on which the European model of social market economy is based and the coordination of national responses are vital .
The initiatives undertaken by individual states will be ineffective unless we have coordinated action at EU level .
It is therefore essential that the European Union speak with a single strong voice and have a common vision , subsequently allowing individual states a choice over the concrete application of measures in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity .
In the social market economy enshrined in and fostered by the treaty , the public authorities must implement settlement measures with the aim of accelerating and facilitating the achievement of balance in order to prevent difficulties for the public or at least minimise them .
We need social policies to protect families , limiting inequality and the impact and the effects of the crisis .
We need to improve systems of social protection by implementing long-term policies , also with regard to jobs , giving greater stability to employment while avoiding unsustainable burdens on our national budgets .
I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution - Amendment 3 - ( Article 157 ( 4 ) of the Rules of Procedure ) to replace non-legislative motion for a resolution on the role of minimum income in combating poverty and promoting an inclusive society in Europe .
This provision , especially in the present times of economic crisis , does not conflict with the principle of a social market economy , a principle to which I subscribe unreservedly .
Poverty is a major social problem all over the world , and unfortunately , the EU is not immune .
Moreover , the already protracted financial and economic crisis that we are experiencing has exacerbated the poverty of people within Europe , creating a new wave of poor in some countries , such as Portugal , and even affecting what is commonly referred to as the middle class .
The allocation of a minimum income is an important social measure with a significant impact in economic terms , and many see it as a moral obligation .
The crucial thing is that this minimum income is regulated in such a way that it acts as a lever to elevate people in poverty to an acceptable standard of living , and that it can never be an incentive for people to act passively in a difficult situation , namely by potentially lacking commitment in looking for a job .
Poverty is a reality which affects people whose income is insufficient to provide them with an acceptable living , with the number of people in this situation on the increase due to the current crisis .
In 2008 , 17 % of the EU 's population ( approximately 85 million people ) were exposed to the threat of poverty .
The at-risk-of-poverty rate was higher for children and young people up to the age of 17 than for the total population , reaching 20 % in the EU-27 , with the highest rate being recorded in Romania ( 33 % ) .
The at-risk-of-poverty rate for those in employment was 8 % on average in the EU-27 , with the highest rate again in Romania ( 17 % ) .
I voted for the need to adopt a system for calculating the minimum income ( equivalent to at least 60 % of median income in the Member State concerned ) in every Member State , consisting of specific measures supporting people whose income is insufficient with a funding supply and by facilitating access to services .
This step could be one of the most effective ways to combat poverty , guarantee an adequate standard of living and foster social integration .
Lifting 20 million European citizens out of poverty by 2020 , such is the ambitious target set by the EU 2020 strategy , a target that could well remain a pious hope if Europe does not come to grips with the growing impoverishment that now affects more than 80 million citizens .
That is why the introduction at European level of a minimum subsistence income or its expansion to all Member States is important .
Designed to be the ' last safety net ' , minimum income already plays a role in combating social exclusion .

We now need to increase its effectiveness while bearing three main things in mind : we must keep the differential between minimum income and guaranteed minimum wage , because work must remain attractive and being in employment is still the best way not to fall into poverty ; we must make minimum income a part of a coordinated and comprehensive policy for helping vulnerable people ( access to accommodation , healthcare , childcare and homecare ) ; and we must cross out heading I concerning the integration of objectives that are assigned to it , and harness minimum income as a means to assist financially , at a given time , a person or family experiencing hardship .
Eighty-five million people are threatened with poverty in Europe .
The economic crisis that we are going through is making young people ( of whom one in five is unemployed ) , women and single parents even more vulnerable .
Precarious conditions among workers are also increasing : the number of those who are affected by poverty is currently 19 million .
Whereas 2010 was declared ' European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion ' , a recent Eurobarometer survey on citizens ' opinion of the EU showed that 74 % of them expect the EU to play an important role in this area .
Let us listen to them and act .
I supported the resolution on the role of a minimum income in tackling poverty and in promoting an inclusive society in Europe .
Unfortunately , the 27 Member States do not all have a national minimum income .
Consequently I supported the invitation made to the Commission to use its right of initiative in order to propose a framework directive establishing the principle of a suitable minimum income in Europe based on common criteria , although this invitation was unfortunately rejected .
With our proposal for a framework directive on a minimum income , Parliament today had the chance to provide Europe with an essential tool for truly combating poverty and for giving every young person , adult and elderly person the right to an income high enough to lift them out of poverty and to enable them to live in dignity at last .
This required political boldness and courage , to put an end to the outrageous scandal of long-term poverty .
However , due to its cowardice and political inconsistency , the European right will carry the heavy responsibility of the failure of the EU 2020 strategy and will cause yet more disillusion among our fellow citizens and among all those organisations that fight day in day out for the most vulnerable .
In a modern society populated by honest and active citizens , it would be an excellent thing to introduce a minimum income for those who happened to be unemployed .
In actual fact , guaranteeing an income to those who do not work leads to a distortion of the world of work .
Many people would , in fact , prefer not to seek jobs , supplementing their minimum guaranteed income with undeclared work or turning to petty crime .
Such negative situations would certainly affect population groups less well-equipped for survival , particularly non-EU families who often have to make do with sharing small and therefore low cost accommodation with one another .
The guarantee of widespread welfare will clearly lead the poorest peoples of the world to try and live in Europe because even though very little would be guaranteed them , this would certainly be better than nothing .
I am firmly opposed to the report on those grounds .
Poverty and social exclusion are a manifestation of lack of respect for human dignity .
Combating the phenomenon is a priority of the European Union , and is also enshrined in the Millennium Development Goals .
What can we do , and what tasks should we undertake in this respect ?
The most important factors are education and ensuring conditions for development , since these are solutions that would teach people how to deal with the problem of poverty themselves by using their own potential , supported by systemic solutions .
In other words , we should give them the know-how they need .
In developing countries , it is important to support infrastructure building , particularly giving people access to clean water .
Development aid must be linked to the creation of conditions for developing trade .
Facilitating development and new jobs is the best way of combating poverty in various regions of the world , rich as well as poor .
Poverty cannot be effectively tackled merely by means of administrative regulations , even those which set minimum incomes .
The economic crisis has been aggravating the social inequalities in the EU .
At the end of 2008 , almost 17 % of the European population - that is , 85 million people - were living below the poverty line .
The effects of the crisis , namely increased unemployment and fewer job opportunities , have been leaving many people in a difficult situation .
It is essential for Europe to involve itself in promoting a more inclusive society using poverty-eradication measures .
2010 is the ' European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion ' , and one of the Europe 2020 strategy 's objectives is reducing the number of people at risk of poverty by 20 million .
The truth is that the level of poverty does not just affect social cohesion , but also the economy .
Therefore , and taking into account Parliament 's commitment to participate in the fight against poverty and social exclusion , I believe the minimum income scheme based on 60 % of median income in the Member State concerned is an important contribution to economic and social cohesion .
I voted in favour for the above reasons , and because I believe that the report highlights the need for concrete action towards more effective social and economic cohesion that respects subsidiarity .
I voted against this report because it turns budgetary consolidation by the Member States on its head and contains the usual flowery Communist dross about inter-State transfers .
Moreover , there is a very clear violation of the principle of subsidiarity in the social sphere .
In the Federal Republic of Germany , social assistance and the State-guaranteed income via Hartz IV long-term unemployment benefits are already so high that for low-end jobs , it is not worthwhile working .
In this connection , there needs to be a mandatory minimum separation between welfare payments and income .
The prerequisite for all prosperity remains , as it always has been , healthy economic growth .
Ladies and gentlemen , despite all the declarations on poverty reduction , social inequality has increased - approximately 85 million EU residents are at risk of poverty .
This is a huge problem for Lithuania , since 20 % of our population is at risk of poverty .
We need a strong employment policy which would stimulate growth and competitiveness in the European social market economy and would prevent macro-economic imbalance and guarantee social inclusion .
However , that is not enough to combat unemployment .
Simply having work does not offer protection from poverty .
The increase in precarious employment and low wages means that the percentage of workers at risk of poverty is rising .
According to EU reports , the incomes of more than 20 % of full-time workers in Lithuania are less than 60 % of average incomes , whereas the EU average is 14 % .
An increase in the minimum monthly wage would help reduce poverty , but would not guarantee a society without isolation .
Mostly young people leave Lithuania , not just because of a lack of money and work ( last year , unemployment among Lithuania 's young people reached almost 30 % ) , but also because they feel abandoned and powerless against decisions taken that have an impact on their daily lives .
This must change .
in writing . - Despite efforts around the globe and commitments from many international institutions , the EU included , the fight against poverty is still far from won .
The percentage of people living in poverty in Europe increased from 16 % to 17 % between 2005 and 2008 .
Across Europe , there is consensus among governments and people alike that we must fight to eradicate poverty .
As we consider the Europe 2020 commitments , we must once again think about what measures can be taken to fight poverty .
I support the Figueiredo report , which calls for a re-evaluation of the EU 's commitments to fighting poverty and social exclusion and for the inclusion of challenging but achievable and clear objectives in the Europe 2020 Agenda .
I echo the call of the European people to put an end to poverty and inequality through the implementation of effective , inclusive and forward-looking strategies that fight proactively against global poverty .
Around 85 million people in the EU are currently facing the threat of poverty .
This includes various different groups : children and young people up to the age of 17 have a higher risk of poverty , which , in specific terms , means that one in five children and young people are victims of poverty .
Elderly people also face a higher risk of poverty than the general population .
In 2008 , the at-risk-of-poverty rate for people aged 65 years and over stood at 19 % .
However , the at-risk-of-poverty rate for those in employment was 8 % on average in 2008 - the so-called ' working poor ' .
The concept of a minimum income will contribute significantly to the social integration of groups that are at risk .
However , in the drawing up of the directive , the greatest possible attention needs to be paid to maximum control and avoidance of any possible ' exploitation ' of this social assistance .
If we just look at the number of people receiving unemployment benefits , there are 23 million people who need to receive unemployment benefits in order to be able to live with dignity .
I voted in favour of this report as it supports the continuation of the work carried out by the Special Committee on the Financial , Economic and Social Crisis which , since its creation , has reached a conclusion and made specific recommendations on certain points .
However , more in-depth work is still needed to reach an exchange with the national parliaments on this basis , to transform these recommendations into legislative proposals and to translate the resulting objectives into a programme of work .
Putting a stop to work by this special committee would give the impression that the crisis had been overcome , when the financial market situation has not been stabilised and the economic and social effects of this huge crash are still unknown , with a profound , long-term impact .
All the files opened or to be opened now , namely , the Europe 2020 strategy and new directives , economic governance , financial perspectives , regulation and supervision , reform of global governance and EU representation , should start by acknowledging the crisis of the current model .
Among other things , such a continuation would allow this multiple agenda to be followed up in depth , and the analysis and political recommendations to be developed based on a programme of work to be defined , and on that basis , would allow a follow-up report to be drawn up for the second half of 2011 .
I voted against the report because the attack on the working class by the capitalist system and its political representatives is a blanket attack which has nothing to do with either financial deficits or excessive debt .
The stand taken by Community officers and in the European Parliament resolution confirms that .
The infighting between the imperialists cannot be overcome and will get progressively worse .
The EU and G20 are making simple plans to slash grassroots incomes , to put grassroots property into the hands of big business and increase their profits , to increase the exploitation of the working class and to cut insurance and labour rights .
The blanket measures decided strengthen the monopolies and shift the burden of the capitalist crisis on to the workers ' shoulders ; at the same time , the EU and the plutocracy are trying to gild the pill by promoting new models of economic governance and green economies and are promising that there is light at the end of the tunnel in order to generate vain hope and wheedle assent out of society .
The massive demonstrations in Greece , France , Italy and other countries are blatant proof that the choices made by the capitalist system are rejected by the workers .
This rejection can - and must - become a rejection of the monopolies and imperialism and must be turned into a fight for grassroots power .
The EU 2020 strategy is critically important for the competitiveness , sustainability and social characteristics of the Union and I voted in favour of what the report says about directing more attention towards initiatives related to the energy , research and innovation sector , as well as health and education matters in the years ahead .
I totally agree that education matters should be at the core of the Union 's economic strategy and that there should be more support for programmes such as ' Lifelong Learning ' , ' Erasmus ' and ' Leonardo ' for education and training abroad and that the people of Europe should be given greater access to these programmes .
Research and development is crucial for competitiveness , and students and researchers must be given support and encouragement when trying to avail of cross-border mobility , while access to funding must be transparent and simplified .
I also support what the report says about improving the ability of small and medium-sized enterprises to obtain credit , reducing the bureaucracy associated with public procurement contracts for SMEs , and establishing a one-stop shop for addressing those companies ' administrative issues .
There have been a variety of factors in the current crisis : the speculative behaviour of the financial markets , and the development of internal demand over recent years based on consumer credit , among other things .
There are many reasons , which we have discussed a great deal in Parliament , but we need to look to the future .
The future is part of fulfilling the content of this initiative .
In order to do so , Europe needs to overcome the problem of the ageing population .
It must regulate , reorganise and supervise the Union 's financial market , improve its coordination , and use this strength to play an active role at global level .
It must adopt measures to improve coordination between the different levels of governance , define a new model of economic growth that goes hand in hand with human and social development and focus on European solidarity , improving competitiveness , quality , improving education , innovation , new technologies , and on knowledge .
This is the only way that we will be able to ensure that Europe is a great opportunity for the world .
We have voted on an extremely long and very complicated report , with an intricate text and structure .
There is one thing , however , that is quite unconvincing : the real , deep-seated cause that unleashed the economic crisis we find ourselves in was not given adequate attention , although it is included in the recitals of the text .
The cause was not contingent , but structural - and not just in economic terms .
The financial crisis was caused , primarily , by the illusion , cultivated by the world 's financial and political elites , that in the third millennium , the economy and wealth could be based more on finance than on the production of goods , more on the astonishing creation of products of financial engineering than on that which is really created , produced , sold and marketed by hundreds and hundreds of millions of enterprises across the world .
Unless we recognise the economic and political importance of restoring the real economy , rather than the virtual economy , the report runs the risk of making a fatal mistake : suggesting ways out of the crisis which would ultimately not be a real solution .
Europe does not need further centralisation of economic powers at EU level .
Europe needs enterprise and less bureaucracy .
I have therefore voted against the report .
I voted for this report because the current financial crisis that has affected the economic and financial sectors has caused a general economic and social crisis in which European citizens continue to live in poverty , social inequalities are becoming even more pronounced , and the number of poor workers is also increasing .
I would like to underline that the recession was further exacerbated by the fact that the various national economic recovery plans are insufficiently coordinated , because it is highly likely that with coordination at European Union level , it would be possible to have a greater impact than that which can be achieved with most programmes at national level .
According to the Europe 2020 strategy , the European Union has committed to combating unemployment and increasing employment and reducing poverty and social exclusion , but this strategy must be a concerted effort - part of the crisis management and post-crisis strategic planning process .
I agree with the position of Parliament that this European Union strategic objective should also be pursued by cooperating closely with national governments , social partners and civil society , and that the European Parliament should be involved to a greater extent in its execution .
The adoption of this complex report represents a very important step for the European community who are calling loudly for clear responses and quick solutions to overcome this difficult economic crisis .
I voted in favour because the text adopted today includes principles that have always formed the basis of my group 's economic policy .
I refer , for example , to the need for greater budgetary consolidation , reinforcement of the Stability and Growth Pact and completion of the single market .
I am , in fact , convinced that Europe needs radical transformation to double its growth potential and this result can only be achieved by greater coordination of Member State 's economic and fiscal policies .
Before this , however , I consider it necessary to review the financial regulation sector that has proved not only fallacious but one of the main causes of the crisis .
The EU must also quickly face up to various challenges , beginning with employment , the demographic challenge and the pension system .
Even before this , we need to implement policies to support SMEs , the driving force and economic heart of Europe , above all , by promoting fiscal packages and incentives that allow easier access to credit .
I voted for this report as I agree that the Commission should take responsibility for ensuring the monitoring and funding of projects in the following areas : new investment in research and the development and deployment of renewable energy , in energy efficiency , especially in the European building stock , as well as in resource-use efficiency more generally ; strengthening the European energy network by interconnecting national networks and distributing power from major centres of renewable energy production to consumers , as well as introducing new forms of energy storage and the European High Voltage Direct Current ( HVDC ) ' super-grid ' ; promoting EU space-based infrastructures in the area of radio navigation and earth observation in order to foster the provision of new EU services and the development of innovative applications , as well as to facilitate implementation of EU legislation and policies ; providing fast Internet access throughout the Union , ensuring the rapid execution of the EU 's digital agenda and providing all citizens with reliable , free access .
in writing . - This report takes a detailed and thorough look at the causes of the economic crisis and the developments that have been made at EU level in order to prevent , pre-empt or at least diminish the impact of future crises .
The conclusions that have been established in the report are well balanced and present an accurate overview of the causes and effects of the crisis .
The report also adds value to the current debate concerning the possible ways forward in this regard .
I have thus decided to vote in favour of this report .
Whereas the recession that we have been through since the summer of 2007 will have cost USD 60 trillion , and the recovery is not guaranteed , I voted for this text because through this vote , together with fellow MEPs , we wanted to prove that political responsibility and ambition can go hand-in-hand .
As an alternative to the cacophony between the Commission , the Van Rompuy working group and the Merkel-Sarkozy tandem on economic governance , we are suggesting a clear proposal : creating a Mr or Mrs Euro responsible for the internal and external consistency of the Union 's economic policy choices .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the Berès report because of my support for the vast majority of its contents .
There is , however , a need for continued detailed debate on one issue in particular , a CCCTB .
I agree it is necessary to ensure that different corporate tax regimes do not enable companies to evade their responsibilities to support society by a share of their profits through a fair corporate tax regime .
However , particular attention needs to be given to the negative impact that a CCCTB could have on small countries such as Ireland , whose prosperity and employment levels depend , to a large extent , on its capacity to attract foreign investment .
I wish to note also that the Irish Labour Party does not support a CCCTB .
I voted against the report , because the left cannot accept a report born of compromise between the socialists and the European right , a report which does not get to the heart of the problem , namely , the basic causes of the economic and social crisis .
The report binds Parliament politically to the disastrous neoliberal proposals by Merkel , Sarkozy and the task force to tighten up the treaties and the Stability Pact , which will break up the social state and disenfranchise the workers .
Our side criticised the anti-social , anti-growth Stability Pact , the institutional and political weaknesses of EMU , the anti-democratic way in which the ECB functions and the unbalanced growth within the EU , and proposed ways of getting out of the crisis which respected labour and social rights .
Unfortunately , however , the spirit and letter of the text remain faithful to disastrous neoliberal policies which work to the detriment of the workers , lead to recession and unemployment and are exacerbating the crisis .
The crisis has taught us a tough lesson and it still has much to teach us about the static and dynamic aspects of economic policies .
It is our task to learn from these lessons and put them in practice in order to get going again .
We need to avoid the mistakes that were made in the past and recognise the phenomena that had not been identified before , but , above all , we need to be thorough in establishing the relationships between the real economy and finance , protecting employment and general welfare from shocks of this kind .
However , the European Union must do more .
It must create added value , strengthen the instruments that have worked well ( such as the currency ) , refine those that can be improved ( such as the coordination of fiscal and budgetary policies ) , and create economies of scale for a rapid and long-lasting recovery .
I find it very positive that Parliament is reflecting on these issues and that it continues to monitor the situation , as long as these signs are translated into tangible and effective measures .
We voted in favour of this report , but we voted against , and are strongly opposed to , the recommendation for the introduction of a financial transaction tax and the distribution of the debt amongst the countries of the euro area .
I voted to adopt this report for two reasons .
The first reason is that its authors have done a wonderful job , reflected in an extensive analysis of the causes and impact of the economic crisis on the global economy , on the one hand , and on the European economy , on the other .
The second reason why I voted for it is that the report contains a series of important recommendations featuring in the section of the report entitled ' The future - a Europe of added value ' .
We must acknowledge that a short-term , narrow focus on profit has led to the loss of a huge number of jobs in Europe in industries offering high added value , while creating precarious and poor quality jobs .
It is time to reverse the trend and reindustrialise the European Union and restore its ability to be innovative and create jobs in sectors linked to R & D and new technologies .
I welcome this vote for it was important to mention at last the issue of sanctions for non-compliance with the Stability and Growth Pact ( SGP ) , which the Member States all too often happily disregard .
We need to create an effective system of incentives and penalties relating to the implementation of the SGP which would help ensure that the current crisis does not become any worse and that any future crisis is averted .
That is why I supported the paragraph in which the Commission is asked to introduce a binding system of penalties unequivocally under its control to force Member States to comply with SGP rules .
The crisis has revealed the shortcomings of Economic and Monetary Union : it nearly brought down the euro and has resulted in the loss of millions of jobs throughout the continent .
With Pervenche Berès 's report , the European Parliament has just adopted a coherent strategy proposal to lift Europe out of the recession and to address the latter 's financial , economic and social repercussions .
This proposal includes the introduction of real financial supervision , which we have started to implement , but which will have to be considerably strengthened ; the taxing of financial transactions in order to regulate the markets and finance public assets , and to reduce public deficits ; the coordination of Member States ' economic policies and budgets for the benefit of sustainable growth ; the appointment of a Mr or Mrs Euro to be in charge of the euro area and to unify its representation at the G20 and IMF ; and the creation of the European Energy Community .
It is now time for Europe to get going again .
This is what the public expects .
In a constantly changing world , inertia is tantamount to decline .
That is why we now need to move on from this report and take practical action .
I voted for the report on the financial , economic and social crisis : recommendations concerning measures and initiatives to be taken , because it sets out concrete measures for overcoming the economic and social crisis through the construction of a genuine European social market economy , with a view to sustained growth , employment and social inclusion .
The effects of the economic and financial crisis are persisting well beyond what we might have hoped , with ever more serious social repercussions .
As I have argued , and as this report also substantiates , this crisis has shown that we need more Europe .
In a large area that has borders open to free movement and an internal market , it has become unacceptable to allow the resistance of a system of mediation , monitoring and supervision based on the power of individual states , which is small and limited in scope given the situation in Europe and the rest of the world .
The strengthening of economic governance , financial supervision and the power to coordinate policies and economic and monetary matters on the part of the EU institutions will ensure greater stability and a greater ability to act swiftly and efficiently .
I would like to highlight the recognition of the importance of the Europe 2020 strategy , where research and innovation are central to the competitiveness of companies and job creation .
I would like to reiterate the importance of the internal market and small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) for the revival and dynamisation of the economy , to which end measures are being deployed to promote their consolidation and sustained development .
I voted against this report because the rapporteur 's initial proposal has been distorted , and positions have been included that urge the application of measures that were at the root of the crisis .
It also calls for penalties for Member States that do not comply with the Stability and Growth Pact .
Although it has kept the odd proposal here and there in the social field , its general direction is negative .
By contrast , the proposals that we were endorsing in the plenary sitting were rejected , specifically in the following areas :
The rejection of the Commission 's recent legislative proposals on economic governance , including penalties - which will have depressive effects on the already weak growth rates in the Member States - while advocating an ambitious European plan of investments to foster jobs .
The welcoming of the widespread participation in the European day of mobilisation against austerity and insecurity organised by the unions on 29 September 2010 , stressing its important political significance and expressing support for their demands , demanding secure jobs for a living wage , strong social protection and protection of purchasing power , the guarantee of better pensions , and the guarantee of high quality public and social services that are accessible to all .
The strong condemnation of the role played by tax havens in encouraging and carrying out fraud , tax evasion and capital flight .
in writing . - ( FR ) As is usual when faced with the economic , social and financial crisis in this Chamber , the report by Mrs Berès overlooks the main issues and concentrates on saving the system rather than fundamentally calling it into question .
This report even adds a profession of faith among the self-regulating virtues of the market , which it pretends to believe can be made more ethical .
It believes in the benefits of global competition and of the free and unrestricted movement of capital and goods .
Supervising a system that does not work will not enable us to avoid its worst aberrations .
The banking system has demonstrated its cynicism by repaying in advance the State aid that did , after all , prevent it from going under , so that it can avoid having to change its behaviour , including its most scandalous practices .
The entire global financial system , such as it exists today , is harmful to the real economy .
It encourages speculation and the creation of complex products , products that are often opaque and potentially toxic .
It produces wealth founded on hot air .
It forces businesses to follow extremely short-term strategies , and it favours shareholders at the expense of other economic stakeholders .
Pretending to supervise it is not enough .
It must be changed .
Beyond the loss of millions of jobs across the European continent and the various threats to the Euro , the recession has had the effect of highlighting the absence of strong and harmonised economic governance within the European Union and the failings in financial supervision .
So if I voted in favour of this resolution , it is because it intends to remedy these ills and promotes the introduction of a tax on financial transactions which would have the advantage of limiting speculation on financial transactions , of regulating the markets , of financing public assets , but also of reducing public deficit .
This is a powerful measure that I have been earnestly calling for for a long time and I welcome it .
I supported the report by my French socialist colleague , Mrs Bérès , on the financial , economic and social crisis .
This ambitious text proposes many ideas and solutions for coming out of the recession , securing a sustainable recovery and preventing similar financial crises from happening again through governance and supervision mechanisms .
With this vote , the European Parliament proves that political responsibility and ambition can go hand-in-hand .
Priority is given to employment , since the economic recovery is in danger of taking place without a reduction in unemployment .
The text calls for establishing a true European Community for energy .
The appointment of a Mr / Mrs Euro responsible for the economic and monetary choices of the Union would also be a major advance .
Finally , the text reminds us of the need for a tax on financial transactions so that those responsible for the recession are made to contribute at last .
in writing . - The Fine Gael MEPs do not support the proposal for a directive on a common consolidated corporate tax base but did not see this as grounds for voting against this important report as a whole .
The Danish Liberal Party abstained from voting in the final vote on the Berès report on the financial crisis as it positively recommends the establishment of a financial transaction tax .
in writing . - I , along with my Labour colleagues , voted in favour of the Berès report because of my support for the vast majority of its contents .
There is , however , a need for continued , detailed debate on one issue in particular , a CCCTB .
I agree it is necessary to ensure that different corporate tax regimes do not enable companies to evade their responsibilities to support society by a share of their profits through a fair corporate tax regime .
However , particular attention needs to be given to the negative impact that a CCCTB could have on small countries such as Ireland , whose prosperity and employment levels depend , to a large extent , on its capacity to attract foreign investment .
I wish to note also that the Irish Labour Party does not support a CCCTB .
The Berès report covers issues of importance to the stability of the euro area , which I voted for .
However , I abstained in the final vote , because I believe that , firstly , a general and simplified approach is being taken to the economic and financial problems of the EU and to the measures that need to be taken and , secondly , it refers to the Commission proposals on sanctions for undisciplined Member States , such as other fiscal or financial measures , which the European Parliament has not yet debated and on which it has not yet reached any conclusions .
I therefore reserve the right to express a specific opinion at a later date .
I voted in favour of the Berès report because I believe in the need for effective cooperation between Parliament , the Council and the Commission to find a way out of the economic and financial crisis .
The International Monetary Fund recently made public an analysis of the current state of the world economy , showing that the recovery process is still fragile and patchy .
In effect , we are facing two different scenarios : on the one hand , a stage of strong growth for emerging countries and , on the other , high levels of unemployment and an overall slow rate of recovery in economically more advanced States .
I therefore believe that it would be useful to embark on a path with the aim of guaranteeing appropriate solidity of public finances to maintain confidence in the markets and ensure that the public can again believe in the worth of the European project .
I voted in favour of the report by the Special Committee on the Financial , Economic and Social Crisis , which represents a constructive compromise between all the groups involved .
We do not need less Europe , we need more of it !
Our national economies are closely intertwined - national egotisms will only intensify the crisis .
This report calls for Europe to be unanimous on essential issues .
Sustainable EU financial , economic and employment policy needs to be the cornerstone of our action .
The recommendations for action show a clear way forward : in future , businesses must have their credit ratings assessed by an independent EU ratings agency .
An end must be put to high risk speculation through a financial transactions tax .
The Stability and Growth Pact needs to be better connected to the Europe 2020 strategy .
We are unambiguous in calling on the Commission to create a balance between growth , equality of opportunity and financial market stability .
There is a need to reduce the taxation on work in order to strengthen investment and thus , Europe 's competitiveness .
Small and medium-sized enterprises , in particular , need easier access to credit .
In the social sphere , the advancement of human resources - through real , tangible measures to get people trained and qualified - takes top priority .
Numerous public hearings , workshops and analyses have enabled us , as committee members , to make well-founded , fact-based contributions to the public debate .
It is important for Parliament to offer clear answers to crises .
Only in that way can we strengthen our credibility and reliability in the eyes of the citizens .
My vote in favour of the report is entirely due to the new agreement obtained thanks , above all , to the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) .
The draft initially tabled by the rapporteur was a clear ideological provocation and therefore had to be altered in its entirety .
According to the International Monetary Fund , the priorities are to correct the remaining fragilities in the financial sector , ensure strong growth in demand and employment , maintain debt sustainability , work for greater equilibrium in world growth , and to resolve the challenges deriving from widespread and volatile movements of capital .
The report , in which the contingent necessity of ensuring adequate solidity in the public finances to maintain confidence in the financial and real markets is recognised , is perfectly in tune with the last budget approved by the Italian Government , which aims to reduce the deficit to below the 3 % threshold .
The constitution of the Special Committee on the Financial , Economic and Social Crisis ( CRIS ) was aimed at diagnosing the factors that led to the crisis , determining what the EU failed to notice which meant that the crisis was unexpected , and devising future measures and initiatives to avoid similar situations and to be able to revitalise economies and definitively halt the crisis scenarios that persist in some Member States .
I believe that the Special Committee on the Financial , Economic and Social Crisis has carried out its tasks well and that in this document , it sets out new paths , measures and initiatives which will allow the EU to be much better prepared for any crises that might occur in the future .
I support Mrs Berès 's report , which calls for more Europe and not less , for more efficiency and less bureaucracy , and for one European Union voice on the international stage .
Despite the return to growth , we should not be mistaken in believing that the recession is entirely behind us , and , above all , that we have solved its causes .
If there is one lesson to be learnt from this crisis , it is the absence of world governance ( absence of a world State ) .
We need a fairer distribution of wealth between countries and within each country .
Therein lies the real crisis .
That is why I am in favour of the European Council convening a G20 summit exclusively dedicated to this issue .
With respect to development , I would stress - as Mrs Berès does in her report - that it is important for Member States to honour their 2005 commitments in terms of official development assistance ( ODA ) .
Nothing justifies a reduction in official development assistance .
Official development assistance should carry on increasing and should not suffer the consequences of the financial crisis .
The financial crisis put an end to the fairytale of self-regulating financial markets .
In particular , the non-transparency of financial products and high-risk packaged structures , together with the United States ' soft currency policy and conflicts of interest in terms of ratings , gave rise to a global financial crisis .
The Member States of the EU and their populations have plenty of food for thought in connection with the resultant economic crisis , with its growing rate of unemployment and social service sector cuts .
The rescue packages were only able to arrest the downward spiral in the short term .
In the long term , they only displace the underlying problems .
The crisis must absolutely not be used to extend EU competences .
Eurocracy and bureaucracy are no answer to the crisis .
Rather , thanks to their enforced conformity and the fact that they ignore cultural differences , they helped to create it .
I am all in favour of better coordination and consultation at the EU level .
European-level economic governance , on the other hand , must be rejected in the strongest terms , and I therefore definitively reject this report .
I voted in favour of the mid-term report of the Special Committee on the Financial , Economic and Social Crisis .
As a member of this Special Committee , I took an active part in the proceedings and contributed to the production of this report .
In particular , I believe that within the social market economy , as recognised and made an objective by the treaty , the public system should make some adjustments aimed at accelerating and facilitating the reaching of an equilibrium , in order to avoid losses and difficulties , or to limit them to the minimum level .
Instead of leaving the search for new paths to take to the production sector , which must undergo radical change , we need to address transformation plans , credit , changes of direction and other suitable means .
Europe must once again attract investment and production , establishing itself as a worldwide model for innovation and growth .
Public and private financial institutions must do their best to ensure that the markets work to benefit the real economy and small and medium-sized enterprises , in order to put them in a position to contribute to the economic recovery and growth in Europe .
I abstained on the Berès report , because the proposals on European economic governance do not address the structural problems of incomplete economic union and do not alleviate the asymmetry between ' truncated ' economic union and full monetary union .
More to the point , I abstained because they do not Europeanise economic policies and the economic risk .
They only Europeanise the penalties , which are now even stricter .
There are no strategic guidelines whatsoever to safeguard balanced growth and stimulate the competitiveness of all Member States .
I voted for this report because I believe that the Commission should ensure the steering and financing of projects in the following fields : ( 1 ) the research , development and deployment of renewable energy ; ( 2 ) strengthening the European energy network , along with using new forms of energy storage and the European High Voltage Direct Current ( HVDC ) ' super-grid ' ; ( 3 ) promoting space infrastructure in the EU in the field of radio navigation and earth observation ; ( 4 ) providing fast Internet access ; ( 5 ) developing EU leadership in the field of e-Health ; ( 6 ) completing the development of , and creating common standards for , electric mobility .
In terms of financial regulation , Parliament should seek to establish a system of regulation and supervision that does not leave out any financial market , instrument or institution .
The following should therefore be significant : ( 1 ) introducing more counter-cyclical regulation ; ( 2 ) reducing systemic risk posed by large institutions and derivative markets ; ( 3 ) strengthening pan-European and global regulation and supervisory structures ; ( 4 ) investigating the use of off-balance sheet transactions ; ( 5 ) introducing a tax on financial transactions ; ( 6 ) introducing new standards on statistical data on the financial sector .
This mid-term report on the financial , economic and social crisis represents a useful tool for analysing the current financial situation in Europe but , above all , it indicates the main road that Europe must boldly take to prevent situations such as these from happening again .
I believe that to do this , as the report rightly says , Europe must immediately set up strong and authoritative bodies that are able to offer standard governance for economic policies in all States .
I am convinced that Europe can no longer stand by and watch Member States come up with fragmented and inconsistent responses to economic crises whose consequences are a real threat to the growth potential of our economies .
The process of Member States converting the EU 2020 strategy into national programmes must help establish a more competitive , social and sustainable European Union , which places citizens and environmental protection at the heart of policy making .
Member States ' priorities must be focused on high quality jobs and ensuring that labour markets operate properly , as well as guaranteeing the existence of appropriate social conditions with a view to improving employment performance .
The rate of unemployment among the EU population is 10 % on average , reaching 20 % in some countries and more than 40 % for young people .
This highlights the importance of high quality , responsible public spending combined with fostering the entrepreneurial and innovative potential of the private sector in order to drive economic and social progress .
I voted to support the need for Member States to draw up viable programmes which will boost the labour market by improving incentives and conditions for workers , while also making the incentives more attractive for employers to recruit and retain staff .
At the same time , emphasis must be placed on decent work , which includes combating undeclared work , and on providing access to the labour market to people who are currently excluded from it .
I was sad to vote against the Berès report .
Frankly , the first version was promising , in terms both of its analysis of the causes of the crisis and of many of the proposals for overcoming it .
However , the demands of the groups on the right have distorted the original report on critical issues .
Although it is true that several good proposals are retained - such as the creation of a European Credit Rating Agency - it is also true that , with regard to economic governance , the report has been returned to the ' Brussels Consensus ' .
As the choice is between deficit and public debt or growth and employment , and as the report is undecided on this crucial issue , I cannot support it .
I voted in favour of this report as I agree that the Commission should take responsibility for ensuring the monitoring and funding of projects , particularly in the areas of new investment in research and the development and deployment of renewable energy , and also the provision of fast Internet access throughout the Union , ensuring the rapid execution of the EU 's digital agenda .
In terms of financial regulation , Parliament should seek to establish a system of regulation and supervision that does not leave out any financial markets , instruments or institutions .
In order to reach such an agreement , pan-European and global regulation and supervisory structures will need to be strengthened .
in writing . - I am glad the report was adopted by an overwhelming majority but overall , because the attempt by ALDE to weaken the paragraph on the financial transaction tax failed and the text based on our amendment , calling for the introduction of an FTT at EU level as a first step , passed .
This report is the outcome of a compromise because no fewer than 1 625 amendments were tabled on it and it is divided into a series of key points covering the causes of the crisis , ranging from the property bubble to unsecured bank products , the lack of European tax harmonisation and the failure to observe the Stability and Growth Pact .
We are all able to see the effects for ourselves : reduced wealth and unemployment .
The answers can only be to create new employment by promoting enterprise and research and development , adopting measures that reward transparency and foster common European rules , for example , on tax , VAT and indirect taxation .
The only thing that is dubious is the introduction of a new tax on financial transactions , which would effectively become the first European tax directly financing the Union budget .
We cannot accept the fact that Europe should put its hands into the already empty pockets of its citizens during a time of crisis such as the one we are experiencing at the moment .
The European Union is currently experiencing what must be its most serious economic and social crisis since it was founded .
This sets the great challenge of finding responses to the current situation , with a view to long-term prospects .
I welcome the creation of the Special Committee on the Financial , Economic and Social Crisis , as well as this report .
I advocate the need for economic governance mechanisms , not least by coordinating and supervising the policies of the Member States regarding the sustainability of public finances .
However , I find it regrettable that the European Parliament is not more involved in this strategic exercise of seeking solutions to the crisis : it is desirable for both the European Parliament and the national parliaments to be more closely involved in the future .
I would stress the importance of cohesion instruments in this process .
Firstly , the EU needs to strengthen coordination , and make better use of cooperation between the various levels of governance and the different policies .
Second , territorial specificities and the asymmetrical impact of the crisis should be taken into account .
As is stressed in the report , in fact , the strength of the cohesion policy in establishing a link between recovery and long-term growth is exactly as follows : establishing strategic guidelines , and giving the Member States and regions cause to implement them , and grant the instruments to pursue the objectives .
Ladies and gentlemen , Europe has become a victim not just of the financial and social crisis .
We are also experiencing a huge crisis in public confidence .
Both in Lithuania and throughout Europe , we must regain public confidence in our financial and political institutions and establish a viable and sustainable financial system , which would offer protection from future crises .
We need a transparent , multi-level regulation mechanism , based on healthy morality , which would serve the general public .
The financial crisis dealt Lithuania a particularly severe blow - in 2009 , our economy shrank by 15 % .
In drawing up a crisis exit strategy , we should take regional features and the varying impact of the crisis into account .
I welcome the fact that the special committee stresses the importance of cohesion instruments crucial for providing assistance to the EU regions that need it most .
They may help us overcome the consequences of the crisis by supporting essential investment in infrastructure , businesses and job creation .
The success of the recovery also depends a lot on the success of the EU 2020 strategy .
It is important for any long-term EU investment strategy to be concerned with maintaining competitiveness and strengthening the internal market ( one of the main engines of European growth ) .
in writing . - Recent years have shown how our economies are interdependent , and the problems that can be caused by lack of legislation regulation or cohesion of economies across Europe .
As we steer our way out of the crisis , we must look to European solutions that promise to build a stronger European economy and better-integrated financial systems that benefit the people of Wales and the whole European Union .
I therefore voted in favour of the recommendations concerning the measures and initiatives to be taken following the financial , economic and social crisis as present in the Berès report .
We must look towards common solutions to Europe 's problems , whilst respecting the choice of each EU Member State by allowing them to decide how we progress .
The Council , Commission and Parliament must work together to ensure that we build a stronger , more robust , global economy that works for the European Union as a whole .
The European Parliament has adopted today , Wednesday 20 October , the report by its Special Committee on the Financial , Economic and Social Crisis .
We in the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left voted against this report , because the proposals it contains are somewhat surreal and totally ignore the social rallies that have been taking place for several months in EU Member States against austerity plans , anti-social measures and the dismantling of social security systems and public services : these are the only measures envisaged to limit the Member States ' budget deficits .
This report follows on from the pension counter-reform put forward by Nicolas Sarkozy and his government , which the French protest movement has been fighting against and condemning for several weeks now .
This report thus continues to praise the Stability Pact and the measures and policies that we have been condemning for years and which our fellow citizens increasingly regard as a failure .
The very large majority ( 501 votes for ) that voted for this report obviously does not understand the message of those citizens who have been protesting across Europe for several weeks against the austerity plans and their associated counter-reforms .
I voted in favour of the report that was presented and discussed here today , as it represents a step forward for the EU by advocating the establishment of an institution like the European Monetary Fund ( EMF ) , and thus leading to the establishment of an overseer of sovereign debt developments to complement the Stability and Growth Pact ( SGP ) as a mechanism of last resort for the Member States .
It is also worth highlighting the proposal to establish a high-level policy group chaired by the Commission with a mandate to study potential institutional changes within the ongoing economic governance reforms , including the possibility of creating a European Common Treasury ( ECT ) , with the objective of endowing the EU with its own financing resources and reducing its dependence on national transfers , as well as producing a feasibility assessment in order to establish , in the long run , a system under which Member States may participate in the issuance of common European obligations .
Thus , with a proper impact assessment and by spelling out the different legal alternatives , along with a clear definition of the objectives and financing for European infrastructure , the long-term strategic projects for building a stronger EU will be easier to achieve .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted for this report .
The current economic , financial and social crisis has shown that the existing economic governance model in the Union has not worked as effectively as it was envisaged .
In recent years , there has been insufficient convergence between Member States , and macro-economic and fiscal imbalances have remained and even become larger in the last decade .
The surveillance framework was too weak and the rules of the Stability and Growth Pact were not sufficiently respected , in particular , as regards preventive provisions .
I agree with the proposals given in the document that we must aim to better coordinate actions with and between Member States , particularly in order to prevent a repetition of the situation that came about recently .
It is crucial for Member States to apply in full the rules and decisions agreed at EU level , such as the rules and instruments of the Stability and Growth Pact .
The greatest attention must be paid to long-term sustainable growth , providing the conditions for the creation of quality jobs , rather than short-term profit , which has done huge harm to the financial stability of European markets .
The current economic crisis has demonstrated that coordination of economic policy has not worked in the Union , nor have the frameworks for governance , for economic supervision or for regulating financial services .
All this has sown instability and decline in Europe .
In this respect , I would like to highlight and express my thanks for the recommendations that accompany the proposal , which are aimed at : establishing a coherent and transparent framework for supervising macro-economic processes in the Union and in the Member States , and improving supervision ; improving the rules of the Stability and Growth Pact ; improving economic governance ; establishing a strong mechanism for preventing and resolving excessive debt in the euro area ; and revising the budgetary , financial and fiscal tools .
I would like to point out that I entirely agree with improving the external representation of the Union in the field of economic and monetary affairs .
I would like to thank Mr Feio for his excellent work in drafting this complex report .
I voted in favour of it because I consider it of fundamental importance to improve the economic governance of the European Union .
The financial crisis has indeed highlighted the lack of true political and economic coordination between Member States and the inefficacy of the various control instruments .
It is now therefore time for Europe to set up a more reliable legal framework that observes the objectives of the EU 2020 strategy while also implementing greater control over debt and public income , fiscal incentives for SMEs , internal market development and integration of labour markets .
In the light of recent agreements , I do not , however , support the introduction of numerical rules that could prove too mechanistic for some Member States and difficult to achieve .
We should not forget that toxic assets and , to an even greater extent , excessive personal debt ( sub-prime mortgages ) lie at the root of the financial crisis .
In other words , the crisis was caused by imbalance in the private and banking sector , not by state public debt .
Lastly , I agree with recommendation 3 on enhancing state coordination by means of annual euro area surveillance reports .
I voted in favour of this report as I agree that a coherent and transparent framework must be established for multilateral surveillance of macro-economic developments in the Union and in the Member States .
I would like to call for an annual debate between Parliament , the Commission , the Council and the representatives of national parliaments on the Stability and Convergence Programmes ( SCPs ) and the National Reform Programmes ( NRPs ) , as well as on assessing national economic developments as part of the European Semester .
I would also like to call for the establishment , at a national level , of a mechanism to assess the implementation of the Europe 2020 strategy priorities and the achievement of the relevant national targets included in the National Reform Programme in order to support the annual evaluation by the EU institutions .
I voted against the report which , for the sake of economic governance of the European Union , adopts a sovereign perception and policy on strict discipline in the Stability Pact and supports preventive sanctions to the detriment of the Member States ' in breach ' of the Maastricht indictors .
It proposes the objective of budgetary stability and strict supervision of national budgets and ends up adopting harsh measures to the detriment of workers ' incomes , pensions and labour and insurance rights .
All this , despite the fact that we can see the effects of these policies in Greece , Ireland , Spain , Portugal and elsewhere .
All this , at a time when the workers in numerous countries in Europe have come out on to the streets in protest against becoming the victims of the crisis and the neoliberal counter-attack being launched by the EU , the ECB and the IMF .
Adopting the euro was a gamble of fundamental importance for the EU .
The main risk factor is associated not so much with matters of monetary technique , where the European Central Bank is doing an excellent job , but with economic cohesion and the link with the real economy .
The problem really made itself felt during the crisis : the single currency makes less and less sense for a market that is still fragmentary and with fiscal policies that are not always sufficiently homogeneous .
Considering these issues should not be , and must not be , a mere exercise or excuse for claiming legal sovereignty over matters that are currently the responsibility of individual nations .
Instead , it is useful to apply consistency and a systematic approach to economic action in the face of increasingly complex situations , where currency challenges are not the same as in the past and require different instruments and objectives where the responsibilities shouldered by the technicians must be backed by ongoing and consistent monitoring as well as political direction based on a considered view of the future and an eye to resolving contingent problems .
We voted in favour of this report without relinquishing in any way our opposition to a European tax .
We will also continue to say ' no ' to the establishment of a high-level group that is to discuss the possibility of creating a European Common Treasury ( ECT ) with the objective of endowing the European Union with its own financing resources .
On other points , too , we have used our vote to express a different view .
The issue of economic governance at European Union level is a tricky matter and the reticence shown by some of its Member States with regard to new transfers of sovereignty are understandable .
The crisis in Greece has highlighted the limitations of the current intervention mechanisms , not to mention the inadequacy of the instruments required to enforce compliance with the convergence criteria , especially in the countries belonging to the euro area .
Establishing a coherent , transparent framework supporting the multilateral monitoring of macro-economic trends in the European Union and Member States , along with consolidating fiscal supervision , as proposed within the document , marks a step forward in the right direction , even though it may entail a partial amendment to the Constitutional Treaty .
Overall , the recommendations in this document are important and address real issues , offering relevant solutions .
This is why I voted in favour of adopting the document .
It is with satisfaction and a sense of responsibility that I am voting in favour of the recommendations to improve EU economic governance suggested in this report .
Given that the EU is facing fierce competition from emerging economies and that the stability of public finances is vital for consolidating opportunities , fostering innovation and stimulating economic growth , which are fundamental elements of a European knowledge-based society , and considering that economic growth and sustainable public finances are a precondition for economic and social stability in the EU and for long-term fiscal consolidation , the current rules of the Stability and Growth Pact combined with their poor implementation have proved insufficient to ensure sound macro-economic and budgetary policies .
It is therefore important to support a more rigorous application of preventive measures and sanctions , as well as encouraging improved monitoring and economic governance through more accurate and comparable statistics on the policies and economic positions of the Member States , particularly in the euro area .
By adopting the resolution on economic governance , the European Parliament is reaffirming its main objectives for the negotiations on the Commission 's six legislative proposals .
MEPs deplore the fact that implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact is inadequate and propose the creation of an effective mechanism of incentives and sanctions , as well as stressing the importance of investment in energy , research , innovation , healthcare and education .
To end the recession , we need to plan the required funding at European level , and the idea of own resources should be put into practice .
We maintain that introducing a tax on financial transactions would reduce speculation and would improve the functioning of the internal market .
In addition , the income generated by this tax could help finance global public goods and reduce budget deficits .
This tax should be established on the largest possible basis , and certainly at European Union level to start with .
in writing . - It is timely indeed that Parliament addresses this matter only days after the agreement between President Sarkozy and Chancellor Merkel to seek to change the Lisbon Treaty in order to provide for an orderly handling of future sovereign debt crises in the eurozone .
Of course , this is all set against the continuing crisis in the eurozone , as each day goes by evidencing the folly of the single currency model . But it does something else .
Clearly , if this goes ahead , there would be an onus on the coalition government in the UK to hold a referendum .
That has been the assurance given by David Cameron , and unlike his cast-iron guarantee of before , he must hold to this promise .
If France and Germany can seek changes to the Lisbon Treaty , it is vitally important that the UK Government use the renegotiation process to win back powers to our sovereign parliament .
I voted for the Feio report , which is the result of successful negotiations between the political groups of the European Parliament , and is based on a broad consensus on the need to reinforce growth and employment policies , with a view to improving economic governance that will enable the crisis to be overcome and the European economy to recover .
In the wake of the current economic , financial and social crisis , Parliament has taken on a leading role in providing the European Union with mechanisms to ensure effective intervention which cannot only stem further crises , but , above all , ensure the stability that is necessary for sustainable development and cohesion within Europe .
This report by Mr Feio fleshes out Parliament 's responsibility for the institutional consolidation of the EU for greater unification in Europe and in terms of the global economy , in the interests of the European public and their well-being .
The proposed recommendations are a very significant qualitative development in improving economic governance within the EU , highlighting the strengthening of rules to promote the stability and growth of the states and the Union , as well as mechanisms for preventing and also correcting and solving problems and challenges to the strategy for EU development .
The reliability of EU statistics is also an important element in providing structures and authorities with better capabilities for assessing and determining intervention .
I would also like to highlight the concern with the need to prevent situations of public debt , apart from public deficits .
This is not about improving economic governance at EU level , but about holding sway over Member States ' economic , budgetary and taxation policies , which are subject to the essential requirement not of creating economic prosperity , but of safeguarding the interests of the single market and of Brussels .
It is also about the reactivation and worsening of the Stability Pact , which continues to cause harm .
This is not acceptable , and nor is the creation of a common public treasury responsible for managing a European tax and the institutionalisation of a European economic government ( to do what ? ) .
Admittedly , the level of public deficit and public debt , most of which is held abroad , is dangerous both financially and in terms of sovereignty .
However , this deficit and debt would no doubt be lower if it were not for your policies and the obligation for States to borrow on the markets .
Nearly a sixth of the French State 's budget is spent on paying interest on its debt .
As long as we are paying that , we cannot use that money for anything else .
The economic and financial crisis has clearly shown us that there is an urgent need to improve economic cooperation within the European Union .
To do this , the Stability and Growth Pact must be reinforced and expanded to include suitable and effective sanctioning options .
There is also a need , however , to keep a closer eye on the national budgets and the competitiveness of the Member States .
In future , we need to identify imbalances between the countries of the euro area and any shortcomings in competition earlier and we need the ability to demand effective countermeasures .
The object must be to make the monetary union and the euro durably strong and robust in order to be able to prevent a crisis like the one in Greece .
The Danish Liberal Party voted against one particular amendment to the Feio report , which recommends that a study be carried out into the advantages of establishing a European tax collection system .
The Danish Liberal Party voted in favour of the overall report , which was otherwise a well-balanced one .
in writing . - It is very important that the rules of economic governance are reinforced , especially in light of the economic crisis that many EU countries are still going through .
However , I agree with the Parliament 's amendments that remove the recommendations on automatic sanctions on Member States that incur an excessive deficit because , as this crisis has shown , it is necessary , in extraordinary circumstances , to exceed the deficit requirements in order to stave off more serious economic effects of a crisis .
The report with recommendations to the Commission on improving the economic governance and stability framework of the Union , in particular , in the euro area , that we have just voted on , is part of a wider debate , that has been going on for several months , on initiatives to combat the financial crisis .
A need is clearly emerging for strong economic governance of the European Union , especially after what happened in Greece a few months ago .
Any day now , we will see the final report by the European task force on economic governance , set up by the President of the European Council , Mr Van Rompuy .
Even now , however , we can state that there is an absolute need to identify rules for surveillance of economic policies , rules that are not mechanistic but realistic and sustainable , able to strengthen fiscal policy and improve European governance as a whole .
One observation which could be made during the recent period of economic and financial crisis was that monitoring and economic coordination at EU level needed to be strengthened significantly .
Major macro-economic imbalances were noted and some states are faced with a major rise in public debt and its proportion of their GDP .
I voted for this report because I strongly support all eight recommendations made by the rapporteur with the intention of reflecting good governance and economic stability in the European Union .
I believe that we are going to face major challenges in the years to come .
We must be able to set definite priorities and make some difficult choices in order to support the EU 's economic growth potential and consolidate public finances .
EU-level coordination will be vital in this respect and may help eliminate the adverse effects .
The joint debate on the European Council , the G20 , the report by the Special Committee on the Financial , Economic and Social Crisis , and the report on European governance , have not produced clear guidelines or pertinent recommendations regarding the financial crisis .
Everyone had their say and gave their own personal interpretation of what are confused and woolly texts .
This is , unfortunately , the reality for these own-initiative reports , which bring large majorities together but , at the same time , do not say a lot .
The Feio report was discussed much too late in the day , the European Commission having already tabled the directives that will reform the Stability Pact and the governance of the euro area .
What is the point , in these conditions , in voting on recommendations to the Commission ?
Parliament should equip itself with far more stringent rules of procedure and abide by them .
Its effectiveness and credibility are at stake .
The reform of the Stability Pact and governance of the euro area will have its decisive moment when the legislative texts are analysed .
Along with colleagues , I will get down to this work , with an open mind and with diligence .
It is important that Parliament supports a realistic yet ambitious reform so as to build the monetary union on new foundations .
It is through painstaking work that an institution earns its legitimacy within the European structure , not by ...
( The explanation of vote was cut short pursuant to Rule 170 of the Rules of Procedure )
Without rules or supervision , you cannot make any progress .
Applying the rules that we have imposed upon ourselves during this time of crisis , to improve coordination and surveillance in economic matters , is the least we must ask of ourselves and of the Member States .
In this vein , the report by Mr Feio allows us to focus on some considerable distortions , seeing how ' recent economic developments have shown clearly that economic policy coordination within the Union and , in particular , in the euro area , has not worked sufficiently well and that , despite their obligations under the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ( TFEU ) , Member States have failed to regard their economic policies as a matter of common concern ' .
My vote is therefore , without doubt , in favour of the report .
The current financial and economic crisis has demonstrated that the EU needs increasingly strong economic and monetary governance so that the stability of the euro and the monetary union itself are not undermined .
Thus , the Europe 2020 strategy should seek to promote economic growth and create jobs , as the sharp fall in GDP , the drop in industrial production and the high numbers of unemployed are a major social and economic challenge which can only be overcome by strong , harmonious and united governance .
Mr Feio 's report points out ways and defines strategies towards a real strengthening of economic governance and the EU 's stability framework , with the main focus on the euro area .
Examples of this include the establishment of a coherent and transparent framework for surveillance , the strengthening of the rules of the Stability and Growth Pact ( SGP ) and the strengthening of economic governance in the euro area , among others .
The economic , financial and social crisis has shown the limits of the European model of economic governance .
That is why we need an agreement at the next European Council on economic governance and on the Stability Pact .
There is an urgent need to adopt reforms that will enable us to take a big step forward in quality terms with respect to economic governance and to introduce transparent and targeted supervision instruments .
I am in favour of Mr Feio 's report because it supports the Commission 's proposal , which , to my mind , is a balanced compromise proposal .
I am in favour of greater parliamentary involvement in the Union 's economic governance and of the centralisation at European level of the exclusive supervision powers of the major cross-border financial institutions .
I also think it would be useful to provide the Union with its own financial resources in order to help it plan its actions and activities .
To my mind , the Feio report is the most professional report we have had in the last three months .
All the issues and solutions detailed in the report are extremely timely .
The lack of information , distorted reporting and , occasionally , downright lies from EU states ' governments , has led to dreadful results .
By fearfully concealing the glaring gaps in their budgets , Greece , Latvia and Hungary have shaken confidence in the euro .
The European Commission and the European Parliament must strictly and effectively react to any distortion of the facts and concealment of the truth .
It is essential to draw up measures in respect of dishonest politicians , on whose account the EU has ended up in crisis .
In order to come out of this complicated economic situation , we must draw up not only regulations for supervision and statistics , but also a plan for overcoming the crisis .
That means , firstly , clear criteria for fiscal policy , and deadlines and guarantees for taxpayers .
We must also ensure that this tax legislation not be amended every day at a nod from investors .
Unfortunately , today , the Latvian Government amends its regulations as the mood of the officials from the International Money Fund and the European Bank takes them .
I hope that the Feio report will act as a signal to the European Commission that the time for getting down to work has come .
I voted in favour of the report by Mr Feio , but as I have already had the chance to emphasise , Europe badly needs major reform in this area even if Europe 's new economic governance cannot consider solely the sum of the public debt .
We do not need mechanisms to tackle debt that are excessively automatic and pro-cyclical , which risk failing to meet the objective and , if anything , risk hindering actions to boost economic growth .
Instead , I favour the adoption of surveillance mechanisms equipped with flexible , reasonable formulas , which can be easily implemented by the Member States .
The results and benefits for the budget of important reforms in social and economic matters , above all , pensions reform , are not seen in the following financial year but , after a number of years in the medium and long term , in the sustainability of the public finances .
In any case , these are the most important and necessary reforms .
Therefore , we must give more and better consideration to the structural reforms required to stimulate competitiveness and economic growth in Europe .
Competitiveness brings economic growth and growth brings more tax revenues and effective financial consolidation .
I abstained on the Feio report , because the proposals on European economic governance do not address the structural problems of incomplete economic union and do not alleviate the asymmetry between ' truncated ' economic union and full monetary union .
More to the point , I abstained because they do not Europeanise economic policies and the economic risk .
They only Europeanise the penalties , which have been made even stricter .
There are no strategic guidelines whatsoever to safeguard balanced growth and invigorate competitiveness for all the Member States .
I voted in favour of this report as I believe that : ( 1 ) a coherent and transparent framework for multilateral surveillance of macro-economic developments in the European Union and the Member States should be established , ensuring an annual debate between Parliament , the Commission , the Council and representatives from national parliaments on the Stability and Convergence Programmes ( SCPs ) and the National Reform Programmes ( NRPs ) and on assessing national economic developments ; and that ( 2 ) a mechanism should be established at national level to assess the implementation of the Europe 2020 priorities and the achievement of the relevant national targets included in the National Reform Programme in order to support the yearly evaluation by the EU institutions .
I also believe that the rules of the Stability and Growth Pact should be strengthened , with a view to : ( 1 ) taking the debt level , debt profile and debt dynamics more strongly into account in the pact of convergence towards Member State-specific Medium Term Fiscal Objectives ( MTFOs ) to be included in the SCPs ; ( 2 ) encouraging the establishment of early warning budgetary control mechanisms at national level ; and ( 3 ) establishing pre-specified and pre-emptive measures within the euro area , both for the preventive and the corrective arm of the Stability and Growth Pact .
The report by Mr Feio is dedicated to the central issue of European economic coordination .
It seeks to guide the Commission 's legislative documents and is being discussed 24 hours after the position of the Franco-German directorate became known .
The positive suggestions included in the report are fatally coordinated , whether because of the Franco-German position , or because of the proposals for automatic penalties which were already present in the Commission 's and Council task force 's texts ..
The report does not break with the fashion for disciplinary penalties in the Brussels Consensus , seeking only to water these down .
This consensus cannot be reformed : it can only be replaced with another that puts employment and the correction of serious inequalities at the centre of economic coordination .
I voted in favour of this report as I agree that a coherent and transparent framework must be established for multilateral surveillance of macro-economic developments in the Union and in the Member States .
in writing . - The global economic crisis has challenged the current mechanisms of economic policy coordination in the EU and has revealed some of its weaknesses .
The functioning of the Economic and Monetary Union has been under particular pressure , due to earlier failures to comply with the underlying rules and given that existing surveillance and coordination procedures have not been comprehensive enough .
This INI report intends to set out the position of Parliament as regards the legislative package on economic policy coordination ( six proposals , including four under Codecision ) released by the Commission two weeks earlier .
The Council 's position is foreseen for the end of October through the final report of the Van Rompuy task force on economic governance .
Following the economic and financial crisis , the European Parliament has approved a series of reports and Commission directives on its outcomes and ways to combat it .
In order to avoid repeats of the speculative bubbles like the one we are currently struggling to escape from , it is indispensable to establish a series of measures and checks amongst and together with the Member States .
For example , it is essential to respect the Stability and Growth Pact .
Serious , far-reaching monitoring would probably have avoided the extreme situations in Greece and Spain .
The current economic , financial and social crisis has demonstrated that the European Union 's economic governance model has not worked as well as would be ideal .
Therefore , it is necessary to find solutions for better and more efficient economic governance in Europe so as to prevent the already serious effects of the crisis from getting worse .
In this context , the rapporteur recommends that the European Commission establish a coherent framework for economic surveillance , strengthen the rules of the Stability and Growth Pact and economic governance in the euro area , and review the EU budgetary , financial and fiscal instruments .
Moreover , it is also proposed to establish a robust and credible excessive debt prevention and resolution mechanism for the euro area .
Finally , it is suggested improving the reliability of EU statistics as well as the external representation of the Union in the area of economic and monetary affairs .
Subsequently , it is necessary for the Member States to fully respect the rules and decisions of the European Union .
I would also stress the importance of aligning the reform with the goals of the Europe 2020 strategy , not least in the sense of strengthening the internal market and the role of small and medium-sized enterprises as essential motors for economic growth .
I am voting for the report for the reasons given above .
Ladies and gentlemen , the current Stability and Growth Pact regulations and the weak system of implementation have failed to sufficiently ensure a strong fiscal and macro-economic policy .
The recommendations provided in this report are a good start .
The rapporteur is correct to observe that we need to proceed with structural reforms regarding social policy and the integration of labour markets , and fiscal incentives to small and medium-sized enterprises .
The process of reducing long-term deficits must be combined with other efforts stimulating the economy , such as improved preconditions for investments and an improved internal market , providing increased competitiveness .
I also welcome the fact that the rapporteur recognises that any new proposed measures should not have a disproportionate impact on the most vulnerable Member States , in particular , the Baltic countries .
That would impede our efforts towards economic growth and cohesion .
Last year , enthusiasm for the euro waned slightly in non-euro Member States , including Lithuania .
Therefore , it is important for us to appreciate that decisions taken in the first half of the year to safeguard the stability of the euro are only temporary and will need to be supported by a better economic governance framework at EU level .
in writing . - The EU 2020 objectives re-establish the need for closer integration between Member States ' economies throughout the European Union in order to encourage productivity , competitiveness and growth .
The current economic crisis has demonstrated that the present economic governance model does not go far enough and cannot allow for progressive integration that will ensure the stability of EU economies .
It is for that reason that I am voting to support the recommendations of the Feio report , which highlights the need to strengthen EU economic provisions and to review and improve them in the longer term .
I understand that Europe needs to look critically at its current economic and financial stability plans in order to move forward together , towards a stronger , more closely intertwined economy that fulfils its potential as a global economic superpower .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Instrument for Stability - Financing instrument for development cooperation - Financing instrument for the promotion of democracy and human rights worldwide - Financing instrument for cooperation with industrialised countries - Financing instrument for development cooperation ( debate )
Τhe next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
the report by Franziska Katharina Brantner , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1717 / 2006 establishing an Instrument for Stability - C7-0042 / 2009 - ,
the report by Gay Mitchell , on behalf of the Committee on Development , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1905 / 2006 establishing a financing instrument for development cooperation and Regulation ( EC ) No 1889 / 2006 on establishing a financing instrument for the promotion of democracy and human rights worldwide - C7-0043 / 2009 - ,

the report by Kinga Gál and Barbara Lochbihler , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1905 / 2006 establishing a financing instrument for development cooperation and Regulation ( EC ) No 1889 / 2006 on establishing a financing instrument for the promotion of democracy and human rights worldwide - C7-0158 / 2009 - ,

the report by Helmut Scholz , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1934 / 2006 establishing a financing instrument for cooperation with industrialised and other high income countries and territories - C7-0101 / 2009 - and
the report by Charles Goerens , on behalf of the Committee on Development , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1905 / 2006 establishing a financing instrument for development cooperation - C7-0079 / 2010 - .
Mr President , we have a number of financing instruments to deal with today .
We have already debated one aspect this morning , but I am going to start by talking about the Instrument for Stability .
This instrument was created in 2006 and is the best funded instrument in the areas of the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction , conflict prevention , civil post-disaster support , civil peacebuilding measures and also for justice and policing in the anti-terrorism sphere .
Despite this , the size of the funding is relatively small .
So far , it only amounts to EUR 1.4 billion in the financial perspective .
This is not a lot of money , but it is good money , as it can be used relatively flexibly .
Consideration has repeatedly been given to cutting this , but so far , we have always managed to ensure that it has not been cut in the budget .
What is the mid-term review of this instrument about ?
What is up for debate ?
Well , there are a small number of points , but some of them are important in terms of content .
First of all , the long-term measures under Article 4 ( 3 ) are designed to make it possible to put in place measures to promote women in political processes , in particular , with regard to the media .
What we are actually talking about here , therefore , is the transfer of an already very successful field into Article 4 ( 3 ) .
So far , support has been given for media appearances by Afghan women standing for parliament .
We would like to have this incorporated into the long-term measures , rather than only being in the short-term measures , so that these women can continue to be supported in this way over the longer term .
Secondly , we want to see the peacebuilding partnership explicitly mentioned in the directive , not only in order to reward the development of formal dialogue with civil society , but also in order to bring the concept into the new era of the European External Action Service .
It should not be allowed to disappear , and we therefore think it is important that it should receive specific mention .
Thirdly , we are voting in favour of the increase in the proportion of funding for long-term measures under Article 4 ( 3 ) from 5 to 10 % .
However , I would like to remind the High Representative , once again , that the Committee on Foreign Affairs did endorse this increase at the last minute , as we were promised that , in future , extensive measures would be undertaken under the auspices of the Instrument in the fight against landmines , cluster bombs and leftover stocks of ammunition .
In other words , this increase in the long-term measures of 5 % of the overall budget line to 10 % was agreed on a conditional basis and we expect that you , Baroness Ashton , and the External Action Service will stick to this agreement and that the strategy paper for 2012 / 2013 will reflect that .
This is important to us , in other words .
To do otherwise would not be in the spirit of the agreement .
If Parliament and the Commission prevail , however , the biggest innovation in the content of the text in the mid-term review will be the explicit expansion of the remit to include small arms and light weapons ( SALWs ) .
At this point , I want to call on the Presidency once again to accept this idea .
The European Court of Justice has ruled in favour .
I know that it still pains some to accept this , but I hope that , with the External Action Service , we will now perhaps be able to overcome this disjunction between the Council and the Commission and to obtain agreement on how to proceed on the issue of small arms and light weapons .
I found this to be a very important point .
My final point concerns the issue of delegated acts .
We have already discussed this issue this morning .
I believe that we need a political solution in this regard and not a judicial one , which would represent a dead end .
One final very brief point : when it comes to the Instrument for Stability and programming in the External Action Service - we are truly convinced that planning and programming must continue to rest with those people who have been responsible for this up to now and that those people must not be downgraded to ' financial management ' but instead must continue to carry out content planning .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to voice my displeasure about the fact that , while we are today dealing with important topics such as funding , development aid and democratic principles , only 14 Members - I believe I have counted correctly - have been able to make it , obviously thanks to some competing or unfortunately-timed event , as everyone else has been disciplined enough to attend the other event .
It is unfair on those making presentations and on those acting as rapporteurs today , as well as on fellow Members , and I am not even going to mention the staff and the representatives of the Commission who have to sit here in front of an empty Chamber .

Colleagues , this is not a point of order : it is an interesting point and it might play on some local TV , but it is not a point of order .
Kindly do not interrupt the session with such points .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the rapporteur for the Committee on Development , Mr Mitchell , has asked me to substitute him because he could not be present today .
I would like to thank him for the work he has carried out with his customary punctuality and for the quality of his proposals , which received a favourable opinion - I would say unanimously - from the Committee on Development .
For the reasons I will state , but , above all , for the work that Mr Mitchell has carried out up to today , I am convinced that the report can be voted through with a broad majority .
I now turn to the report .
During 2009 , the European Commission tabled a proposed amendment to Regulation 1905 / 2006 , which establishes a financing instrument for development cooperation .
Through this proposal , the Commission asked Parliament to adopt an amendment that would allow non-governmental organisations to benefit from tax relief when operating in developing countries .
We accepted the request .
However , the regulation for development cooperation also contains implementing rules for the European Union 's development policy .
These rules provide that when the Commission accepts financing , it must follow comitology procedures .
This means that Parliament can examine these financing proposals and , if the Commission oversteps its authority , Parliament may adopt resolutions to ask the Commission to change the decisions in question .
Merely between 2006 and today , Parliament has felt that the Commission had exceeded its executive competences in at least 12 cases , but only in three of these did the Commission in fact amend or withdraw its draft decision .
Following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , the Committee on Development proposed the application of the procedure for delegated acts established by Article 290 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
The adoption of this procedure would mean that Parliament would have a more significant role , at least in the strategic financing decisions that the European Commission has to adopt .
In effect , according to the Treaty of Lisbon , in some well-defined cases , Parliament can delegate the power to take strategic decisions to the Commission , but what could these decisions be ?
In our opinion , the legislature is responsible for choosing which countries the European Union should supply with development aid .
There is then this question over which sectors to give funding priority to : education , health , environmental protection , capacities for good government or development of small businesses ?
Also , how are we to ensure transparency in the management of development aid ?
These are the choices and the subjects in which the European Parliament must play a more important role than it has in the past .
In these sectors , it must be the legislature that gives precise indications to the executive .
In the end , I believe that this is the way that the requests of European citizens are going .
I sincerely hope for the greatest possible consensus on this report by Mr Mitchell .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mrs Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , the European instrument for democracy and human rights is the financing instrument that supports human rights , the rule of law , the protection of democracy and the prevention of conflicts around the world .
The beneficiaries of this financing instrument are , in the first instance , civil society organisations , those civil society organisations and individuals which fight for human rights in the most difficult conditions , in third countries .
The great advantage of this financing instrument , as opposed to other geographic instruments , is that it can be paid out without the consent of the government of the country receiving the aid .
Therefore , its role is of great importance .
Nevertheless , in the case of this instrument , it has not been possible to finance the costs relating to VAT payments out of Community funds .
Therefore , the European Commission 's initiative suggested a technical amendment that would have helped the work and operation of civil society organisations in third countries using these funds .
Since such organisations are of crucial importance for the promotion of human rights in these countries and for developing political pluralism , it is very important not to make the work of these organisations , which already face difficult situations , even more difficult .
We therefore welcome the Commission 's initiative and , with the consent of my fellow rapporteur , Mrs Lochbihler , we lend it our full support .
However , this is only one side of the coin .
On the other side is the political significance of this matter .
The issue of the financial instrument has become part of the interinstitutional struggle which has been going on for a year now .
It is precisely because the instrument for financing human rights is essential for civil society organisations that it is important for the European Parliament to have a part in shaping the strategic and multiannual framework programmes .
What we are fighting for is that the European Parliament should have a say , insofar as it deems it necessary , in the elaboration of strategic plans for the financing instrument , through annual reviews rather than at seven-year intervals , at the time of the budgetary cycles .
This is the purport of the amendments which we hereby wish to support .
The Treaty of Lisbon confirmed the European Parliament 's right of oversight , which is , in effect , the institution of a ' delegated act ' which my fellow Members have already mentioned , and which we think we need to enforce and implement in this case .
The matter at hand is indeed the first example of the increased role of the European Parliament since 1 December 2009 .
Following the discussions we have had so far and the parliamentary debates , we , the rapporteurs on the financing instruments , have reached the joint conclusion that the dossier should be sent for second reading , and we are sending a serious political message to the institutions , because now , since the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , we should act in the spirit of the treaty .
We believe that these are the very instruments for which it is most crucial that Parliament truly exercise its democratic right of oversight .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights is a very recent instrument .
It can already be said , however , that it does a lot of meaningful and important work .
You can see that from the feedback that we get from representatives of civil society , both within and beyond the EU .
It is also a very positive complement to our human rights policy in the European Parliament and in the EU as a whole .
Work on human rights often takes place under very difficult conditions .
It is therefore particularly important that these instruments provide the ability for the EU to grant financial support to civil society establishments without the government in question having to give its consent , and potentially without it even having to be informed of the financial support in question by the EU .
We should stress a number of times that this aid is to be retained and - where necessary - extended .
Like my co-rapporteur , Mrs Gál , I can endorse the Commission proposal that there should be a tax abatement in those countries where payments from this financing instrument are still taxed .
That , too , would significantly ease the work of the NGOs in question .
However , I see it as a constant challenge in work with this financing instrument that , on the one hand , we also have complaints or negative feedback in this connection that makes quite clear that it leads to more red tape for civil society organisations that seek support from this instrument .
On the other hand , of course , there is the necessity for transparency with regard to what money is spent on and whether and how it is used .
However , we should take seriously the repeated complaint by small organisations , in particular , that they are put off from using this support and this is an issue we need to tackle now .
By the same token , I see it as a challenge that it is difficult to reach a lot of local organisations in the countryside , rather than in the metropolises of the global South , in other words , to make them aware that a financing instrument of this nature exists and how they can administer it .
Imagine the following situation : in a rural area where there is not always electricity , paper trails are perhaps an exception rather than the rule - that makes it necessary for particular attention to be focused on achieving these initiatives .
I see an opportunity in enlarging the EU embassies on the ground at this point - and it is , of course , actually settled that there are also to be responsibilities , and staff on hand , in each local EU embassy to speak up for human rights and democracy - in these civil servants - who I will now refer to as human rights agents - intensively engaging in taking on precisely this role as a mediator and this remit to provide information and communications , and also in getting through to local initiatives that perhaps do not have the ability to communicate in English , French , Spanish or another EU language .
It is still far too early , at present , to undertake a comprehensive evaluation of the Instrument .
The timeframe is much too short - the results would not stand up very well .
In a few years ' time , however , we need to very intensively devote ourselves to a comprehensive evaluation of this kind .
By evaluation , I mean not only looking back at what went well , but also considering what new ideas we should adopt and how we can further develop the financing instrument .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank all the rapporteurs - Ms Brantner , Ms Gál and Ms Lochbihler , as well as Mr Mitchell , Mr Scholz and Mr Goerens .


The proposals before us result from the mid-term review conducted by the Commission in 2009 at Parliament 's request .
That review concluded that the instruments are working well .
This is very positive and it gives a stable framework for our external relations until 2013 .
In some cases , the Commission proposed only technical amendments in order to bring them into line with the other instruments .
We are glad that we have your support on these technical issues .
The big issue identified in the review was Parliament 's objections concerning aid under the Development Cooperation Instrument ( DCI ) which could not be considered to be official development assistance .
Here , the Commission took the views of this House fully into account .
We tabled a proposal broadening the industrialised countries ' instrument to cover activities which cannot be eligible as official development assistance .
This is about engaging with important bilateral partners and global players with whom the European Union has a strategic interest in promoting diversified links , such as India , China or Brazil .
These countries are also interested in engaging in economic , academic , business and scientific exchanges with the European Union .
This amended instrument , called ICI Plus , is a short-term solution for three years .
We do not prejudge the future revision of external action financial instruments for the period after 2013 .
Parliament has already approved a budget for this instrument in 2010 .
In order to implement the budget for 2010 , the instrument needs to be adopted now , so I very much welcome the work done by the rapporteurs in finding a large measure of agreement .
On the instrument for stability , the Commission proposed to include EU action against the proliferation of small arms and light weapons , following the ruling of the Court of Justice in 2008 .
We are discussing the issues raised in Council and must find an agreed solution .
I can also assure you that funding for civil society under the crisis-preparedness component of the stability instrument will further increase this year .
Moreover , funding is scheduled to double over the years 2011-2013 for the peacebuilding partnership .
This will provide ample scope for funding civil society actions .
Even more important is the share of 22 % for civil society funding under the crisis response budget since 2007 .
This shows the capacity of NGOs in peacebuilding and crisis response .
It is an excellent example of the added value the stability instrument has brought to comprehensive EU action in fragile and conflict-affected countries worldwide .
Since the proposals concerning the mid-term review , another amendment to the DCI was presented on 17 March 2010 .
The so-called Banana Accompanying Measures have a clear objective : to support the adjustment of 10 ACP banana-exporting countries to changing EU import tariffs for bananas .
Bananas were the subject of the world 's longest-running trade dispute .
The EU had to find a solution and conclude an agreement in compliance with WTO rules .
The Banana Accompanying Measures are an integral part of this agreement and the tariff reductions are already in place .
I would very much like to thank again the rapporteur for his very constructive attitude .
I think we now have an effective programme that could start as soon as we have adopted it .
The tariffs are already in place and the ACP countries are urgently looking for the financial support the EU promised during the negotiations .
Now we come to the most debated issue .
Committees have all adopted amendments in order to treat strategy papers and multiannual programmes as delegated acts under the new treaty procedure in Article 290 .
As you know , the Commission and also the Council do not share this point of view .
We think these strategy papers and multiannual programmes do not fall within the scope of Article 290 since they do not supplement or amend certain non-essential elements of the legislative act .
However , we fully agree with the necessity to ensure Parliament 's strong involvement in overall strategic decisions .
It is also in the interests of us all to ensure that programming can be done in a practical and smooth way .
So far , Parliament has been involved through the democratic scrutiny procedure which was agreed in 2006 as regards the strategic papers and multiannual programming .
Through these procedures , the Commission engages in dialogue with Parliament on the content of the strategies .
This consultation process goes beyond the strict bounds of comitology .
Let me be clear : we definitely need to find a solution now .
The Commission is open to discuss with Parliament in order to find a way forward that addresses Parliament 's concerns .
The three chairpersons last week sent an invitation for an informal meeting between the steering committee in charge of this issue in Parliament , the Commission and the Council .
We very much welcome this invitation .
The High Representative , a representative from the Council and myself met the steering group this morning .
It was a very fruitful meeting and it very clearly confirms that it is necessary to find a solution in the shortest possible time so as to give full effect to the Treaty of Lisbon by also respecting pressing practical concerns , not least as regards the budget .
I feel confident that we can find a solution if we act together .
Mr President , Baroness Ashton , Commissioner Piebalgs , honourable Members , I too , on behalf of the Council of course , should like to thank the rapporteurs for their work and their involvement .
Allow me to add a few words to Commissioner Piebalgs ' comments , which the Council naturally fully endorses .
The Commissioner rightly drew attention to the main issue that remains unresolved , namely , Parliament 's wish to see the strategic papers and multiannual programming treated as delegated acts .
I do not intend to present in detail the Council 's position here this afternoon , but I will just say that the Presidency is obviously more than happy to reach an agreement that satisfies the three institutions and that enables us to adopt the financing instruments as quickly as possible .
Admittedly , I am thinking more specifically in this context of the previously mentioned ICI Plus and of the Banana Accompanying Measures .
I am delighted with this morning 's meeting with Baroness Ashton , Commissioner Piebalgs and the rapporteurs .
We feel that this meeting is a clear testament to the genuine will of our three institutions to secure an agreement , and the Presidency believes , as you know , that the current debate on the financing instruments should be kept separate from the negotiations under way between Parliament and the Council with regard to the committee procedure and delegated acts .
For the time being , you are aware that the Council is still examining these two issues and that any possible solution must indeed be endorsed by your Parliament .
That is why , in view of the urgent need to adopt the financing instruments , we must take the exceptional step of developing a solution that is specifically tailored to them .
The Belgian Presidency will ensure , for its part , that the work which was asked to be carried out following this morning 's meeting makes swift progress and produces tangible results that will allow us to reach an agreement as soon as possible .
This morning 's meeting leads us to believe that Parliament fully shares this objective .
Mr President , I am speaking on the subject of the ICI + Instrument .
The Instrument for cooperation with industrialised and other high income countries and territories ( ICI ) was launched in the previous parliamentary term .
In an opinion , the Committee on Foreign Affairs called for a financing instrument for foreign affairs to be created that had no connection with development aid but was aimed at the countries of Latin America , Asia and the Middle East .
The Commission then created the little instrument that is the ICI Instrument .
Unfortunately , the Commission saw this as an interim solution .
It replenished the Development Cooperation Instrument ( DCI ) countries but otherwise , produced little that was new and treated it as a trade instrument .
The Committee on Foreign Affairs therefore put forward an amendment concerning the title of the instrument that clarified the original intention to identify it as a foreign policy instrument .
The new title is a ' Financing instrument for cooperation with countries in the Middle East , Asia , the Americas and South Africa ' .
We ask for your support for this .
It would be worse than regrettable if the EU had no foreign policy financing instrument that was actually named as such .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Development . - Mr President , we must look at how the financing instruments - the DCI , the stability instruments and the human rights instruments - are important for the soft power that the European Union exercises around the world .
That soft power is growing , as demonstrated by our election monitoring , observation , democracy campaigns , and so on .
Parliament gave up 16 scrutiny instruments when it created the DCI .
We had 16 core decision powers which we gave up to the Commission in order to control the DCI instrument and facilitate greater cooperation .
This is working well .
Now we have a stability instrument for post-crisis development .
It needs to be fortified with a substantial amount of money , as there are many civil crises , civilian crises and military crises around the world .
There are currently 36 civil conflicts .
In the same manner , I think the human rights instrument needs to have oomph .
It is just not good enough for us to talk and talk and talk : we need to have people on the ground , instruments for monitoring elections , good governance and all the other things for which we require funds .
I am very pleased to support this .

Allow me to begin by expressing my full agreement with the conclusions from Mr Goerens 's report on the need for the Development Cooperation Instrument ( DCI ) and its benefit to the European Union 's policies to continue .
I also agree that the European Union must find a way to continue supporting banana-growing countries , even after the World Trade Organisation banned the granting of soft terms from the start of this year .
Incidentally , the Commission has not , strangely enough , carried out even once , between 1994 and now , an assessment of the assistance 's impact on these 12 countries , which is something that must be changed in the future .
The point which the Committee on Budgets is insisting on and which we do not agree with is resources being cut from other policies so that the EUR 190 million in question is allocated for the next three years .
There is a principle which we insist must be protected , namely , new policies must be funded using new resources .
This means that this new policy , even though it could be provided for in the financial framework from the European Commission , ought to be provided for in the budget and not funded at the expense of other programmes .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - Mr President , High Representative , Commissioner , I would like to welcome first of all Commissioner Piebalgs ' detailed and positive statement on the situation and his conclusions that the financial instruments are working well .
I think the stability instrument has been very useful in addressing conflicts and crises and we should , therefore , focus more on prevention and follow-up .
This also means robust support for civil society building .
Here again , the announcement of a substantial increase in funds for peacebuilding is to be welcomed .
We also welcome the news of , and understand the need for , the rise in the ceiling of measures under Article 4 ( 1 ) from 7 % to 10 % .
At the same time , it is crucial to ensure that the different EU instruments and programmes are used coherently and with an understanding of complementarity .
The Lisbon Treaty has to make the EU more coherent and efficient .
We have understood in this Parliament the need for technical modifications .
The question is rather about the political solution , as has been pointed out .
This concerns delegated acts and the European Parliament 's right to scrutiny .
Today , I am encouraged by the statements of openness on the side of both the Council and the Commission .
This is a sign that you are prepared to reach agreement in the shortest possible time .
I very much hope that we can reach such an agreement guaranteeing the rightful balance between the EU 's three institutions .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I should like to congratulate Mr Scholz for drafting this report , which establishes a financing instrument for cooperation with industrialised countries .
It is right that this instrument is managed by the Committee on International Trade because , above all , it relates to cooperation with industrialised countries and emerging countries , so there is a certain difference compared to other instruments .
First and foremost , I think it is necessary to emphasise the role of Parliament .
We have lost too much time in a tug of war with the Council and the Commission on an obvious issue after the Treaty of Lisbon .
We must defend the centrality of Parliament , in regard to both delegated acts and executive acts .
Secondly , I think it important to underline the strategic importance of this whole game and , thirdly , the need to intensify collaboration with developing countries and emerging countries , without taking money away from the poorest countries .
We must make an effort , within the budget of the European Union , to divert more resources to the poorest countries , bearing in mind that the problems with emerging countries are mostly to do with rules , rather than financing .
In any case , innovation must also be supported , but with additional resources that have not been taken away from the poorest countries .
Mr Chastel , Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , today , we are debating various financial instruments that enable the European Union to act in foreign affairs .
All these instruments are of a relatively recent date and are , moreover , of quite an original nature .
We have previously had nothing comparable and , elsewhere in the world or in other international or supranational institutions , there are , in fact , very few models of the kind of instruments that the European Union is developing .
Because of the groundbreaking nature of this body of instruments , we wisely agreed that we would evaluate them after only a few years and , where necessary , adjust them .
That is what is keeping us busy here this afternoon .
However , there are other important changes which have occurred in the meantime .
These days , we have a High Representative who is also Vice-President of the Commission .
During this sitting , we have been asked to approve the basic texts on the subject of the European External Action Service , which is , so to speak , a diplomatic arm of the European Union .
That , too , is a very important innovation .
Last , but not least , the powers of this House have been considerably extended .
We have , so far , had ample opportunity to exploit those powers and , as tends to be the case with young institutions , you push as far as you can to assert those new powers to the maximum .
Therefore , we are currently discussing with the other institutions where exactly lines need to be drawn .
I am also pleased at what both Commissioner Piebalgs and the President-in-Office have said about there being a will to reach an agreement .
Given that I used to be part of the executive power in my country in a former life , I understand all sides of the argument and I hope that we reach an agreement .
I also dare to hope that this House will not overplay its hand , as the English sometimes say .
To conclude , as regards the Instrument for Stability - I still have a few seconds - I would like to say that I very much welcome what Commissioner Piebalgs said , that , indeed , the intention is that we should concentrate , among other things , on the fight against the trafficking of small arms and light weapons .
That the intention is to involve NGOs more closely in the working of the Instrument for Stability and to make full use of the even more groundbreaking body of instruments for peacebuilding .
If that becomes a reality , you will be able to count on the full support of our group .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I would like to raise the issue of the Development Cooperation Instrument ( DCI ) in which I , and also colleagues from the Committee on Development , see an urgent need to strengthen the scrutiny power of Parliament .
That is because Parliament has the duty to control where the Commission spends the money and whether it is spent as intended , in this case , on Official Development Assistance ( ODA ) .
We have , in the past , found bad examples of where money was not spent in accordance with ODA criteria or where we found that it did not comply with the goal of poverty eradication .
Merely having the right of consultation , our proposals and our ideas were not taken up .
This clearly shows that we need a stronger position .
We need the power to codecide on where the money goes .
Not only the Commission , but we too as a Parliament have an obligation as regards policy coherence in development .
We also need to make sure that the money that is spent goes in the right direction and that other policy fields also work towards the eradication of poverty .
Parliament also has a responsibility towards the citizens of the European Union .
We must better control where the money is spent , namely , on poverty eradication .
European citizens are in favour of development aid .
They are even in favour of providing more development aid - as surveys have shown - but we also have to show clearly how we spend it and that we spend it to the benefit of poor people .
Therefore , the Committee on Development and I urge you to accept delegated acts for the DCI .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , the EU is the world 's largest multilateral donor of development aid and humanitarian assistance .
It also plays an important political role supporting the promotion of human rights and democracy in third countries .
My group , the ECR Group , strongly believes that properly structured new EU financial instruments are therefore essential .
They ensure a more efficient and effective way of disbursing EU taxpayers ' money and enable Parliament , particularly post-Lisbon , to scrutinise spending and strategic policy in a more open and transparent manner .
This democratic accountability is vital , especially at a time when Member States are themselves making severe cuts to their national expenditures .
Investment and development , democracy and human rights are potentially an important way to support , through soft power in particular , the EU 's wider foreign policy goals and could also contribute to reducing inward migratory pressures on the EU 's external borders .
Strong mechanisms to prevent corruption and misuse of EU money are , however , fundamental and we should also be careful not to force our own western liberal values , in particular , so-called reproductory rights , on to others ill-equipped or reluctant to absorb them under the guise of human rights .
Mr President , it is important to make clear at this point that , when it comes to the EU 's foreign policy financing instruments , the Treaty of Lisbon abolished the European Parliament 's right of supervision .
In so doing , the competency for these financing instruments was fully transferred to the Commission and to the High Representative , and with her , to the European External Action Service .
I find it completely unacceptable that Parliament and the Council are to be ignored , despite the fact that what is at issue is the European Union 's far-reaching foreign policy measures and their implementation .
We support Parliament 's cross-group efforts aiming to re-establish parliamentary supervision of the financing instruments .
Accordingly , we will support the amendments to the delegated acts in this regard , which , of course , were discussed earlier .
All the same , I would like to close by expressing my major concern in respect , in particular , of the Instrument for Stability and the European Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights , as I believe that these instruments are used in an undemocratic and non-transparent way and , in some cases , against the will of the countries in question , which gives them the character of an interventionist EU foreign policy .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , there is an anecdote going around the bazaars of Karachi roughly as follows .
A thief holds up the President of Pakistan and says : I want your money . The President of Pakistan says : I am President Zardari , your President .
The thief says : in that case , I want my money !
This is relevant to the debate today because it emphasises the key point .
The European Commission has no money .
All the Commission 's money comes from the taxpayers of the Member States or , to be precise , the taxpayers of the 14 Member States which are net contributors .
Even if the Commission gets its own resources some time , which , on the basis of the votes earlier today , looks depressingly likely , the money spent by the Commission would still be money from taxpayers .
I therefore leave you and ask you to consider very carefully this question : can you really suppose that hard-pressed European taxpayers and UK taxpayers , especially in today 's environment , really want an extra EUR 2 billion to be spent - because that is what these proposals provide for - just so that the EU Commissioner can strut about on the world stage ?
( DE ) Mr President , as ever , the funding bodies of the EU are having some problems .
Financial aid is difficult to obtain due to its complexity , while the monitoring systems continue to be designed in a less than optimal way .
One example of this is pre-accession aid , which , as we all know , is awarded to potential candidate countries , but which it only makes sense to pay if the states in question are getting to grips with their corruption problems or if the necessary structures are actually established .
I hope that , in this connection , the EU has learnt from its overhasty enlargement of 2007 .
When it comes to the Instrument for Stability and development cooperation , the budgetary funds far too often do not reach , or only partially reach , the local institutions for which they were intended .
This is partly due to the weak institutions in the recipient countries , but it is also due to faulty incentive structures and a lack of documented accountability .
There is food for thought in the fact that , according to an IMF study , the public expenditure of 33 countries is more than 50 % dependent on international development aid .
When it comes to financial aid from the EU , of whatever kind , the monitoring needs to be tightened up .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like , first of all , to offer my sincere thanks to the rapporteur , Mr Scholz , for the positive and open cooperation that we enjoyed .
In the trialogue , in particular , there was not always agreement , but we did enjoy a constructive atmosphere for discussions .
Expanding the financing instrument for cooperation with industrialised and other high income countries and territories will give the EU the opportunity to establish cooperation with the crucial emerging and developing economies on an equal footing .
This includes educational exchange programmes under the Erasmus Mundus scheme , and supporting entrepreneurial or cultural cooperation , and is something that I very much welcome .
There is one point that I would like to draw your attention to , and that is that , given the EU 's current financial situation - and that of every Member State - the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) does not find it acceptable to demand new , not currently available funding to realise the measures just described .
There needs to be a financial evening out with the financing instrument for development cooperation , the resources of which were only intended to be for all the emerging and developing economies .
I have therefore tabled an amendment on behalf of the PPE Group that makes it possible to achieve such a financial equilibrium .
I also want to say a quick word about the delegated acts .
This is an important issue - it has already been mentioned twice this morning .
There is absolutely no doubt , as far as I am concerned , that Parliament must have a right of supervision and veto over the whole package on the financing of foreign cooperation currently under discussion by means of delegated acts .
The spirit of the Treaty of Lisbon needs to make itself felt here .
There can be no compromise on the issue of whether delegated acts are or are not to be included in the financing instruments .
Mr President , the European instrument for democracy and human rights is crucial for an EU foreign policy seriously committed to the promotion of democracy , the rule of law and human rights worldwide .
It is the only instrument that we can now mobilise to help those who stand up for democracy and human rights in countries where basic freedoms are restricted .
We can do it without the consent of their respective governments .
Obviously , such a valuable instrument must be under proper European Parliament scrutiny , and this is why we demand the delegated acts procedure .
However , we should realise that this instrument is rather limited in terms of the funding available , and a sizeable part of it actually pays for the EU election observation missions : 22 % for the period 2011-2013 .
This means that the budget allocated to the European instrument for democracy and human rights must be significantly increased .
I would like to use this opportunity to point out a new tool which the European Parliament should help create , and which this instrument could fund in order to assist even more efficiently and with more flexibility the people who often risk their lives in fighting for democracy , rule of law and human rights in countries with dictatorships or oppressive regimes , and in countries seeking a transition towards democracy , but where they meet violent anti-democratic forces and where they need much more assistance in terms of building capacities to defeat these anti-democratic forces .
What we need is a cross-party non-governmental European foundation similar to the National Endowment for Democracy established by the US Congress .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
Mr President , thank you for giving me the floor .
My question to Mrs Gomes on her excellent proposal is to ask her what she thinks we could actually learn from the US models for this kind of more flexible and , let us say , less bureaucratic , financing of democratisation and human rights .
Mr President , it is exactly in the flexibility that the beauty lies .
Having a cross-party foundation , we would be able to identify particular cases which , on a broad basis , we would see as needing particular assistance , bypassing obstructive governments or authorities or forces , to build capacity for those who are fighting for human rights .
I think that the example of the NED in the US is indeed a very enlightening one , and we should not be shy of following what works from other parts of the world , in this case , from our American partners .
We already have the foundations of the different parties working in Europe , but often with different agendas , and certainly there are many cases where they should converge and would then be more efficient in providing assistance to those who are fighting for democracy and human rights .
You deceived me there , Ana .
I thought you were finishing , then suddenly you continued your speech , so I did not know whether or not to bang the gavel .
The fact is that in the blue card procedure , the questioner has 30 seconds and the person who answers has only 30 seconds .
( FR ) Mr President , I am very embarrassed because I would have liked to have taken part in this discussion .
I very much doubt that the US model is more effective than the European one .
The US model , when it deals with human rights , is essentially selective and completely self-serving because , in truth , the US model is first and foremost about active bilateralism .
I would like to congratulate my colleague , Charles Goerens , on his work , since he has succeeded in strengthening the development dimension of the approach , and I would , of course , like to thank Commissioner Piebalgs for the careful and favourable attention he has paid to this request .
For my part , I would like to make three brief observations .
Firstly , dismantling the Community preferences system too quickly can and will have dramatic consequences in some ACP countries that still export bananas .
Some of these consequences will directly affect the ability of ACP countries to promote sustainable development .
That is why I would like to argue in favour of a reasonable and slightly flexible interpretation of the criteria for allocating aid .
Aid should be allocated as a priority to those ACP countries that wish to maintain their banana sector because of the latter 's impact on their country 's sustainable development .
In this respect , it would have been helpful - this was requested but not obtained - to have already had an ex ante impact assessment on the situation of banana exporting countries .
I have two other general observations , and I will certainly come back to these in the following weeks .
From my point of view , the best way to channel this aid is , without a doubt , general budgetary aid wherever possible , and sectoral aid wherever desirable .
It would have also been helpful perhaps to have had a debate on the quantity of aid and on honouring the commitments made in 2005 by Member States .
This is central to the debate .
Moreover , what I have heard from some fellow Members here is deeply worrying .
Evidently , selfishness is king .
I must say that this is rather surprising .
Finally , to answer a number of questions , I would also like nonetheless to revive the idea of including the European Development Fund in the budget , since this would obviously enable us to monitor the Commission 's political action directly .

( FR ) Mr President , I wish to thank Mr Goerens for having taken into account international standards concerning the health and safety of workers and international environmental standards , especially those which relate , of course , to exposure to pesticides .
This report 's defence of small producers is crucial in my view because , need I remind you , in the end they receive only 1.5 % of the price paid by the end consumer .
It is worth remembering , as you already know , that every year , millions of small farmers are forced to move into shanty towns .
Now that the fight against pesticides and large-scale exposure to pesticides has been addressed in this Chamber , I feel it is crucial to apply the same requirements to the French West Indies , where chlordecone is used , and to the outermost regions .
I call on the Commission to do just that .
To conclude , although I welcome the progress made , I would like to reiterate that the fundamental problem with the banana trade is obviously the agricultural model , which should be rethought because it is geared towards exporting only .
The agricultural model should be reshaped towards greater self-sufficiency .
( PL ) I fully agree with Mrs Gomes that the issue of human rights is one of the most important issues with which we have to deal , which is why I completely fail to understand Mrs Lösing 's statement that money spent on human rights is sometimes , if not frequently , misspent .
Human rights are our constitutive , if not our most important task as a European Community .
I would also like to refer to one of the instruments for supporting democracy and human rights throughout the world , and to the statement that these instruments should be introduced and made operational regardless of whether third parties and other public authorities have given their agreement .
This , I believe , is a key statement which illustrates our duty .
We sometimes have to help build democracy and strengthen human rights despite the governments of some countries .
I believe that it is a worthwhile exercise , particularly and , above all , in places where the right to freedom of expression is violated .
It is our duty .
Mr President , there is an air of unreality about much of this debate .
All these reports concerning the promotion of democratic and human rights worldwide and financing instruments for development cooperation must be seen in the context of the chilling statement made yesterday in this very Chamber by the United Nations Secretary-General .
He said that 65 million more human beings will be plunged into extreme poverty in our world this year alone .
That is the harsh reality that flies in the face of fine words by government and the Commission .
Outside the doors of this Chamber , huge banners with EU logos proclaim : Halt poverty .
At the same time , the EU Commission - and indeed the major groups in this Parliament - are pushing neoliberal economic policies that slash budgets and public services , savaging the living standards of ordinary people , while transferring massive resources in bailouts to banks and speculators .
On financing development cooperation , the Commission congratulates itself on the new tariff reductions for bananas agreed with Latin America banana producers , but , in reality , this new arrangement is for the benefit of powerful transnational corporations .
The huge banana exporters , like Chiquita and Del Monte , will gain hugely but African , Caribbean and Pacific countries and small producers will be devastated .
Of course , the subsidy to small banana growers who face ruin because of the new agreement must not come from established social funds but from elsewhere in the EU budget .
Trade should be for the benefit of small producers and working people - the majority - not major transnational corporations .
( EL ) Mr President , I fear that the European Union budget for 2011 has erred , both in the provision for medium-term review and by establishing direct revenue from new taxes which , in the final analysis , will be paid by end users , in other words , by European citizens .
I feel that this is not the right time to levy these taxes , while Europe is sinking into recession and workers are losing their jobs , their purchasing power and , more importantly , their insurance rights .
Instead of giving to European consumers , we are taking away from them .
It would appear once again that , in our efforts to achieve budgetary discipline , we have put aside our plans for growth and that , in applying economic theory , we have forgotten political theory .
We must convince European citizens , by example , that we are taking care of them in the best possible way .
At this particular juncture , therefore , we should not behave like Marie-Antoinette .
I therefore have two specific proposals : firstly , our pay as MEPs should be cut by EUR 1 000 in 2011 and we should each use that money to recruit a young unemployed European citizen from our own country .
Secondly , we should cut our travel costs by flying economy class .
Mr President , as is so often the case with EU proposals , these financial instruments include measures which have great emotional appeal .
All decent people like us want to stop drug smuggling , people trafficking and the supply of small arms to conflict zones , but it is very easy to be emotional and generous with other people 's money .
Thus , while ordinary people in Greece , France , Ireland and Great Britain are having their societies ripped apart by cuts and their backs broken by taxes , the Scholz report will add EUR 176 million to the EUR 172 million already committed to help third-world capitalists gobble up even more of our jobs .
The Goerens report will blow EUR 190 million , including EUR 17.4 million for a facility for rapid response to soaring food prices in developing countries .

It may have escaped your attention , but food prices are soaring in our constituencies as well .
Worst of all , however , is the Brantner report .
Here , on page nine , it speaks of a financial envelope of EUR 2 062 billion by 2013 .
This is , of course , a misprint .
I hope to God it is a misprint , but the fact that such a ridiculous error could slip past all the experts and MEPs who have read this report speaks volumes for the careless abandon with which the European Union spends money .
This money does not grow on trees .
It is not handed out by a giant tooth fairy .
It is not the Commission 's money ; it is not MEPs ' money .
It is taxpayers ' money and a hugely disproportionate amount of it is British taxpayers ' money .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , for many years , the European Union has maintained a special and strong relationship with ACP countries .
This special relationship has resulted , in particular , in the granting of tariff preferences .
Such is the case for the banana sector , in which ACP countries have benefited from a preferential trading arrangement for their exports to the European Union .
This preference has been challenged at the WTO , especially by the Latin American countries , which are large exporters of bananas .
Therefore , in order to comply with WTO rules and to end a long dispute , the European Union accepted to reduce its tariffs in the banana sector in December 2009 .
On account of the privileged partnership that it maintains with ACP countries , the European Union nonetheless wanted to help banana-producing ACP countries to cope with this increased competition .
Consequently , Europe has pledged EUR 190 million until 2013 to help banana-producing ACP countries to adapt , be competitive and restructure their sector if need be .
In the report on which we will vote tomorrow , the European Parliament is reaffirming its commitment to , and support for , banana-producing ACP countries , and I very much welcome that .
Thus , we have suggested , among other things , that the European Union could adopt complementary measures after 2013 if necessary .
Mr President , we need to push for a maximum of transparency and accountability on the budget as this will contribute highly to the legitimacy of the EU 's external policy .
We are talking about significant sums spent on the basis of regulations which leave a considerable margin of manoeuvre for the Commission .
This is all right , but we need to exert our full scrutiny on strategy papers , multiannual indicative programmes and the like , as they are of a general scope and supplement the financial instruments by defining priority areas and objectives .
The Commission should show its result in an annual report to Parliament with particular attention to the ODA eligibility of all projects .
Programming and planning should be carried out by the same expert people who are doing this now , but the External Action Service itself needs more development and human rights experts to understand and work with these instruments in Brussels and in EU delegations in third countries .
( EL ) Mr President , I should like to refer briefly to the issue of democracy and funding to support it abroad .
We consider that democracy is a human achievement that needs to be safeguarded .
Is , however , democracy as we know it the democracy that we want to - and must - export ?
I am absolutely certain that the first thing we need do is to improve democracy at home .
When we have a country in which abstentions exceed 50 % , how can we talk of democracy ?
When millions of people are unemployed , can we talk of democracy ?
When , instead of being expressed through elected representatives , democracy is mainly expressed through and , at the same time , is controlled by the media , then what can we say ?
Is this the sort of democracy that we can be proud of and want to export ?
I believe that there truly are nations that need help in order for their rights to win proper support and acceptance from their governments .
Surely , however , this should be done with caution , following lengthy investigation of any potential negative , rather than positive , results ?
Can anyone say that funding democracy in Afghanistan pushed democracy forward ?
I think that there is far more we can do to make our democracy an example to be copied , rather than paying people to copy us .
( SV ) With the Treaty of Lisbon and the new External Action Service , we have the possibility of a greater presence on the world stage .
With this , of course , also comes an increase in responsibility .
We have a particular responsibility in all sorts of relations with countries that are not democracies , whether it be in relation to aid or trade .
Europe and the EU should and must take the lead .
The EU must show the way .
Among the financing instruments that we are now debating , there are building blocks that provide us with the prerequisites to really make a difference .
The prerequisites are there , but this does not automatically mean that we will succeed .
In order for every euro in aid to have the optimum effect , our development work needs to be constantly permeated by democracy promoting initiatives and opinion forming .
This may seem self-evident but , in fact , it is not for everyone .
In the United Nations , it is the EU that takes up the cudgels .
It is the EU that stands up in the negotiations against totalitarian regimes , and it is we who consistently and unswervingly stand on the side of the vulnerable , and , of course , that is how it should be .
It is therefore disappointing to see that , globally , the direction of change is not the one we would like when it comes to democracy and human rights , and I have a feeling that some Members of our Parliament do not fully appreciate the importance of democracy as the most significant and fundamental building block for development .
At regular intervals in the Committee on Development , we see attempts to initiate texts that subtly , between the lines , or even quite openly , give a degree of concession to totalitarian regimes .
It was recently claimed , for example , that the main problem in dictatorships is that there is a risk that healthcare will be privatised .
The fact that widespread starvation has never occurred in a democracy is seldom pointed out by anyone .
This attitude is quite simply not tenable .
In order for our financing instruments within the aid budget to function in an optimum way , we must place the promotion of democracy at the centre of all our external relations , and this must not only happen in formal contexts and verbally , without any practical action being taken .

( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am going to focus my speech on Mr Goerens ' report , which deals with the ACP Banana Accompanying Measures ( BAM ) .
As I myself come from one of the only European regions to produce bananas , I can only show solidarity with the ACP producers in question .
Solidarity , first and foremost , because a strong historical link unites the European Union to these countries , and we should do our utmost to ensure that they , too , are able to maximise the benefits of globalisation , of which they are , more often than not , the first victims .
Solidarity , also , because the trade concessions generously granted by the Commission to the WTO are in danger of dealing a fatal blow to this agricultural sector in our ACP partner countries .
Solidarity , but definitely not naivety , lastly , since the proposal for a BAM regulation as tabled by the Commission put much too much emphasis on the economic diversification aspect .
Given the loss of tariff preference that resulted from the WTO agreement , this programme 's main goal is clearly to ensure the sustainability of ACP banana exports and hence , to help make them competitive .
Furthermore , let us be honest , the funds set aside by the BAM are by no means enough and do not extend over a long enough period to make diversification happen .
Finally , I would add that , if we are aware of the urgency of the situation , we can accept these accompanying measures being financed through the extensive redeployment of heading IV of the budget .
The Council must be responsible and work towards finding a viable solution for the multiannual financing of this programme .
( PL ) The European Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights is , in my view , an instrument that is used and approached too technically at present .
It should be a political tool of the European Union to a greater degree , as it has a huge potential to support and promote democracy .
However , this would require a change in the way this European financial instrument is approached .
To date , the question of supporting democracy has been overshadowed by the issue of human rights .
Of course , these are extremely important , but I believe that supporting democracy itself , which is a different matter , should be given a much higher status and much greater weight .
That is why we must also strengthen non-governmental institutions in countries with authoritarian governments .
We should focus on grassroots democracy in those countries , building it from the bottom up .
This means focusing on civil society organisations which offer innovative methods of expanding the public space .
In order to succeed in this , we must first introduce regular monitoring of the impact of those organisations which receive European funding .
We must also , as the organisations themselves agree , set up a forum at which regular meetings are held to facilitate communication between donors and recipients , and not only donors from the European Union , but also from elsewhere .
Our application forms need to be simplified .
At present , they are simply beyond the understanding of many .
Finally , the Commission must work to relax financial regulation .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the title of this debate is likely to create a certain optimism because in theory , it is about defining the procedures for helping banana-producing ACP countries .
The reality is entirely different , and I have to say that the way they have been treated throughout this report is quite simply unacceptable .
We must first and foremost bear in mind the fact that the banana sector is vital for many African and Caribbean countries .
Yet , despite this , they have made the effort to accept , at the WTO , an agreement which lowers the European customs tariff to EUR 114 per tonne , in order to put an end to a long-standing dispute with Latin American producer countries .
However , the Commission seems to have forgotten to inform them of the bilateral negotiations under way with these same countries on a far lower tariff : EUR 75 per tonne .
In other words , the commercial consequences of these agreements will be deeply felt in a context in which the lion 's share of the European banana market is already held by multinationals based in Latin America .
Faced with this situation , during the last plenary session of the ACP-EU Assembly in Tenerife , all the members agreed to adopt as one a declaration calling for support measures tailored to producers ' needs to be implemented without delay .
Back in Brussels and Strasbourg , I see that , unfortunately - and this is no surprise - the right is backtracking and even opposing any reference to this declaration .
I am tired of this double-dealing , but , above all , I fear that this weariness is shared by our historical partners , who no longer believe in our will to truly support their development .
Mr President , I welcome this mid-term review of the European Initiative on Democracy and Human Rights ( EIDHR ) , commend the work of the rapporteur and welcome the changes allowing tax payments to be made .
Two-thirds of human rights organisations have been unable to obtain local exemptions , so this loophole which has diminished the real needs of the projects will now be filled .
To the Commission , I welcome the structured cooperation which has allowed Parliament to be consulted on your annual programmes , and I support the further amendments today on delegated acts .
I also remind you of the need to integrate the findings of the electoral observation missions into follow-up in the country .
And , to the Member States , I remind you that when it comes to the next financial perspective , do not be tempted to cut the EIDHR .
It has been tried before and failed , and this Parliament would ensure it would fail again .
( RO ) I would like to highlight the implementation of the European Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights in the separatist Transnistria region in the Republic of Moldova .
Transnistria is committing serious violations in the areas of democracy and respect for human rights .
In this regard , using this instrument offers a good way to promote democracy , the rule of law and respect for human rights in this region .
Projects have been launched as part of the instrument , including the one launched in 2009 on capacity building and promoting human rights and democratic institutions in Moldova 's Transnistria region .
It entailed the involvement of the region 's civil society in the democratic process .
However , experience has shown that this instrument has not been used to its maximum capacity as there have been frequent implementation delays and transparency problems .
I must stress the need to review this instrument with the aim of devising effective implementation strategies in this region .

( SK ) With its budget of EUR 1.1 billion for the period 2007-2013 , the European instrument for the promotion of democracy and human rights contributes significantly to the upholding and advancement of human rights and the strengthening of democracy worldwide .
I am pleased that the set of additional amending and supplementing measures takes into consideration and simultaneously makes provision for the changes ensuing from the Treaty of Lisbon by appropriately strengthening the right of Parliament for control in this area .
I also consider the explicit stipulation of the possibility to object to the delegated act within the period of two months from the date of notification a substantial asset for Parliament .
I believe that the empowerment of the authority of Parliament will help make this instrument more flexible , comply with the new requirements stipulated in the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , and better face the challenges involved in the protection of human rights and democracy worldwide .
( RO ) The common denominator which the three reports we are currently discussing actually have is that they examine the instruments intended to fund development cooperation and the actions taken to promote democracy and human rights globally .
I believe that it is natural for us to carry out such evaluations of the instruments for funding development cooperation , just as I think it is natural for us to exercise our right of control as part of the comitology procedure and highlight a series of problems linked to the way in which the Commission has implemented the instrument and interpreted some of its basic provisions .
I wanted to speak in support of the proposals tabled by the Committee on Development , which will supplement the accompanying measures proposed by the Commission , especially for the banana sector .
On the other hand , I would like to remind everyone that the purpose of the European Union 's development policy is to reduce and , in the long term , eradicate poverty .
I , too , believe that , in addition to human rights and the promotion of democracy , we must not forget this fundamental objective of eradicating poverty .
( SK ) The proposal of the Commission , amending and supplementing the instrument on cooperation with industrialised countries , relates to the extension of the geographic jurisdiction from the original 17 countries to a further 46 countries , to which , thus far , the financing instrument for development cooperation has applied .
I am glad that the European Union has decided to extend cooperation in accordance with the programme of the instrument on cooperation with industrial countries by adding more countries .
However , I do not understand the motivation for including some of the countries in this list .
I admire the citizens of the Democratic People 's Republic of Korea for tolerating and withstanding the long decades of abuse by the military regime , but I fail to understand the Commission officials who , in the submitted proposal , indirectly recommend to us that we help Kim Jong-Il improve the technological base of his military industry so that he may intimidate and threaten neighbouring countries more efficiently .
I firmly believe that modernisation of the Korean democratic people 's army should not be a priority to which the citizens of the European Union should make financial contributions , and that the Democratic People 's Republic of Korea does not yet belong to the list of countries proposed in the appendix by the Commission .
( DE ) Mr President , before I start , I would like to thank you for the constructive way in which you chair our session and for your fairness in naming who is to speak and who is not to .
The OECD countries pump over USD 100 billion per annum into development aid .
This means that they make up 90 % of the publicly funded development aid in the world .
The EU is the world 's biggest donor of development aid .
However , every year , EUR 3 billion worth of aid gets lost due to qualitative defects .
What can be done about this ?
In future , we expect monitoring that ensures that the funds are employed in a way that is traceable and durable .
We also expect the recipient countries to be reminded of their obligations , for example , with regard to cooperation in the repatriation of illegal migrants .
It is absolutely possible to use development aid as a means of applying pressure to conclude readmission agreements .
Uncooperative countries of origin for millions of illegal migrants must not be allowed to continue to look forward to millions in development aid .
I expect clear words in this regard at the forthcoming EU-Africa summit in November .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the financing instruments for development cooperation and for the promotion of democracy and human rights should be flexible in order to prevent stalemate situations of the kind we have already experienced many times .
The European Union is , in fact , releasing substantial funds .
These funds should not be made inaccessible because procedures are too complex .
Above and beyond the flexibility given to these instruments , however , I would like to stress the importance of really ensuring that small organisations and structures , too , can benefit from these grants , because nowadays , we are unfortunately too often faced with situations in which only large NGOs benefit from them , and only for a short period .
Indeed , I believe that prioritising small NGOs over longer periods could produce far better results .
These days , there are many small grass-roots organisations that do excellent long-term work at local level .
They are the real conduits of change , and that is why they , too , should be able to benefit from this aid .
Mr President , giving money from one 's own pockets is an act of generosity .
Giving money out of other peoples ' pockets , those of the taxpayer , is both less generous and less honest .
The additional EUR 176 million will not just be given to the poorest countries , but also to emergent countries whose exports are already and increasingly destroying our manufacturing bases and the jobs of our taxpayers .
A desire on the part of the EU to promote democracy and human rights in the Third World might be admirable , if it were not for the fact that European Union countries can , and do , imprison people who have committed neither acts of violence nor theft , but simply expressed heretical or dissenting opinions on political or academic subjects .
European Union countries can , and do , ban political parties openly , as in Belgium and Germany , or by the back door by civil action , as in the United Kingdom .
If we wish to spread democracy and human rights worldwide , we would do so more effectively and more cheaply by setting a good example .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , this has been a fascinating debate .
In a way , it very much coincides with yesterday 's speech here by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon , when he clearly said that the EU and the United Nations share responsibility in this world in the fight against poverty , the fight against climate change and the fight against nuclear proliferation .
It is a common challenge that we face .
On the whole , our citizens today are not too worried about this issue because they believe that we take care of this issue and also promote our values .
Transnistria was mentioned .
It is not thousands of kilometres away from us ; it is very close .
Concerning peace and security , it is true that we do not have too much conflict , but that is because we have an extremely active external policy in order to prevent any conflict as soon as it starts .
I believe that we have experience that we can be proud of .
Financial instruments definitely help us to address these challenges .
I believe that today 's debate was basically very positive about the experience that we have had from the financial instruments .
At the same time , I would emphasise that we have full accountability , and that it is taxpayers ' money .
Whenever we start a project , there are ex ante controls and there are ex post controls afterwards .
There is a Court of Auditors of the European Union that looks not only at whether the money is spent correctly , but also at the political reasoning behind this .
The Committee on Budgetary Control is quite tough with regard to any Commission spending , so I can assure you that taxpayers ' money is very much valued and is spent with good purpose .
We always discuss how to be more effective , but I can assure you that we follow policy objectives that have been agreed with this House .
Today 's debate has already started the next debate , because ambition concerning the revision of financial instruments has been rather humble until now .
We wanted just to adopt them until the year 2013 , with some particularities .
Some of you address the challenge for countries that will have particular issues because of our agreement on the banana trade .
It is necessary to adopt banana accompanying measures as soon as possible .
It is not only our credibility which is at stake ; countries really face a challenge .
That is the reasoning behind it .
I believe that this House was very supportive of it .
We have started to debate what will happen after 2013 , and I would draw your attention to the fact that this is the beginning of the debate .
We are not prejudging what will happen after 2013 .
The budget review was adopted by the Commission yesterday ; it will be considered in this House .
I intend to discuss the Green Paper on modernisation and development policy within the Commission .
I believe my colleagues will also come forward with issues .
We need to agree on policy priorities and also financial instruments well in advance so that we do not need to make an adjustment later if we find that there is not sufficient money in one instrument and we try to cover some of the priorities with reallocation .
I understand that this is not the best possible way , but it means that before adjusting the financial framework , we should agree what we would like to achieve , which instruments should be applied , and what scope we would like to see .
I would like to emphasise that , as a Commissioner , I have two budgetary authorities .
One is definitely this House , but the other is the Council .
I believe this means that , for all the scrutinies that we will carry out and on which we should agree , we need to follow the letter of the Lisbon Treaty , with the political willingness to find the right compromise so that democratic scrutiny can be fully emphasised to show that it is efficient , swift and effective .
This is exactly what we have discussed today in the meeting that I mentioned in the first speech .
I have every reason to believe that we will find the necessary compromise .
It will not be easy ; it will require a lot of political will .
On the Commission side , we definitely have the political will because I know what the stakes are , particularly for some of the measures where we need a swift conclusion of this process .
Thank you very much .
I very much commend the work of the rapporteurs , which was very much appreciated from our side .
rapporteur . - What will happen after 2013 ?
As regards the stability instrument , we have seen that it is wonderful because it is more flexible than other instruments , but that also occasionally leads to misuse for food crises , for humanitarian and natural disasters .
That should really be stopped and we should clarify , for the period after 2013 , that this is really for conflict situations , and maybe add more flexibility to other instruments in order to address more emergency situations .
Then there was another thing that I would like to highlight .
The recent British defence review puts conflict prevention at the core of the External Action Service .
I find that quite interesting and correct .
I think it is the right way forward to say that the External Action Service should become the hub for conflict prevention , in the interest of internal coherence .
The tools that it needs include the stability instrument .
I see others , like a mediation cell , being created within the appropriate structures .
I think we should build on this when we look at the period after 2013 , and ask : What do we need in terms of money and resources so as to really become a driving force for conflict prevention ?

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I should like to offer a heartfelt greeting to Commissioner Piebalgs and appeal to him to take an active part , as I believe he sincerely will , in the measures to be voted on tomorrow , because it is a matter of great importance for the European Parliament , which will have greater power after the Treaty of Lisbon .
Thank you , Commissioner Piebalgs .
I should also like to thank all the speakers who gave their support during today 's debate .
I sincerely hope that tomorrow 's vote will obtain a very broad majority , if not unanimous approval , thereby ensuring a great victory for the report by Mr Mitchell , precisely because it is important that the European Parliament has greater powers after the Treaty of Lisbon .
I would like to thank my fellow Members for participating in this debate .
Your comments have actually drawn attention to the same question that we , the rapporteurs , have had to grapple with in the past period .
I would like to thank the Commissioner for his constructive approach to this debate .
What we have seen today is that - as almost all speakers confirmed - the European financing instrument for democracy and human rights is a very important and perhaps the only instrument of the European Union for the democratisation of third countries and the defence of human rights designed in such a way that civil society organisations can receive it directly .
It can be paid out directly to organisations working in the field , without the support of the third country .
This is why it is important and we consider it necessary to promote every technical facilitation that will enable these organisations to access the aid that is often crucial to their survival .
At the same time , and for this very reason , since this programme involves such a priority area and we are talking about an instrument that is intended directly for these NGOs and civil society organisations , it is important that Parliament has a say in the elaboration of the strategy and long-term programme , and it is essential that Parliament should see how these funds are used , and not only at the end of the seven-year financial framework .
This is why we consider it important to emphasise Parliament 's democratic right of oversight and its right to have a say .
I believe that a joint solution will be found , especially after the meeting this morning with both Mrs Ashton and Commissioner Piebalgs , and I , too , seriously believe that if the political will is there , the legal obstacles will be overcome .
This , then , is the view we should take as we look ahead to the coming weeks .
Mr President , the cooperation between the Commission and Parliament in relation to the Instrument for democracy and human rights was good ; the relationship was very cooperative , in fact .
Occasionally , MEPs were invited to take part in an exchange of opinion between the Commission and civil society on specific programmes .
The debate , too , has shown that there are hardly any problems in administering the instrument .
That does not mean , however , that we can rule out occasional problems in application in future .
That is why Parliament 's right of supervision is very important .
However , the one point on which we have not been able to reach agreement so far is the establishment of a binding right of supervision for Parliament , which the Treaty of Lisbon allows for .
I therefore join the multiple others who have expressed the hope that we reach a compromise - in other words , a political solution - quickly and one that takes full account of Parliament 's rights .
Mr President , Commissioner Piebalgs , ladies and gentlemen , as the debate draws to a close , I would just like to express my sincere thanks , once again , to the shadow rapporteurs and to Mrs Lochbihler , for the constructive and results-oriented cooperation stretching back over a year of working together .
The debate today has demonstrated that financial issues , the use of budget resources , planning and the issue of the political control of the instruments are highly political issues .
To close this debate , I would therefore like to summarise what form the instruments are to take .
How we realise them has much to do with how European citizens perceive the European Union and thus , also with how the use of resources for one instrument or another is accepted by citizens .
I can therefore only repeat what I said to Baroness Ashton and to you , Commissioner , this morning during the briefing of the steering committee for the working group on delegated acts , which was that I think there is an urgent need to quickly reach a solution in relation to delegated acts , whilst preserving the legal and political responsibility of the legislator and the Commission .
The Instrument for cooperation with industrialised and other high income countries and territories ( ICI ) is being fundamentally amended in this parliamentary term .
We plan to release up to EUR 348 million for cooperation in the fields of science , academic exchanges , the Erasmus Mundus programme , culture , environmental protection and renewable energy sources and the stimulation of bilateral trade relations .
The aim is for particular consideration to be given , here , to small and medium-sized enterprises .

I have the following to say to the empty benches facing me , including because Mr Griffin is no longer there : I believe this to be a very important contribution towards the European Union 's openness to the rest of the world and towards its acceptance , both by its own citizens and by other countries with which we enter into exchanges .
In conclusion , then , we have started this financing instrument on its way through successful compromise negotiations between the Council and Parliament and attempted to adapt it to the challenges of the future and to reach agreement on all the issues of content .
I hope that , with the vote in this House tomorrow , we will take a decisive step forwards .
Mr President , I make no secret of the fact that the provisions set out in the Banana Accompanying Measures are a gamble on the future , for various reasons .
Firstly , the general trend of reducing trade preferences , from which ACP countries have benefited until now , is not going to change any time soon .
Negotiations under way are already aiming at tariffs close to EUR 75 per tonne of bananas , whereas we are working here on the basis of EUR 114 per tonne .
Secondly , the Commission had no other choice but to agree to negotiate a tariff reduction agreement with the countries competing with the banana-exporting ACP countries .
The alternative would have meant leaving the Dispute Settlement Body to sort out the problem .
Personally , I believe that a negotiated solution is the lesser evil for ACP countries , and this is the spirit in which we must also approach the Banana Accompanying Measures , since they would not have been the automatic outcome of a judgment by the Dispute Settlement Body .
Thirdly , since the world is not going to end in 2013 , which is the year when the Banana Accompanying Measures will end , we continue to believe that it is important to start preparing right now for the period after 2013 .
Indeed , the EUR 114 tariff paid at the borders of the European Union on each tonne of bananas is already soon going to be exceeded in practice .
I said at the outset that we were already talking about EUR 75 per tonne .
I feel it is wise , therefore - and this is my fourth point - to preserve the European Parliament 's supervisory powers .
We must ensure that the right to oversee strategy papers , laid down in Article 290 , does not become a dead letter .
I think we can safely say that , in this instance , our cooperation with the Commission has been extremely fruitful .
This Parliament is not a troublemaker ; on the contrary , it is forever enriching the debate and helping the Commission move forward on this matter .
Finally , Mr President , this is a personal observation , but I am making it as rapporteur , even so .
Once more , we are witnessing here a squabble between emerging countries , on the one hand , and least developed countries , on the other .
Moreover , were it not for the European Union acting as an ally of the weak in order to mitigate the likely effects of a trade agreement , in all its brutality , the least developed countries would feel even more isolated .
I invite the Commission to start thinking right now about the period after 2013 , because I believe that the measures which will be decided on now and which , I hope , will come into force before too long , will suffice to make banana production sustainable in the countries concerned .
I hope that these measures can help ensure the long-term survival of the banana sector and that those who are unable to keep producing can find alternatives .
I think that , post-2013 , as I have already said , water will continue to flow under the bridges over the Rhine and the problems with regard to the banana sector will still be there .
We already need to be thinking about a post-2013 strategy .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Thursday , 21 October 2010 , at 12 : 00 .
Ukraine ( debate )
The next item is the statement by the Vice-President of the Commission and High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy on Ukraine .
Baroness Ashton was not able to remain with us today .
Commissioner Füle will present the matter on her behalf .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , thank you for this opportunity and I apologise on behalf of Catherine Ashton , who asked me to share with you what she intended to tell you .
I am pleased to have this opportunity to make a statement on the current situation in Ukraine .
I should like to make my remarks in the light of three important upcoming events : the EU-Ukraine Ministerial meeting which will take place in Luxembourg on 26 October , the local elections which will take place on 31 October , and the 14th EU-Ukraine Summit which will be held in Brussels on 22 November .
In recent times , Ukraine has enjoyed a high level of political freedoms .
Successive elections have been recognised as having been conducted in accordance with international standards .
Ukraine has developed a dynamic and diverse civil society and media environment .
There have been consistent improvements across the board with regard to respect for human rights .
As a consequence of these developments and of the commitment of successive governments to the path of closer ties with the European Union , relations between the European Union and Ukraine have acquired considerable momentum .
This is reflected most clearly in the ambitious and far-reaching European Union-Ukraine Association Agreement which we are currently negotiating , and which aims at achieving the twin goals of political association and economic integration with the European Union .
President Yanukovych 's government has undertaken a number of important economic reforms in recent months , which should be commended .
These include the adoption of a public procurement law , which should play an important role in the fight against corruption and in increasing competitiveness .
The adoption of a gas sector reform law , which paves the way for Ukraine 's imminent accession to the Energy Community Treaty , as well as the agreement it recently reached with the IMF for a standby agreement , are also critical steps in securing macro-financial stability , transparency and a return to growth .
These reforms go in the right direction and must be sustained .
The Ukrainian Government has also managed to achieve a level of stability which has eluded Ukraine 's political establishment in recent years .
This is an important and necessary development in ensuring effective governance of the country .
Nonetheless , we are concerned at consistent and widespread reports of a deterioration in respect for fundamental freedoms and democratic principles in Ukraine .
Particularly worrying are complaints related to freedom of the media , freedom of assembly and freedom of association .
Respect of these fundamental values is essential .
They are the best guarantors of individual freedoms .
They ensure a genuine competition of ideas .
They are an essential component of truly open , innovative and competitive societies .
On 1 October , the Ukrainian Constitutional Court handed down a judgment which overturned constitutional changes made after the 2004 Orange Revolution .
This decision only increases the need for Ukraine to achieve wider constitutional reform through an inclusive constitutional reform process and , to a great extent , takes up a key theme of the European Parliament 's resolution of 25 February this year .
Such a process should seek to establish an effective and lasting constitutional system of checks and balances in accordance with European standards .
For the European Union and our Member States , respect for human rights , democratic principles and the rule of law are fundamental principles that bind us together .
They are principles that cannot be compromised , so too for our relations with key partners such as Ukraine .
The pace and depth of our rapprochement with Ukraine will be determined by full respect of these values .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the people of Ukraine have come out impressively in favour of a European future for their country again and again .
Disturbing reports from Ukraine , however , indicate developments that distance the country from Europe .
That is why we are having this debate ahead of the municipal elections .
We will be able to discuss economic reforms in November in connection with the EU-Ukraine summit .
We therefore need to talk about intimidation by the secret police and restrictions on the freedom of the press and the ability to take part in the elections unhindered .
Developments like this cannot be balanced out by positive news in the economic sphere .
' Economic prosperity through authoritarian rule ' is a Chinese approach , not a European one .
Those who hold power in Ukraine today should not be allowed to believe that they can escape just because the broad European public takes no notice or because the previous government admittedly did have failings in relation to good governance and combating corruption .
These things are true , yet there was no atmosphere of being watched , there were no visits from the secret police , as has been experienced by the rector of the Catholic University of Lviv and by young people involved in NGOs and opposition parties .
Cutting off power to businesses , seizing computers , occupying party offices on the grounds of supposed risks of attacks - the whole gamut of the déjà vu is on show in Ukraine .
There is method to it .
The secret police is headed by Mr Khoroshkovsky , who actually runs a media empire and is now also a member of the committee to appoint the most senior judge in the country .
That , too , distances Ukraine from Europe .
There is little left of equality of opportunity in the political contest before the municipal elections .
The opposition is being partially excluded from the elections , while puppet parties are being spontaneously formed and authorised to take part in the elections by compliant local authorities .
In Kiev , the district councils are being unceremoniously abolished so that no elections are taking place there - the governing party knows that it will not win there are the moment .
The power vertical has the objective of achieving control over regions that have previously been inclined to disagree with it .
We put forward our European experience as an alternative .
Our Member States took important decisions in democratic consensus between government and an opposition ready to take responsibility - for European reforms , for the rule of law , for a competitive market economy , for European integration .
We want Ukraine to continue down this road with us .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( PL ) Thank you for allowing my question .
It is always good to be able to start such a debate .
You have actually painted a rather gloomy picture of what is currently going on in Ukraine , even going so far as to compare it with China .
Do you really believe that the current situation in Ukraine is so dire that we should hurl such grave accusations against the country ?
What are your views on Russia in this context ?
Is equating Ukraine and Russia not doing Ukraine an injustice ?
Mr President , I said that looking to achieve economic prosperity through authoritarian rule is not a route that we in Europe can go down .
We know this from China .
I did not make a comparison , I merely stated that that would be the wrong route to take , that it would not be a European route .
The image that I sketched is a very realistic one , I think , for the people on the ground .
The supposed economic achievements there still need to demonstrate their effectiveness .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , Ukraine is a very important country to us .
It is a country which faces a lot of challenges .
I would like to thank the Commissioner for a perfect description of the situation , as well as a perfect description of our expectations .
A new government was elected through free and fair elections , recognised by all of us .
Today is the right time to leave this government to deliver , and not to prejudge its achievements or non-achievements from the first minutes of its mandate .
The real problem of this debate is a problem we have here .
We were too fast in dividing that country into pro-westerners and pro-easterners .
Now we have a problem , since the pro-westerners are not in power , in recognising the pro-easterners ' capacity to deliver and to help the country promote its European expectations .
This is the real problem with this debate today and we should understand that the real pro-Europeans are the pro-Ukrainians - those who are able to bring the rule of law , democracy and European modernisation to their country .
I would conclude simply by asking colleagues to decide to postpone the resolution we are expected to adopt , because the Ukrainians are facing elections and they face negotiations with us .
We should not adopt resolutions in the middle of a political process and before we have the facts on the basis of which we can indeed draw conclusions .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , we seem to have difficulties in knowing how to deal with our Eastern neighbour , Ukraine .
It is just as difficult for Ukraine , which treats Europe one day as an ally , another day as a problem .
This is why I believe we should be pragmatic , recognise the realities on the ground , and find common items on our agendas to reach agreements .
Economic cooperation has always been Europe 's most powerful engine for greater integration and Europe has owed its success to this pragmatic approach since 1956 .
So we must continue to focus on both institutional and economic reforms to be undertaken by Ukraine in parallel .
This two-track approach is the only one possible if we want to create a virtuous circle that could lead to democratic stability in this country and in the Eastern neighbourhood .
A priority should be to support a healthy business environment and the achievement of a functioning market economy in Ukraine by encouraging their property and VAT reforms and their efforts to combat high-level corruption , among other priorities .
This is why I see the association agreement as a powerful instrument of reform , and it is why we should continue our negotiations on the establishment of a deep and comprehensive free trade area and on Ukraine 's accession to the Energy Community Treaty .
In that context , I welcome Ukraine 's accession to the WTO , which should be seen as an important step in Ukraine 's acceptance of European economic standards .
I hope that we will be able to overcome the continuous postponement of the FTA and encourage the virtuous circle of mutual trust , which is beneficial to the whole region and to Europe .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , first of all , I would like to say that I share the concern about the intensification of the situation and the undemocratic developments in Ukraine .
There are more and more reports about the repression of the freedom of expression of journalists , regular threats to committed individual members of the NGOs and people working for democratic development .
The role of the secret police , too , gives real cause for concern .
However , I do not believe that the altercations about freedom of the press and democratic development in general begin with the last election , rather - and I have said this here often - all the leading players in Ukraine have repeatedly abused their power for purposes including bringing their own interests to fruition .
This abuse is getting worse and that really must concern us .
We would be doing ourselves no favours if we were to adopt this resolution without being worried about certain economic developments in Ukraine .
I am watching with just as much concern how Russia 's influence on the Ukrainian economy , its energy sector , but also other sectors , has been systematically expanded .
I would therefore also advise that we do not have to vote tomorrow but instead after the delegation has visited Kiev - a delegation is going there the weekend after next - and before we have the summit here , after careful preparation in all areas to agree what the European Parliament 's position actually is regarding the situation in Ukraine .
I have gone down this path from the pre-democratic times to the new times with numerous Ukrainian friends .
Ukraine was on a very good path .
It was our impression that the last elections took place in accordance with democratic conventions .
If the situation should not now improve , but instead worsen , we should nonetheless consider very carefully how we intervene and how we do not intervene .
In any case , I would advise against making a decision before our next visit to Ukraine .
Our voice will be louder if we bring up the debate on the things about which we have spoken in the resolution over there .
As I say , I really am concerned .
I am receiving a lot of reports that everything is heading in a negative direction .
However , we would be doing ourselves no favours if we were to rule out debate on the ground over there and make too fast and too hasty a decision .
Many of us here played an active role in the Orange Revolution by helping the Ukrainian democrats at a time of hardship .
However , we always stressed the fact that the aim of our involvement in Ukraine was not to support any particular political force , but to help make Ukraine a democratic and free country .
Today , we should remember that the European Parliament did not play a role in Ukraine 's internal politics , but acted as a guardian in two very important ways : on the one hand , by upholding and assisting Ukrainians ' European aspirations and , on the other , by upholding democracy , human rights and all the values we regard as European values in Ukraine .
I say that the tone of the proposed resolution is not one which will help those who regard themselves as friends of Ukraine .
Today 's resolution will only push Ukraine closer to Russia , and to those who say , ' you will see , there is no room for us in the West .
It is closing its doors to us ' .
We have to be open to Ukraine , we have to tell it what European standards are , and we must keep up the pressure to ensure they are observed , while , on the other hand , we must absolutely prevent Ukraine from returning to the East .
I would like to ask Mr Gahler , whose involvement in human rights and international politics I value greatly , why he finds it necessary to use such damning words about Ukraine .
I would like to hear from him whether his colleague , Angela Merkel , used such damning words about Russia during her recent meeting with Mr Putin .
Mr President , at the beginning of this week , Ukraine made headlines in the Dutch press - and I will say it in this auditorium - not very flattering headlines , unfortunately .
That was on Monday .
In brief , Ukraine is the Wild West of Eastern Europe .
Foreign investors are said to fear the lawlessness that reigns in this country where , last week , no fewer than 3 000 buildings and companies were expropriated through fraud and violence .
This process involves wide boys acting in cahoots with the country 's politicians to dupe entrepreneurs .
Meanwhile , Member States of the EU have been the largest direct foreign investors in Ukraine since 1991 .
Commissioner Füle , are you aware of these major concerns which affect European investors in Ukraine and what specific steps has the Commission taken to protect legitimate , legal European business interests in the Ukrainian economy ?
That would be showing commitment .
We have nothing against Ukraine .
My party even strongly advocates Ukraine 's eventual membership of the European Union , but we do have to maintain a sober perspective , of course .
We are witnessing worrying developments , not only in the field of human rights , but also in the fields of economy and business .

( DE ) Mr President , within a few months of the presidential election in February of this year , in which Mr Yanukovych celebrated his comeback , the democratic accomplishments of the Orange Revolution are clearly being lost .
When , however , even the financial markets judge the new government to be more stable and predictable than the government put in place by the Orange Revolution , that is probably a sign that democracy according to Western - according to our European - preconceptions cannot be transposed on a one-to-one basis to every country , including to those of the post-Communist sphere of influence .
The current decision by the Constitutional Court would indeed strengthen the position of the President and weaken that of the parliament , of that we can be sure .
Those who know the region say that a de facto presidential system was already in place before the pro forma court judgment .
Growing restrictions on the freedom of the press and of opinion put Mr Yanukovych 's reassurances that democratic standards will be maintained in doubt .
If the President succeeds in both reinforcing his own power base and achieving an economic recovery by carrying out central reforms in Ukraine , which is , of course , one of the poorest countries of this continent , he will perhaps keep himself on his presidential throne for longer and I believe that that would be something that , plainly and simply , the European Union would have to take note of .
Mr President , developments in Ukraine clearly illustrate the old saying about how power corrupts and absolute power corrupts absolutely .
The present ruling élite has been exercising power since the election of President Yanukovych and much of what has been done points in the direction of favouring the concentration of power .
This is all the more striking if we recall the results of the presidential elections which gave Yanukovych a small majority and demonstrated that he had strong support in the south and east of the country only .
Yet - and this is the striking feature of Ukrainian politics currently - there has been a steady movement in the direction of marginalising alternative centres of power .
The media , rule of law , the opposition , the autonomy of the state administration , have all been affected .
What is particularly worrying is that the secret police have acquired the capacity to intervene very extensively in the affairs of the country .
All this augurs badly for the future , especially if Ukrainians genuinely seek a European future , because the system being built by Yanukovych points away from Europe , not towards it .
The most that can be said for the changes is that they have brought a degree of stability to the country , but increasingly , this stability foreshadows stasis and immobility .
At the same time , it is true , Yanukovych has certainly improved relations with Russia , but has thereby accepted a degree of subordination to Moscow that is new .
Whether Ukrainian society will accept this transformation in the longer term is an open question .
( PL ) Let us ask ourselves what has actually happened in Ukraine : a coup d 'état , or a military coup , perhaps ?
Those would be the only situations in which we should sit up all night drafting resolutions , sitting down at the negotiating table the next day .
We are negotiating in such a way that the absolute majority simply dominate the way the resolutions are worded and what they say .
The language of the draft resolution by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) is the language used to condemn African dictators and South American regimes .
This is not the right kind of language to use for the situation in Ukraine .
I would like the members of the PPE to decide whether we should describe Ukraine using the language of Commissioner Füle , who says ' yes , but ... ' , or in other words that some things are good , but there are a lot of things we do not like , or whether we should use negative language , whereby there is nothing we like , and everything is to be condemned .
Ukraine was in chaos for five years .
We witnessed this chaos .
We helped the democrats and we helped everyone who wanted to move towards the European Union .
We have had six months of consolidation , consolidation which may have a negative outcome , and our job is to point out these negative outcomes , but not now and not in this manner .
I understand the PPE 's regret that Yulia Tymoshenko lost the elections , but I say to you : it is unfortunate , maybe she had a chance of winning , but she lost .
Now she has lost , let us acknowledge what is really happening and let us keep the Ukrainian authorities under careful observation , but let us not throw out the baby with the bathwater .
( PL ) I am very grateful to Commissioner Füle for his constructive attitude .
It is one which will bring great changes in relations between the EU and Ukraine .
I also thank Mrs Harms for her balanced position , and her wise - as ever - words on the subject of Ukraine .
All information from the OSCE shows that Ukraine is one of the few countries of the former Soviet Union in which proper elections have , to date , been held .
This is an achievement of Ukraine , both on the orange and on the blue side .
It is an achievement that we cannot question before the next elections are over .
It would be a serious political error on the part of the European Union and our Parliament if we listened to the voice of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and threw doubt on the fact that elections can be held successfully in one of very few countries in the East .
Let us help Ukraine conduct normal elections .
Let us not make any judgments before they have been held .
I would like to address the Ukrainian guests present in this House today : Ukraine 's place is here , in this Chamber , and that is why we are subjecting you to the same standards that we apply to the countries of the European Union .
That is what you fought for together , whether blue or orange .
Every issue , even the tiniest one , to do with human rights or press freedom will be scrutinised here .
Do not be surprised - I am talking to our Ukrainians brothers .
That is because you are being treated as a European country , according to European standards .
My last appeal to you is to act together in your dealings with the European institutions and Parliament .
We believe that in the future , you will be among us .
We know that it will not happen soon , but we want to help you with this .
I agree with Mrs Harms that the time for resolutions is after the elections .
It is then , before the EU summit , that we will be able to discuss the issue frankly and draft a position with which to present the European Parliament 's common position .
( LV ) Ladies and gentlemen , Ukraine is a country of great strategic significance for the European Union .
That is why we cannot be indifferent to what happens in that country .
On 1 October , tens of thousands of Ukrainians took to the streets to protest against the constitutional changes initiated by Yanukovych and confirmed by the Constitutional Court , the composition of which was changed shortly after the election of the President .
These reforms were carried out without democratic debate and without the agreement of the Venice Commission .
The changes weaken the balance of power and threaten the independence of the judiciary in Ukraine .
Economic reforms are also put under threat .
Our Ukrainian friends have expressed concern over the organisation of the coming elections , over the excessive representation of the ruling coalition in the Central Electoral Commission , the restrictions on non-governmental organisations and state interference in the activities of opposition parties .
This is precisely why this resolution is needed today .
Unfortunately , the ruling coalition rejected the opposition motion in the Ukrainian parliament to make membership of the European Union a priority of Ukraine 's foreign policy .
We must , however , continue to stress the importance of cooperation with Ukraine and monitor the implementation of agreements that have been concluded .
The European Union must demand that corruption be fought and , at the same time , help in that fight , and that press freedom be ensured .
A situation in which a media magnate at one and the same time both heads the state security service and is a member of the High Judicial Council , which has the power to appoint and dismiss judges , is not characteristic of a democratic state .
In conclusion , we also need to take positive steps , providing not only for the introduction of a visa-free regime in the future , but also economic cooperation , especially in the energy sphere , while , at the same time , we await the democratic development of Ukraine .
That would be the objective of the next resolution , which we should draw up after the election , and should cover energy , the economy and other issues of significance for Ukraine . Thank you .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

Mr President , I have a very simple question .
Maybe this is an interpretation problem , but you said that the current Ukrainian Government rejected future membership of the European Union .
As far as I know from the declaration of the President and the official statement of the Ukrainian Parliament 's long-term policy , membership of the European Union is one of their top priorities .
So the question is whether I misunderstood you , or you misunderstood the President of Ukraine .
( LV ) Yes , I shall gladly clarify this point .
Clearly , that was an inaccurate translation .
The President of Ukraine has announced a willingness to continue convergence with the European Union .
Nevertheless , membership of the European Union has , according to the decision of the Ukrainian Parliament , not become the first priority .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

( DE ) Mr President , I would like to ask Mrs Vaidere : now that we have put down in black and white all the points concerning our consternation in relation to the misuse of power and the repression in Ukraine , what objection can there be to taking this text to Kiev in a fortnight 's time in order to discuss it and then to decide how we proceed from there ?
I would like to know the answer to this question , as , from the previous experience of our delegation , I think this is the best and most productive way to move forwards , especially if we want to gain democratic influence .
( LV ) Yes , I am happy to reply .
Personally , and yet I do not know why , Mrs Harms , nevertheless I am personally worried , even after our participation in the Ukraine summits , about these signals that we are currently receiving from our Ukrainian friends on the composition of the Central Electoral Commission , media freedom and the restrictions on non-governmental organisations .
These all exist , and it is precisely if we express our concerns about this that the regional elections could , in my opinion , take place in a much better atmosphere .
There is no one to prevent us from going to Ukraine next week , even with our resolution .
No one is preventing us from drawing up another resolution , as I said , on economic issues .
We must definitely do this , but as regards these concerns about the deterioration of the democratic situation , we must unfortunately , that is , I think we ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , I would say that the quality of the debate today shows that it was not prepared .
We did not need this debate and now is not the time to adopt resolutions on Ukraine , neither today nor tomorrow .
I must remind you that six months ago , the country was in freefall and on the verge of falling into chaos .
We had political , economic and financial instability - even a deep crisis - but now we have a very different picture .
We have to recognise that in the space of a few months , the Ukraine Government has succeeded in bringing the country back to normal ; back to political , economic and financial stability .
There are problems .
We do not deny that .
But we must admit that they are listening to our voice ; some corrective measures have been taken , for example , on the issues of electoral law and some electoral practices .
In this sense , our voice will be heard there as long as we do not cry out on each occasion , but adopt a decent approach to Ukraine .
That is why I think we are doing a disservice to our parliamentary committee which is going to Ukraine in 10 days time ; we are doing ourselves a disservice in undermining our own role by adopting such resolutions 10 days before the elections .
Such a move has never happened before .
It is a clear attempt to influence the elections .
We should not allow our parliament to be part of this game .
Therefore , I propose that we postpone the adoption of the resolution , and that we ask our colleagues in the EU-Ukraine Parliamentary Cooperation Committee to check with the colleagues there , to discuss those issues ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , the new Ukrainian authorities are new only in name .
A regression towards authoritarian practices is sweeping the country .
The legal framework for the forthcoming local elections has been altered and could jeopardise the participation of the opposition parties .
The Constitution has been changed , and a de facto presidential regime is back in place .
The media and civil society are under constant pressure , and the Ukrainian secret service seems to be reliving its Soviet days .
It is time for us to clearly express our concern through a resolution .
The Ukrainian authorities should get the message that closer ties with the EU cannot be guaranteed by friendly declarations alone .
An undemocratic Ukrainian Government cannot be a reliable partner for the EU , especially in the strategically sensitive area of the Black Sea .
( DE ) Mr President , I think we all need to live up to our responsibilities .
The government in Ukraine needs to implement the rule of law and the freedom of the media , and it needs to do so effectively , but the opposition , too , needs to show that it is responsible and must not give out false information .
When I look at how many of the claims contained in your draft resolution were then immediately denied by the people in question , it shows how much false information is often passed on here .
We , too , need to show that we are responsible .
We cannot allow ourselves to become embroiled in the internal political argument .
Ladies and gentlemen - and I address this in particular to Members of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) - there is no point in us defending one group or another in Ukraine on party-political grounds .
That is not our job .
Next week , we will be having discussions with the Foreign Minister , then we have the elections , then the EU-Ukraine Parliamentary Cooperation Committee , which is travelling to Ukraine , and it has always been the case - Mr Gahler , I am appealing to your sense of fairness here - that we say whether or not things went well after the elections , rather than pre-empting the elections by saying that things will not go well .
That is not our job , and I am appealing to your sense of fairness - something that you normally always demonstrate - and I beg you to remain fair in this case , too .
( PL ) Only those who have lived under the socialist system can fully understand the nations which experienced lack of personal freedom , lack of press and media freedom , or the difficult road these nations had to follow .
I understand those who are today raising their concerns and speaking of the lack of respect for people 's rights and the multifaceted problems that Ukraine is grappling with today .
Yet we must also acknowledge the small but positive changes , such as the recent democratic elections at which we , as representatives of the European Parliament , were observers .
I appeal for sensitivity to the situation of millions of citizens of Ukraine and hundreds of young Ukrainians .
They are counting on the European Union , on our help in building democracy , and on our help in building a civil society .
It is very easy to criticise , but as a Polish woman , I remember that we were once helped .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( EL ) Mr President , I , too , should like to add my voice to those who have argued that there is no reason for such a quick resolution , especially before the elections , before the visit and , more importantly , before the European Parliament is present in Ukraine .
This government was elected just recently ; it is a fact that there are problems , but we need to recognise that it was democratically elected and allow it to pursue its efforts .
A resolution would only make sense after the forthcoming elections in Ukraine .
( ET ) I had a question for my colleague , Mrs Vaidere , but I would like to speak about what is on my mind .
The fact that we want to adopt the Ukraine resolution now and not tomorrow is not well-timed , and the Ukrainian people , who are looking to the European Parliament with recognition , would not understand us .
This is because what we have today in the draft is firstly not the best in terms of tone , it is not the most accurate , and there are also some factual errors .
Mrs Vaidere mentioned here that the Chair of the Venice Commission has criticised the amendment of the constitution .
I have a letter by him with today 's date in which he says he is astonished that this point appears in our resolution , and he says clearly that he did not do this , here , there or anywhere else .
( PL ) Unlike Mr Vigenin , I believe today 's debate has been excellent , and very useful .
It is rare for such an interesting debate to be conducted in this Chamber , for which I would like to thank everybody .
Mrs Łukacijewska 's speech shows that even the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) is divided on this issue , which is good news .

We should thank the socialists , and particularly Mr Swoboda , Mr Severin and Mr Siwiec , for understanding that decisions which are so unfavourable to our Ukrainian friends should not be taken before the elections .
Commissioner Füle and Mrs Harms are also right to bring up certain facts which are cause for concern , and of which we are also aware .
( CS ) Pull yourselves together , ladies and gentlemen , and try to think for once .
For a week , there has been no change to laws , nor to the composition of the Electoral Commission .
It is interesting that whenever certain political forces feel that their allies in a country outside the European Union have not won , these forces abroad instantly express their concerns about the state of democracy in that country .
I agree with what Mr Kamiński and others have said .
We definitely need action from the European Parliament to contribute to the development of democracy and the improvement of conditions for the mutual development of relationships .
Efforts to support stabilising actions by the Ukrainian Government apparently stepped on the toes of some of those who revel in chaos and lawlessness .
My colleagues probably consider them better partners than the current government .
I recommend postponing the draft resolution and returning to a discussion on this topic after the delegation returns from Kiev .
( SK ) I believe that Ukraine is one of the closest potential partners of the European Union .
The Ukrainians are much closer to Europe civilisation-wise than are the Turks or the Albanians .
The Ukrainian people have freely elected a change because the democratic orange powers have run the country into poverty , hopelessness and decay .
Yanukovych was long in opposition and his attitude to the current opposition reflects the treatment he received from the orange leaders .
Moreover , we must also recognise the fact that he probably remembers the earlier period when he was victimised by the orange league , and the European Union reacted by simply smiling benevolently .
Unless we want to lose Ukraine as our future member , let us be patient and concentrate on economic cooperation ; let us build up a climate of mutual trust .
We must explain to the government that the opposition has its legitimate place in a democratic society , and to the opposition that unless it gains sufficient support from the people , it has no right to compete for power .
( DE ) Mr President , as I was addressed personally , I would actually like to respond for a minute under the catch-the-eye procedure .
Is that alright ?
( DE ) Mr President , the foundation of the Energy Community in 2006 established an integrated European Energy market for gas and electricity , and the planned inclusion of Ukraine is intended to secure the energy supply towards Eastern Europe .
This is a good thing , as there have certainly been a few serious problems in recent years and the gas dispute between Russia and Ukraine , in particular , had a serious effect on the gas supplies of EU Member States .
Subsequently , it was , of course , clear that Russia stopped the gas supplies during the price discussions and my home country of Austria , alone , experienced a fall of 33 % in supplies of Russian gas , while France , Hungary and Italy also recorded drops of 20 to 40 % .
This calls for the Commission - as coordinator of the Energy Community - to grab Ukraine by the arm and remind it of its obligations when it comes to Europe 's security of supply .
The energy supply of our Member States cannot simply be allowed to become a pawn in the price war between Russia and Ukraine .
Let us have good discussions , then , but let us also play hard ball and let us , I beg , secure the energy supplies of our Member States .
( BG ) The European Parliament has always supported Ukraine on its journey towards democracy , based on the principles of the rule of law and sharing with us common values on European integration .
Elections act as a barometer in any democracy .
This allows us to evaluate the quality of the democratic process , institutions ' stability , the maturity of the political parties and the views of civil society .
I welcome the Ukrainian authorities ' decision to invite observers to the elections to be held on 31 October .
I am confident that their mission will provide greater trust in the election process and their observations will help confirm the transparency and impartiality of the workings of Ukrainian institutions .
Apart from elections , the constitution , as the supreme law in Ukraine , must guarantee the authorities ' balance and their reciprocal control .
Ukraine can rely on its European partner to support consistently its efforts to achieve reform and stability .
The opinion of the European Union and its civil society provides additional impetus and a guarantee of ultimate success .
( LT ) Last week , Viktor Yanukovych , President of Ukraine , paid an official visit to my country , Lithuania , and confirmed once again that Ukraine 's goal is to become a Member of the European Union .
Without doubt , this will take several years and a lot of homework has to be done and many reforms have to be carried out in various fields , such as ensuring human rights , combating corruption , overcoming poverty and strengthening democracy .
However , I agree with my colleagues who spoke here in the European Parliament ; we must not immediately condemn Ukraine as a country and we should not stop it from becoming an equal partner and therefore , I repeat that we in the European Parliament really must cooperate as equal partners and help Ukraine move towards the European Union .
( SL ) Ukraine is a large and important partner of the European Union and a country which undoubtedly has a European future .
The worst service , I think , that we can do for Ukraine , a country with a complicated internal structure and a difficult history , would be to speak of it as if it were the subject of our cross-party or ideological bartering .
For that reason , every document we adopt must be well thought out and well balanced .
The opposition of yesterday is the government of today and that can happen in any other country holding democratic elections .
It is easy then to understand that the opposition is dissatisfied because it has lost power .
However , it will get its chance , when the time is right and if voters so decide .
I think it is wrong for us to rely on the arguments of only one side and , above all , I would like to say that I am confident ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , Ukraine is our major European democratic associative partner and I , too , hope that one day , it will become a member of the European Union .
Like many speakers , I have some doubts as to the appropriateness of an EP resolution shortly before their local elections , and my group , the ECR Group , has submitted a number of amendments to make the resolution more balanced and less repetitive .
Yanukovych won the election to become President democratically , albeit by a small margin .
There are indeed some worrying authoritarian trends in Kiev , from attempts to re-establish the temniki censorship of press freedom to the use of the FBU security service , led by an oligarch for political purposes .
However , the West is watching the process closely .
President Yanukovych is now under pressure .
The legacy of the Orange Revolution is still strong and the Ukrainian civil society that emerged from it very robust .
Everyone knows that I have close relations with the opposition 's leading figures , but I , too , think we should avoid too much interference in Ukrainian internal domestic and political affairs which may well backfire on this Parliament and we should give the ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( PL ) Exactly the same arguments were made before the presidential elections , when we were wondering in this Chamber what resolution to adopt , and what our position should be with regard to what was going on in Ukraine prior to the presidential elections .
We decided that we would issue a resolution after the elections , and that is what we did .
We called upon the government and the opposition to observe human rights , freedom of speech and freedom of association .
Several months have gone by since that resolution , and we can already see that some of its provisions have not been observed .
I therefore understand the concern that the local elections , which are key in terms of fostering democracy , strengthening it and establishing it , may involve certain rights being violated .
That , too , is why I am one of the authors of the resolution .
( The President cut off the speaker )

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , thank you for giving me this opportunity to react to what has been a very interesting debate indeed ; my reply will focus on three points .
First , let me respond to a concrete question by Mr Belder concerning the investment and business environment .
More needs to be done in Ukraine in this field .
That is obvious , and I have raised this question a number of times , whether in the framework of the Association Council or in the framework of various meetings .
The last time I had the opportunity to raise this issue was with Prime Minister Azarov , just last week .
There are a number of issues , such as the procurement law and the possibility of going back on this law through various amendments which are now being debated in the Ukrainian Parliament .
More needs to be done as far as the rule of law is concerned and , of course , we have watched with great interest the Mittal case in recent days .
More needs to be done to deliver on the commitment and promises made to deal with the VAT issue , which is also an irritant for our businesses .
Through our contacts with the Ukrainian authorities , and through regular contacts with businessmen , we are set to protect the interests of European investors and European businessmen .
My second point is that it is not an easy process in which we are engaged with Ukraine .
This is a process where proclamations about the European future might sometimes be helpful , but will not deliver .
What is going to deliver is building more of the European Union within Ukraine .
They need our assistance .
They also need us to give them a reality check from time to time .
That is what they expect from us .
What we do not need is to be pushed into a false debate about what is more important : stability or adherence and commitment to values , and that leads me to my third point .
Who am I to comment on the draft resolution before this House , but I think the very fact that this debate has happened has already given a valuable signal .
I think the fact that this House 's representatives are going to Ukraine soon , and will pass on most of these messages , conveys a very valuable message in itself .
I think that another very valuable message in terms of what we should expect from the Ukrainians is that the forthcoming local elections on 31 October will reconfirm the democratic stance of their country .
I shall stop speaking now , if I may .
Mr Gahler has the floor under Rule 151 ( 1 ) due to personal allusions .
Please be very brief and respond to the personal allusions .
( DE ) Mr President , I wanted to respond in detail to what Mr Swoboda had to say .
He made a point that was not entirely correct .
It is true that , in our resolution , we in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) did incorrectly quote the Venice Commission .
I have spoken with Mr Markert and he told me what he actually said .
That is why the joint resolution no longer contains the quotation .
You can see , therefore , that this is no longer a subject of debate .
You spoke about the rule of law in general .
However , I would have liked to have heard you , as the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , say something clear and specific about the things that the secret police do there .
When parties there are not permitted to take part in elections , that is something that you can criticise even before an election , as , in such circumstances , the results of the election obviously cannot meet democratic and European standards .
( DE ) Mr President , this is not supposed to be a dialogue .
However , Mr Gahler , you should at least be made aware that I made very clear , in a press release , no less , which was also on behalf of my group , that the secret services must be monitored .
I also brought this up in my talks with Prime Minister Azarov .
We have a clear position on this matter .
I would ask you , once again , to consider overnight whether it would not really make more sense for us to adopt a resolution together , as a broad community , rather than adopting one with a narrow majority as would be the case at present .
Have another think about that .
That would be sensible .
To conclude the debate , I have received six motions for resolutionstabled in accordance with Rule 110 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Thursday , 21 October 2010 , at 12 : 00 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - ( LT ) Ukraine has always played a special role in the EU Eastern Partnership .
Its size , location and the vicissitudes of history make it an important bridge between East and West .
It is hardly surprising that now as before , Europe is closely following political events within Ukraine .
However , the current picture is not without ambiguity .
We must recognise that the new government was elected in free and democratic elections and it helped pull Ukraine out of the economic and political chaos that dominated six months ago .
On the other hand , we cannot ignore tendencies in the area of media freedom that cause concern .
However , I agree with colleagues who stated that today 's resolution is ill-timed .
I think we must postpone it , and following the visit by a European Parliament delegation scheduled for next week , following the coming council elections and the EU-Ukraine High-Level Meeting , we would be able to give a more balanced and objective parliamentary position .
After all , Ukraine may provide a good example to other countries in the Commonwealth of Independent States of how to go down the route of rapprochement with the EU while , at the same time , fostering good relations with Russia .
in writing . - I appreciate the debate on Ukraine , where opinions are expressed clearly .
My conclusion is that Ukrainian democracy needs assistance , but not in the form of this document .
It would be more important to create conditions for development .
One of those is easing tension in the region .
And that is why , ceterum censeo , the French plan to sell Mistral warships to Russia must be stopped !
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is Question Time ( B7-0552 / 2010 ) .
The following questions are addressed to the Council .
Subject : UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
The Belgian Presidency has highlighted its firm intention to make progress in the fight against discrimination and to promote equality .
In this context , what concrete measures , if any , is the Presidency taking to move forward the ratification of the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities by all 27 EU Member States ?
On 7 June 2010 , the Council adopted the resolution of the Council of the European Union and the representatives of the governments of the Member States , meeting within the Council , on a new European Disability Framework .
This resolution invites Member States and the Commission , in accordance with their respective competences , to promote the ratification and application of the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities concluded by the European Union on 26 November 2009 .
To date , the convention has been ratified by 13 Member States of the European Union .
Within the Council , we are therefore clearly expecting those Member States that have not yet done so to ratify this convention .
In particular , Articles 3 and 4 of Council Decision 2010 / 48 / EC stipulate that a code of conduct between Member States and the Commission must be adopted before the deposition of the instrument of formal confirmation on behalf of the European Union can take place , in order to lay down details of the point of contact function conferred upon the Commission .
The work relating to the code of conduct is now in its final phase and should be finished by the end of the year .
I would like to thank the Council for its response .
I am particularly pleased to hear you say that it could be concluded before the end of this year .
I think you said 13 - my figure is that 16 Member States have ratified .
Can the Council tell me what will be the impact of the EU itself ratifying this convention ?
You mentioned a number of articles , and there are obviously a number of articles within the convention referring to the issue of reasonable accommodation for persons with disabilities and the right to live independently .
What do you think the impact of that will be ?
In particular , my question is what will be the impact of the EU itself ratifying the convention on those countries that have not already ratified it ?
I would like to return to a point mentioned .
Thirteen Member States have indeed ratified the convention .
I will in fact list them so that you can castigate one or the other of them : Austria , Belgium , the Czech Republic , Denmark , Germany , Hungary , Italy , Portugal , Slovenia , Spain , Sweden , the United Kingdom and France have ratified this convention .
What is the current situation ?
We are waiting for an agreement on the code of conduct between Member States and the Commission before laying down the instrument of formal confirmation .
This will complete the ratification by the European Union of the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities .
What are the next steps likely to be ?
Once the convention has been fully ratified , the Council may come back to the issue of a possible ' toolbox ' for actively promoting the rights of disabled persons - an idea that was , incidentally , suggested by several Member States .
Work on this project would go hand in hand with the preparation by the Commission of a 2010-2020 European strategy for disabled persons and , as its name suggests , this strategy will put forward an action plan for the next 10 years with the aim of ensuring that disabled persons can fully enjoy their rights and freedoms .
( PL ) I would like to ask the Minister a question which I consider rather important .
The situation leaves a great deal to be desired .
Thirteen out of the 27 Member States have ratified the convention , but 14 Member States , or , in other words , the majority , have not .
Why have only half the Member States of the European Union ratified a convention that is so important to disabled people ?
( LT ) Thank you for your answer .
Really , it would be very interesting to know why the Member States are taking so long to ratify the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities ?
Are they afraid of shouldering the responsibility for creating equal opportunities for people with disabilities ?
Minister , once again , if it is not too difficult , I would like to ask whether the drafting of the anti-discrimination directive has moved forward at least a little and how negotiations , discussions and consultations with the Member States on speeding up the anti-discrimination directive are progressing because it is very important for people with disabilities .
Concerted efforts are being made within the Member States , but even so , I must say that one can , in fact , be disappointed , sceptical even , about the pace at which a number of Member States are ratifying .
Indeed , I repeat for the third time that it is true that only 13 Member States have ratified .
I do not think there is any particular reason for this .
It is just that the Member States ratify in accordance with a process that can sometimes differ from one Member State to the other .
I am not hiding behind this argument , but I must also tell you that , in this matter as in others , national sovereignty is still a factor in terms of the way in which Member States progress through the ratification process .
Indeed , one could argue that it could go faster , that all the Member States could cooperate much more from the outset .
Nevertheless , the fact remains that national sovereignty comes into play on a number of issues .
Subject : Epilepsy treatment
In August 2010 , I attended the European Conference on Epilepsy and Society in Porto , where the Global Campaign Against Epilepsy launched its report entitled ' Epilepsy in the World Health Organisation European Region ' .
According to the report , epilepsy surgery programmes are non-existent in 58 % of European countries , yet 6 million Europeans suffer from the illness , generating costs of € 20 billion per year .
Is it not time for the EU Member States to adopt a common and consistent approach to the treatment of this illness ?
Honourable Members , I should like to begin by thanking , even if he is not present , the honourable Member who tabled this question for his interest in this matter .
It is true that neurodegenerative diseases , neurological development disorders and non-psychiatric brain diseases , of which epilepsy is one , are a major concern for many of our fellow citizens .
In accordance with Article 168 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , the Union shall encourage cooperation between the Member States in the field of public health and disease prevention .
A horizontal approach is therefore taken at EU level , with the focus being on combating stigmatisation of and discrimination against people affected by neurodegenerative diseases , neurological development disorders and non-psychiatric brain diseases .
Hence , the Council invited the Member States , in its June 2003 conclusions on combating stigma and discrimination in relation to mental health , to give specific attention to the impact of stigma and discrimination related problems due to mental illness in all age groups , and to ensure that these problems are recognised , in this context , giving special attention to the reduction of risks of social exclusion .
In its conclusions of 3 June 2005 on Community action in the field of mental health , the Council invited the Member States to implement the declaration and action plan adopted by the European Ministerial Conference of the World Health Organisation on mental health , held in Helsinki in January 2005 .
Finally , the Council is particularly committed to combating another illness that is part of the group of neurodegenerative diseases , neurological development disorders and non-psychiatric brain diseases , namely Alzheimer 's disease .
I should mention in this connection the conclusions of 16 December 2008 on public health strategies to combat neurodegenerative diseases associated with ageing and , in particular , Alzheimer 's disease , and the conclusions of 3 December 2009 on joint programming of research in Europe , covering , in particular , the launch of the pilot joint programming initiative dedicated to the fight against neurodegenerative diseases and Alzheimer 's disease in particular .
author . - Thank you , Council , for your response .
I will pass on your appreciation to my colleague , Gay Mitchell .
Could you address the realities in the different Member States , which must be of concern to the Council ?
It is a fact that the treatment you get for epilepsy depends on where you live , and there is a huge problem with the lack of neurologists in some Member States .
Could you also address the implications of this for the cross-border healthcare package which is currently under discussion ?
If epilepsy is not treated , people suffer more deeply than when there is adequate treatment .
It is regrettable that in different Member States , there are different levels of care for people with epilepsy .
I think that your observation concerning the quality of medical care in the various Member States is quite right .
We are still a very long way away from harmonising the quality of healthcare management as a whole .
This is also down to the fact - and it should be pointed out - that the Union 's powers in healthcare matters are still fairly restricted compared to national powers .
Moreover , you are right to mention the cross-border package , because it is something that can improve a number of quality aspects in terms of healthcare .
Need I remind you that , under the Belgian Presidency , the Council is still negotiating , and will continue to do so until the end , with the aim of gaining as much support as possible for a second-reading agreement on this cross-border healthcare package ?
This is a difficult task , and the timescale is tight , but we have the ambition to achieve it before the end of December .
Subject : Coordination of the EU 's position in Cancún
Ahead of the 2010 United Nations Climate Change conference in Cancún , what concrete measures is the Council taking to coordinate the EU 's position at the negotiations , with the emphasis on the whole EU speaking with one voice ?
Honourable Members , during its meeting of 14 October , the Council adopted conclusions on the European Union 's position in view of the Climate Change conference in Cancún , during which the global framework for climate protection is to be examined .
On the basis of this text , the October European Council , which will take place next week on 18 and 19 October , will establish the European Union 's position in view of the 16th Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Convention on Climate Change .
This EU position encompasses all the important aspects of this conference : the expected outcome , the conditions for the continuation of the Kyoto Protocol beyond 2012 , the progress to be made in the various areas outlined in the Bali road map - mitigation , adaptation , forest technology aspects and financing .
For all these aspects , the Council has strived to present a position which is clear and easy to communicate .
It is now incumbent on all European Union players to use this position to send a clear and unequivocal message to our international partners .
As the Council has just pointed out , the European Union hopes that the Cancún meeting will result in the adoption of a balanced series of decisions that will aid the introduction of an international policy to protect the climate after 2012 .
Moreover , there will be several bilateral meetings and contacts before Cancún , and they will provide an opportunity for us to explain our position to our partners .
During the conference itself , this position will be clarified if necessary during the regular coordination meetings held by the European Union .
Of course , we are counting on all the institutions to help make our position clear by conveying , if possible , the same message in all our external representations .
President-in-Office of the Council , I appreciate your response and I think it is very important that we do have a positive impact in Cancún , unlike what unfortunately happened in Copenhagen .
I would just ask a supplementary question : from the contacts I presume you have with other countries around the world , arising out of Copenhagen , how confident would you be of getting agreement on binding targets ?
At the end of the day , they have to be binding .
Anything else will not deal with this unfortunate situation .
I should say and make it clear that , yes , it will be difficult to make progress in Cancún .
There are three reasons for this relative pessimism .
Firstly , the economic crisis that is obviously affecting the European Union and many other countries outside the EU has led to goodwill and investment promises in this matter being levelled down ; secondly , the refusal of emerging countries to accept binding commitments ; and lastly , the United States ' failure to enact clear legislation on the subject .

The European Union has kept the same positions it had in Copenhagen , and I think we should exercise caution in the way in which we are currently committing ourselves , in order not to trivialise the positions and guidelines that we could adopt in Cancún in a month 's time .
( RO ) Minister , I would like to ask you whether you are considering linking climate change and pollution reduction objectives with the millennium goals because there are , admittedly , developing countries which think that it is too costly for them to move to an emission-reducing process , even though this can entail job creation and , by extension , a sustainable economy .
I am therefore asking you whether you intend to establish a link between the Millennium Development Goals and climate change .
( DE ) Madam President , in Copenhagen , even cooperative countries like Indonesia and Brazil ultimately fought on the side of the G77 states , thus joining forces to form a bloc against the so-called rich states of the North .
The climate debate became a debate about fairness and , even in the preparatory conference , the emerging economies made it clear that they had no intention of making concessions in Cancún .
My question to you , then , is as follows . How can the formation of blocs like this be avoided and how can this kind of changing of the subject be prevented ?
Should the EU not take on an important role as a mediator here ?
To answer these two questions , I cannot agree with you more .
The Union should change strategy in relation to Copenhagen .
The Union should explain its position much more , the Union should talk much more with groups of countries that have significantly different opinions to ours and , yes , you are right , the link between climate change and the Millennium Development Goals is plain to see .
Clearly , we cannot expect , and especially not in the coming years , in the next few years , the same effort from those who have to reduce a heavy industrial base , such as we have within the Union and developing countries have .
This is seemingly not enough , but this is also why the Union contributes so much to the ' fast start ' principle , which is financing aimed at helping developing countries .
This scheme is very clearly aimed at countries that cannot afford this reduction .
I think that this forms a whole .
Dialogue and appropriate resources should enable developing countries to think more deeply about their own objectives in terms of reduction , in particular , of greenhouse gas emissions .
Subject : Programme of the Presidency - early school leaving
The chapter of the Belgian Presidency 's programme entitled ' Education , Training , Youth , Sport , Culture and Audiovisual Policy ' states that the Presidency will pay particular attention to the problems associated with the failure to complete schooling , as well as to the role of education and training in social inclusion .
What initiatives exactly has the Presidency taken so far to achieve the above commitments and what timetable does it intend to follow through to the end of the year ?
Does the Council have any data providing evidence that the current economic situation is exacerbating the problem of early school leaving in the Member States which are affected by it ?
Madam President , honourable Members , the Presidency , in continuing the work begun by previous presidencies on greater European cooperation in the area of school education , is paying special attention to the issue of key skills and of early school leaving .
In so doing , it is following up on the conclusions of the March 2010 European Council , which highlighted the need to reduce the early school-leaving rate in Europe and which also set a collective target for bringing it under 10 % by 2020 .
The Presidency has launched several initiatives to this end , starting with the ministerial-level seminar that it organised at the very start of its term , in July .
This seminar , together with the meeting of Directors-General of compulsory education , which incidentally took place the day before , focused on the difficulties pupils experience in acquiring basic skills , that is to say , their mother tongue , sciences and mathematics , as well as on the experience of Member States and the policy guidelines to be developed as regards the prevention of early school leaving .
Following on from these meetings , the Presidency has drawn up conclusions on the importance of raising the level of key skills in the context of European cooperation in the area of school education .
Since the Council is currently discussing these conclusions , the Presidency is planning to put them on the November Council agenda .
More generally , the Council is waiting for a proposal for a recommendation that the Commission is due to submit shortly on the issue of early school leaving at European level .
At the same time , efforts will continue or will be stepped up at national level in order to gradually reduce the early school-leaving rate by 2020 , in accordance with the target set by the European Council .
In closing , I would add that in the context of the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion , the Belgian Presidency also organised , on 28 September , the conference entitled ' Breaking the cycle of disadvantage - Social inclusion in and through education ' .
The outcome of this conference will serve as material for a debate that will take place during the Education Council on 19 November .
( EL ) Thank you , Minister , for your reply .
Following on from what you said , I should like to add the following questions : where do all these children who leave school go ?
Do they end up on the margins , in social exclusion or do they enter a technical profession which represents a good move that will afford them a decent standard of living ?
Does the Council have any data or has it at least asked or is it planning to ask the Commission to map the social corridors , so that we can see what happens next in these children 's lives and how we can ensure that our policies have better results ?
Honourable Members , the initiative is excellent and , moreover , contacts between ministers and those working in education show us how much the situations vary from one EU country to another , because some countries have programmes that can be very specific and very selective , to ensure that those who leave school early are not marginalised .
This map-making process is therefore particularly important .
It will take time , because assessing the situation in 27 Member States is not easy to do .
I think that the work in relation to early school leaving has got off to a good start under the Belgian Presidency and that subsequent presidencies , the Hungarian Presidency in particular , will certainly be able to initiate a draft recommendation , not only to reduce the early school-leaving rate , but also to draw conclusions from this mapping of the 27 Member States about what becomes of those pupils who leave school early , in particular , when they are marginalised and when they are not picked up by a more vocational education system , as you point out .
( LT ) Thank you , Minister , for the efforts you have made , as the country holding the Presidency , to combat poverty .
Do you not agree that poverty is also one of the reasons why not all young people finish secondary school and are forced to leave school ?
Today , our European Parliament is approving a very important decision on strengthening minimum income throughout the European Union .
In your opinion , as the country holding the Presidency , could this also be one of the measures to encourage young people to acquire a secondary education and not leave school ?
( RO ) Unfortunately , the school dropout rate in Europe is 19 % , while it is 40 % in countries like Portugal .
The economic crisis and the decrease in budget and population resources have resulted in some countries in the closure of many schools , especially in rural areas .
When we talk about education , we are talking about the future of Europe .
I would therefore like to ask you , Minister , in the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion , to set compulsory targets , at Council , and perhaps even at European Council level , for reducing the school dropout rate .
I would like to say that I agree with the two honourable Members in that , yes , early school leaving is linked to poverty and social exclusion .
It is clear to me that a number of our children , depending on their family status , their parents ' financial status , are disadvantaged in their schooling and that the economic crisis has obviously made this phenomenon much worse .
Having said that , both the Council and the Commission have taken this on board since , together , we have adopted , as you know , this 2020 strategy , which combines at the same time economic development , research for development , the quality of our teaching and also the fight against poverty .
All these elements form a whole that enables us , in my view at least , to come up with a coherent response .
I wish to return briefly to key skills , because this is an important issue .
The conclusions that the Belgian Presidency will submit for adoption at the November Council will target a number of objectives .
I will mention them quickly : the implementation of national strategies for improving pupils ' performance in reading , mathematics and science .
Another objective is to analyse the effectiveness of current national strategies in order to have a source of information that can be used , as we were saying previously , in the decision-making process .
However , the aim is also to launch pilot projects carried out between Member States on a voluntary basis and with the aim of improving young Europeans ' basic skills , and - why not ? - to ensure the more effective use of the instruments that we have available to us and which are relevant , such as those that are part of the open method of coordination , the programme for education and lifelong learning and the Seventh Framework Programme for Research and Technological Development .
Those are a number of objectives that we will pursue under the Belgian Presidency and that will most certainly be taken up by subsequent presidencies , in particular , by the Hungarian Presidency .
Subject : EU goal of total elimination of landmines
What steps does the Council intend to take to counter the devastating consequences of landmines ?
A number of countries continue to use APLs and some are also believed to continue to produce landmines - approximately 65 countries remain affected to some degree by mines and UXO .
Global estimates of new landmine casualties each year vary between 15 000 and 20 000 people , many of whom are civilians , including children .
The EU has been very vocal about its wish to eliminate landmines and their use and stockpiling , but as yet , an ambitious plan of action with deadlines has not been forthcoming , yet alone been implemented .
The European Union has been working for years towards the total elimination of anti-personnel landmines , thus helping to solve the enormous humanitarian and development problems they cause .
Back in May 1995 , the European Union adopted , by means of Council Decision 95 / 170 / CFSP , its very first joint action to help combat the use and proliferation of anti-personnel landmines throughout the world .
The European Union was therefore the first to act within the international community , in November 1997 , following the adoption of the Ottawa Convention on the Prohibition of the Use , Stockpiling , Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on their Destruction .
On 18 September , the Council adopted a new joint action designed to continue the Union 's political efforts with regard to the total elimination of anti-personnel landmines and , more specifically , to establish a joint moratorium on the export and production of anti-personnel mines and to facilitate a multi-dimensional contribution , within the Union , to mine clearance efforts and other related activities .
Since then , the European Union has continually promoted these commitments , which have been based , since 2003 , on the European security strategy .
In June 2008 , a new joint action was adopted to support the universal adoption of the Ottawa Convention .
This joint action is also aimed at specifically helping the States Parties to the Convention to implement the convention 's provisions , particularly those concerning mine clearance , victim assistance and the destruction of stockpiles .
Furthermore , although the number of States Parties to the Convention has considerably increased , and the number of victims of anti-personnel landmines is going down , there is still a need to assist victims and to improve their lives in practice .
The European Union was involved in drawing up the 2010-2014 action plan - which it fully supports - adopted in Cartagena , Colombia , during the convention 's second review conference from 29 November to 4 December 2009 .
A new Council decision is currently being drafted in order to specifically support the action plan and its victim assistance component .
In addition to the Council 's more political action , the assistance programmes managed by the Commission in the context of development aid and of the Neighbourhood Policy - together with the Member States ' national programmes - have increased the European Union 's contribution to mine clearance and victim assistance to EUR 1.8 billion , which is half of the total global contribution .
I would like to thank the President for his very comprehensive reply .
He mentioned the Ottawa Convention or Mine Ban Treaty , we have had the international Convention on Cluster Munitions signed in Dublin in 2008 , and now we have an action plan , but the reality is that the European Union committed EUR 1.8 billion to landmine awareness projects for the period up to 2007 , but only 1.5 billion of this has actually been spent .
The reality is that landmines are still being used .
It is a barbaric practice ; 2 000 people die or are maimed every single month and we really need to get to grips with this issue comprehensively and on an international basis .
You are right , we have spent 1.5 billion , and there are still 2 000 victims every month .
The European Union cannot single-handedly do everything that needs to be done in this matter - it is already doing half the work .
I think I have clearly explained how sensitive we are to the human aspect of this problem .
Unfortunately , we cannot go much further in terms of decision making .
Only substantial and concrete progress with respect to disarmament is probably still possible , and we are particularly involved in the aspect concerning the prohibition of anti-personnel mines .
( DE ) Madam President , Mr Chastel , landmines will probably continue to be a major problem even far into the future .
Do you believe that it is possible to initiate dedicated research programmes into the detection of landmines ?
Of course , this is not a European problem , it is a global problem .
Can you envisage also finding suitable institutions that grapple with research programmes in this field ?
Firstly , thanks to my colleague , Mr Higgins , for raising this very important question and thanks also to the Council for their comprehensive response .
I think , in fairness , the European Union has been pro-active in dealing with this unfortunate situation .
I would like to ask the Council : is it happy with the way the United Nations is dealing with this issue and can it make a better contribution , similar to what we are doing ?
The two questions are very much linked , and I was going to answer the first one by referring to the second one .
It is true that any search programme to find anti-personnel mines around the world would be welcome .
The introduction of such a programme requires close cooperation with the United Nations and , crucially , it must be possible to reach agreement , within the UN institutions , with all those who make up these institutions .
This work is long and exacting , because there is a need to convince others who do not necessarily agree on the resources that will have to be invested in this kind of search programme .
Subject : Creation of an Observatory on Violence Against Women
The Council conclusions on the eradication of violence against women , adopted on 8 March 2010 , call for the establishment of a European observatory on violence against women , building on existing institutional structures , in order to collect high quality statistical data for use as a basis for the policies to be introduced .
There is no place in a civilised society for violence against women , and it must be eradicated .
There is a need to collect better quality statistics , improve the coordination of measures , exchange best practices and organise effective information campaigns on violence against women .
When does the Council intend to reach a decision on the establishment of this future observatory ?
What will be its objectives and missions and when will it become operational ?
Honourable Members , combating violence against women is a goal shared by both the European Parliament and the Council .
As you know , our two institutions have been working on this topic for several years and in many different contexts .
Let me remind you of the resolution that you adopted last year , when we celebrated the 10th anniversary of the United Nations resolution establishing 25 November as the International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women .
In that resolution , you invited the Commission to submit a targeted and more coherent EU policy plan , and urged Member States to introduce a coherent system for collecting statistics .
As the honourable Member has reminded us , in March , the Council asked the Commission to draw up a European strategy for preventing and combating violence against women .
One of the priorities identified by the Council in this matter is to prepare the creation of a European observatory on violence against women , based on existing structures .
The Commission is currently drafting a new strategy on violence against women , which will also touch on the creation of this observatory .
However , as you can imagine , for the time being , we still do not know what will be in the strategy .
We expect to receive it some time next year .
It is therefore highly likely that a separate proposal will be required thereafter in order to create this observatory .
Obviously , as you know , the Council can only intervene as legislator on the basis of a Commission proposal .
Such a proposal will be duly examined by the Council , acting as colegislator with the European Parliament .
Evidently , it is a little premature at this stage to make assumptions about what the objectives of a future observatory on violence against women will be , and especially about the date when it will come into force .
( LT ) Minister , thank you for your answer .
There is still hope then , that at some point , there will be a centre which will collect reliable data about the violence against women that continues to exist .
However , I would like to know whether , in your opinion , the Member States hold sufficient data for the fight against violence towards women to really become a priority .
To my understanding , we do not yet have reliable data and this is one of the reasons why rather a lot of different types of violence still exist in the European Union .
What you are saying is not wrong .
It is difficult today to accept that , in order to create this observatory and identify the issues involved , we need only rely on what the various Member States have already individually come up with in terms of census , type of violence and prevalence of the various types of violence .
This is a start .
What we are expecting from the Commission is a plan , a direction , a methodology so that we can harmonise throughout the EU , in the 27 Member States , a reliable way of listing all the types of violence and their prevalence and so that we can draw up , together if possible , a strategy that will bear fruit .
( DE ) Mr Chastel , we do have agencies that already deal with these issues .
I would remind you of the Agency for Fundamental Rights in Vienna .
Would it not be possible to ask that agency to focus on this issue and to concentrate its work on it so that we do not have to create a new body but could instead pass this activity on to the existing agency in Vienna ?
We have very qualified staff there .
It would be good if that could be arranged .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) ( off-microphone ) easily answer that question .
I am very much in favour of using an existing agency rather than creating a new one .
I think there are too many agencies , and so there is no need to create new ones .
In any case , I hope that existing structures , such as the Vienna agency , will be involved in the drafting of the tactical plan that the Commission is due to present to us .
Subject : Bio-waste
On 6 July 2010 , Parliament adopted , by a large majority , resolution P7 _ TA ( 2010 ) 0264 , on the Commission 's Green Paper on the management of bio-waste in the European Union , urging the Commission to draw up a proposal for a specific directive on bio-waste by the end of 2010 .
During the subsequent exchange of views between the Committee on the Environment and the Belgian minister , Joke Schauvliege , held on 14 July 2010 , the latter , speaking on behalf of the Belgian Presidency , welcomed the resolution adopted by Parliament and promised further action on the matter .
Now that we are halfway through the Belgian Presidency , can the Council state what action it intends to take before the end of the Presidency with a view to implementing the measure called for by Parliament ?
Madam President , honourable Members , like the European Parliament , on 25 June 2009 the Council adopted conclusions on the Green Paper on the management of bio-waste in the European Union .
In its conclusions , the Council encourages the Commission to continue its impact assessment with a view to preparing , if appropriate , an EU legislative proposal on biodegradable waste by 2010 .
You will tell me that we are in 2010 now .
In particular , the Council invited the Commission to consider preventive measures , measures for introducing separate collection of biodegradable waste , a quality assurance system based on the principle of integrated chain management and traceability throughout the process , and the establishment of requirements on labelling and on quality criteria for compost and digestate .
Furthermore , the Council of 11 June 2010 took note of the Commission communication on future steps in bio-waste management in the European Union .
In that communication , the Commission indicated its intention to continue working towards the introduction of technical rules to assist bio-waste management and , accordingly , to amend Directive 86 / 278 / EEC on sewage sludge .
The Council is obviously going to examine a new proposal along these lines , and the Belgian Presidency organised a conference on bio-waste on 21 September to discuss , among other things , the substance of the Commission communication .
The outcome of this conference was communicated to the Council on 14 October , so it is very recent .
( PT ) Madam President , Mr Chastel , on 6 July this year , the European Parliament adopted , by a large majority , a specific directive on bio-waste .
For the sake of clarity , for the sake of simplicity and for the sake of legal certainty , we believe that instead of this legislation , which is spread across several legal texts , instead of this situation , a specific directive would be better .
In this way , we will also be able to be in line with the Europe 2020 strategy , with intelligent , sustainable and inclusive growth .
In this way , we will also achieve more green jobs .
In this way , we will also successfully combat climate change .
Using high quality compost will enable us to better help our soils and will also aid biodiversity .
I question , therefore , whether the Council agrees : whether the Council , too , is advocating a specific directive , and what it will do to achieve this end .
I have been relatively gentle with you all tonight because we have had a reasonable amount of time , but it is meant to be 30 seconds .
I will try to be as brief as possible , Madam President , so as not to be called to order at the end of my speech .
However , this is an interesting question .
As you know , it is up to the Commission to propose or not such a specific directive .
The Council is aware that in its communication on future steps in bio-waste management in the European Union , the Commission did not note any shortcomings in the current legislation which would require specific legislation , but it did announce a proposed amendment to the Sewage Sludge Directive .
This is not going to satisfy you , but please also be aware that , when the Council conclusions were being drafted in 2009 , the Member States appeared to be divided on whether or not there was a need for a specific directive on bio-waste .
Therefore , I will not answer with a ' yes ' or a ' no ' , since the Member States are divided .
The Council will obviously examine with interest the Commission 's proposals concerning this Sewage Sludge Directive and particularly its provisions on bio-waste , which will , of course , be covered by this proposal .
Thank you , Minister .
My comments were not directed at you .
Subject : The possibility of a double-dip recession : sustainability of the 3 % target
Can the Council respond to comments by the respected Nobel prize-winning economist Joseph Stiglitz that the European economy risks sliding back into recession due to spending cuts imposed by EU governments in an attempt to reach the 3 % deficit limit laid down in the Stability and Growth Pact ?
Is this 3 % target a realistic one , considering that some Member State finances are under severe strain at present ?
Madam President , honourable Members , the main objective of the Stability and Growth Pact is to maintain price stability within the European Union .
Under the terms of the treaty , Member States should conduct a national policy that is consistent with the Stability and Growth Pact and the broad economic policy guidelines .
The Council of 7 September agreed on the introduction of the European Semester from 2011 .
The main objective of this exercise is to align the timetable for presenting the stability and growth programmes and the national reform programmes , with a view to ensuring consistent structural surveillance at every level of budgetary discipline , macro-economic stability and growth , whilst preserving formally separated individual procedures .
This process will allow for better coordination of economic policies within the European Union and will help to strengthen budgetary discipline , macro-economic stability and growth .
This same concern has led the European Union , in accordance with the powers laid down in the treaty , to envisage measures aimed at promoting the recovery while also ensuring this budgetary discipline .
Europe 2020 , the new EU strategy for employment and smart , sustainable and inclusive growth , adopted by the European Council on 17 June , meets this challenge .
Its aim is to change the focus of policies from crisis management to the introduction of medium- and long-term reforms , which specifically promote growth and employment , and which also guarantee the viability of public finances .
As you know , the major objectives identified in the Europe 2020 strategy include an increase in the number of jobs , better conditions for research and development , an improvement in education levels - we touched on this in a previous question - and the promotion of social inclusion , including poverty reduction .
To my mind , therefore , there is no mismatch between a stability pact and measures to restore growth and employment .
Thank you for your response .
I had expected more detail but I thank you for it .
The party of which I am a member , Fine Gael , supports the 3 % target , as do all the major parties in Ireland .
I believe having the target and a date to achieve it is vital , not just for our own self-interest , but also for the sake of the European Union .
I would draw Members ' attention to an excellent speech delivered this morning by a former Taoiseach of Ireland , John Bruton , a friend of this House , who speaks in very straight terms about the challenges , but also the fact that we are able to do what is set out for us in these tough targets and that Ireland as a country has many qualities which will allow us to achieve the targets without suffering .
There will be pain , but we will be able to manage that pain .
I would like your comments on that please and also to draw your attention to that speech .
You mention the Irish problem .
I understand , and we are obviously all sensitive to the Irish problem .
My answer to your first question is obviously a very broad one covering 27 Member States , because we must have consistent policies , we must have monetary and budgetary stability policies , and recovery policies .
Furthermore , it is fair to say that some will , of course , have more difficulties than others , depending on their level of debt , depending on their annual debt in the last two or three years and since the beginning of the recession .
So , yes , it is true that Ireland is going through a difficult time .
You can rest assured that Europe understands that it is going through this difficult time , but I think that several countries are in this situation , several countries will experience the same thing in the future , and austerity and solidarity are not mutually exclusive .
I therefore think that the economic governance measures that the Commission has put on the table this week will invariably include a concern not to leave any country by the wayside - you know what Europe was capable of in terms of solidarity in the case of Greece .
Let us not compare the situation of two countries , but rest assured that under no circumstances will Europe leave any of the 27 Member States by the wayside .
I would like to thank the President-in-Office for his answer .
Just two points very briefly .
First of all , when discussions are held with regard to the 3 % deficit issue , there appears to be different accounting standards used in different Member States according to certain criteria .
Secondly , on the enforcement , what level of flexibility is there because of the current crisis afflicting all Member States to allow for leverage or margins for error within that 3 % figure ?
( EL ) Minister , of course , the Council conclusions and the 2020 strategy contain what endeavour to be optimistic messages .
However , even in the budget which we passed today , when it comes to achieving the 2020 targets , I believe that - for example , in research and innovation - we have failed to respond and we will not be able to attain the targets we want with these figures .
We also see , however , that the Council is silent on the question of the massive north / south divide in the European Union .
I am reminded of a recent statement by a senior officer of the European Union , the Eurogroup Chair , to the effect that large countries in the Union , such as France and Germany , knew about Greece 's problem - I mention this because you referred to Greece - and yet did nothing before now , because they gained massively from this situation .
Can we expect an initiative to address the north / south divide in the Union ?
Two questions , two answers .
Regarding the first question : of course , there have been , and still are , a number of disparities in the accounting standards .
These standards are , of course , being harmonised , because if , in the future , we want to be fair to all 27 Member States ' economies , we need to have the same calculation methods .
Therefore , this harmonisation is ongoing and under way .
As for flexibility regarding the 3 % limit , as you know , we really are being flexible ; we have been flexible since 2009 , we have been flexible in 2010 , and we will continue to be flexible in 2011 and 2012 so that our various Member States can return to healthy budgets , because if we wanted to apply this 3 % limit rigidly , with absolutely no margin for error , then this year for instance , practically every one of us would have failed to comply with this budgetary restraint plan , and that is not the case .
I think that the European institutions realised that returning to stable and balanced budgets by 2013 would take time , particularly in view of the recession and the Member States ' situation .
Now to the North-South imbalance .
Whether the imbalance is between the North and the South or between Member States which have capitalised to some degree on aid provided by the European Union in order to boost their economy , productive fabric and labour market , and other Member States which have done so to a lesser extent , I think that the European Union is actually there to safeguard this coherence , this cohesion .
In particular , the funds available in the European budget for cohesion - the first heading in the Union 's budget - should indeed be used to reduce these imbalances .
You mention the North-South imbalance , but I am not sure that that is the only imbalance that exists within the European Union .
Subject : Council measures in favour of free movement of labour between Member States
The EU 's new plan for the economy for the next ten years refers to workforce mobility as an essential condition for reducing unemployment .
The unemployment rate has risen disturbingly with the crisis , from 6.8 % in May 2008 to 10 % in July 2010 .
Meanwhile , according to a Commission survey published on 13 July 2010 , 48 % of Europeans would be willing to seek employment outside their country or region , rather than remain jobless .
In addition , 17 % said they expected to work abroad at some time in the future .
It should also be remembered that Member States are obliged to give preference to nationals of other Member States over third-country workers .
In the light of the above , can the Council state what concrete measures it proposes with a view to the rapid elimination of the barriers now existing to the free movement of workers from those Member States which joined the Union after 1 May 2004 ?
Madam President , honourable Members , the Council would obviously like to reiterate that the free movement of persons is one of the fundamental freedoms guaranteed by the treaty and secondary legislation deriving from it , and that this includes the right for citizens of the European Union to live and work in another Member State .
With regard to the temporary restrictions set out in the accession treaties , it is up to each Member State still applying restrictions to assess the repercussions for its labour market and to decide whether to maintain the remaining restrictions or to relax them before the end of the transition period : April 2011 for the countries that joined in 2004 and December 2013 for the countries that joined in 2007 .
Moreover , the Council has invited those Member States that are still applying restrictions in accordance with the transitional provisions laid down in the accession treaties to lift them during the third phase of the transition period if it cannot be established that their labour market would suffer or is liable to suffer serious disruption .
Since May 2009 , when Denmark granted free access to its labour market , the transitional provisions applied by Member States have stayed the same , and whereas a majority of Member States do grant free access to workers from those Member States that joined after 1 May 2004 , 10 Member States are still applying restrictions .
The Council has stressed that the economic and financial crisis should not be used as a reason to justify , on its own or more generally , the continued use of the provisions in question , and has called on Member States to further develop suitable strategies and tools which would enable them to identify and analyse the barriers to the geographical and professional mobility of workers , and to help eliminate existing barriers , in accordance with the treaty .
( RO ) Minister , thank you for your reply .
I would even request that the European Council continues to ask Member States to lift barriers and temporary provisions restricting the free movement of workers from new Member States , especially Romania and Bulgaria .
I also wish to stress that offering equal opportunities on the European labour market to all workers from all Member States means protecting workers in the destination countries as well .
This is why , Minister , I call on you to ask Member States to lift existing barriers .
( EL ) Madam President , thank you for giving me the floor again .
Minister , on the one hand , we have mobility problems and , on the other , we have Europe 's initiatives to boost job mobility which , in these very difficult times , will certainly be an option for many European citizens , especially young people .
We adopted the European Job Mobility Action Plan in 2007 and it is due to expire in 2010 .
Can we expect an evaluation of this plan and a new Council proposal ?
We also have the Leonardo da Vinci programme on job mobility .
Can we expect further support for this programme or similar new initiatives ?
Just briefly , what steps is the Council taking with respect to the movement of workers , or actually refugees , coming into the European Union , getting papers and then moving to other countries within the European Union , and also with respect to the safeguards under the 1951 Convention which mean that they have to claim asylum in their first safe country ?
I am just wondering what steps the Council has taken with respect to that .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Firstly , I should like to point out that the free movement of labour is a genuine priority for the Council .
I think that everything is being done to inform Member States that retain a number of restrictions to thoroughly analyse this transitional phase , during which they retain a number of restrictions , and to see how they can lift those restrictions .
Moreover , to answer one of the questions , I should add that , while it is true that the free movement of workers is a priority for the Council , it is a priority in particular for the Presidency .
You will find in the 18-month programme of work of the trio of Presidencies of the Council - Spain , Belgium and Hungary - that these three countries will work , and are currently working , on the review of the single market that is under way , by encouraging the implementation of the four freedoms , given that exploiting the full potential of the single market is essential for a return to growth .
Our programme specifically mentions the possibility of reviewing the transition periods , which limit the free movement of workers from the new Member States .
Should we consider that these transitional restrictions are incompatible with the free movement of workers ?
It is not for me to judge , as the transitional restrictions are defined in the accession treaties and such restrictions have been used for all the accessions .
It is true that , beyond the incentives we can offer them , it is the responsibility of each Member State applying these restrictions to analyse the impact on its own labour market and to decide whether to retain or lift these restrictions before the end of these transitional periods , which , as you will recall , are April 2011 for the 2004 accessions , and December 2013 for the 2007 accessions .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will receive written answers ( see Annex ) .
That concludes Question Time .
Composition of committees : see Minutes
Aid for Pakistan and possible implication for the European industrial sector ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on aid for Pakistan and possible implication for the European industrial sector .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , honourable Members of Parliament , Europe is very concerned at the devastating impact of the floods in Pakistan , which destroyed livelihoods and communities throughout the country .
The scale of the disaster is unprecedented in Pakistan 's history .
The cost in humanitarian needs , and to its already fragile economy , is immense .
The severity of this crisis demands an immediate and substantial response , also taking into account the strategic importance of Pakistan 's development , security and stability in the region .
The European Council on 16 September called for a comprehensive package of short- , medium- and longer-term measures that will help underpin Pakistan 's recovery and future development .
The initial EU response to the floods was swift and generous .
Our common contribution to the humanitarian aid efforts presently stands at more than EUR 320 million from Member States and the European Commission in cash and in kind .
This alone represents more than 60 % of the global initial UN appeal .
The European Council recognised that , in addition to the immediate and significant humanitarian aid and development assistance , ambitious trade measures are essential for economic recovery and growth .
Trade is therefore part of the long-term response to the ongoing crisis .
To this end , the Commission adopted on 7 October a proposal for unilateral suspension of import duties on a number of important export items from Pakistan .
This proposal is now submitted to Member States and the European Parliament .
The Commission is proposing to liberalise 75 tariff lines on imports from Pakistan , accounting for 27 % of Pakistan 's current imports to the EU and almost EUR 900 million .
This would yield an increase in EU imports from Pakistan of about EUR 100 million .
The objective of this measure is to support Pakistan 's reconstruction efforts in the medium term .
Consequently , the special concessions will be limited in time - the Commission is proposing three years .
Given the nature of Pakistan 's industrial base and export basket , where textiles account for more than 60 % , a large number of products for which we propose liberalisation are textile products .
Other industrial products such as ethanol are also included .
If Parliament and the Council can act quickly on this , we hope to have the measure in place on 1 January 2011 .
In parallel , we are working with other members of the World Trade Organisation to obtain the necessary permission - a WTO waiver - which has to be granted before the measure takes effect .
The trade concessions should be economically meaningful for Pakistan but , at the same time , take account of industrial sensitivities in the European Union .
Therefore , in drawing up this proposal , we have tried to take into account industrial sensitivities in the EU , especially as regards textiles .
Our analysis has shown that the impact on EU production is likely to be modest .
The potential increase in EU imports from Pakistan ( EUR 100 million ) corresponds to less than 0.5 % of EU production value of the liberalised items , which , in fact , account for EUR 24 billion .
The European Parliament 's support in helping this proposal come to fruition is essential to the presentation of a complete picture of EU solidarity in times of unprecedented needs .
Trade can be an important part of a long-term economic solution for Pakistan .
We have a tight calendar to work to .
You can count on me and my staff to explain our approach and reduce any lingering concerns you may have .
Madam President , I must say that I fully understand what they are going through in Pakistan , but I would also say that this decision is tragic for Europe and , particularly , for some countries that are already experiencing serious difficulties , such as Portugal , Spain and Greece .
For example , the textiles and clothing industry represents 11 % of Portugal 's total exports , 22 % of the manufacturing industry ; 80 % of production for some products even takes place in Portugal .
Perhaps , then , this 80 % spread across the 27 Member States means little to the European Commission , but it means an enormous amount to Portugal .
Europe cannot demand extremely damaging - but understandable - measures to control public audits and to fight the deficit , and , at the same time , take decisions that hurt the productive heartlands and capacities for wealth and job creation of those very same countries .
I must say too that this decision is also an incomprehensible attack on the normal market rules .
I do not advocate any form of market protectionism , but I demand the strict defence of its proper rules : the rules of a market that is healthy and fair .
Please understand that this decision will make it possible for products manufactured in Pakistan to come on to the European market , and with production costs below those possible for our companies simply because the same conditions are not required of them during production ; humble apologies , but I call that unfair competition .
It is unfair competition because Pakistani companies do not have social costs relating to their workers , they do not have environmental costs , they are not particularly concerned with combating the child labour that goes on there , and they do not have equivalent restrictions on the use of primary materials for reasons of public health .
I would even ask : how is such a radical decision possible without a report being tabled first that exactly details its negative impact on the various Member States ?
Nevertheless , I could venture some consequences right now , and those consequences are the closure and collapse of companies in the European Union , particularly in Portugal , and increased numbers of unemployed .
It is good for you to fully understand this , because there will come a time when someone has to be responsible for it .
If , in the end , we can assume - as some surely will - that this proposal is inevitable , please at least give a bit of forethought to some things that are not yet under consideration .
For example , the establishment of a tariff rate quota , which is provided for in the case of ethanol , but not in that of textiles .
The waiver should be for a maximum of one year because aid is temporary .
Believe me ; no European company will survive three years in direct competition with Pakistani companies .
Madam President , I am finishing now : lastly , a provision is needed on primary materials , so that Pakistan does not block European companies ' access to such materials to benefit from this production itself .

on behalf of the S & D Group . - Madam President , I understand what Mr Melo is saying but I cannot agree with it .
I welcome the Commission 's proposal to suspend import duties on key Pakistan imports into the European Union .
Firstly , the common ground between us is that Pakistan , which has not had an easy history since its birth as a nation , is going through its worst possible period .
It is in the frontline of the war against terrorism , costing it so far , it is reckoned , USD 40 billion .
We are all very well aware of the floods , the combined impact of which is worse than the Asian tsunami of 2004 and the Haitian floods of earlier this year .
That is a significant blow to any country .
What I welcome about the Commission proposal is that we give Pakistan the opportunity to trade its way out of some of its difficulties .
It is an intelligent proposal .
Firstly , as the Commissioner has said , the 75 tariff lines that would help boost Pakistan 's trade by an estimated EUR 100 million a year do little harm to EU investment .
This will not significantly damage any European Union industry and , equally importantly - in fact , quite possibly even more importantly - it will not harm the developing countries which are on a par with Pakistan , because none of the tariff lines affect products on the DDA preference erosion list .
That is very positive .
The second thing that is sensible about the Commission proposal is that it is time-limited and does not unilaterally attempt to alter the GSP resolution .
I welcome that because it still gives an incentive to Pakistan to come into line with social and human rights standards between now and 2014 in order to qualify for GSP + in 2014 .
So it gives the emergency aid we need now but , at the same time , does not give carte blanche to the Pakistan Government .
It says ' you have a duty yourself to put your country in order if you want to continue to qualify for these benefits ' .
This is a real test of Europe 's generosity and I hope that we , in this Parliament , will be prepared to meet it .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , our debate today marks a fork in the road between two crucial principles .
On the one hand , there is the duty of solidarity towards a country that has been hit by natural disasters , bringing its society , which already has structural problems , to its knees .
On the other hand , there is the necessity for a balanced trade policy .
With the European Commission 's proposal to suspend duties for Pakistan , the European Union is rightly avoiding a policy of mere humanitarian aid , allowing Pakistan to strengthen its economy and therefore its society .
The fact that all 74 of the tariff lines involved relate to the textile and clothing sector is almost inevitable for a country that can export only products within this sector .
We liberal democrats definitely prefer recourse to this kind of measure , rather than agreeing on humanitarian aid which is incapable of giving the country a genuine boost .
However , as Mr Melo reiterated a short while ago , we must not be naive and we ask the Commission - above all - not to make the mistake of naivety .
The Commissioner is well aware of the critical situation in which some textile districts , such as Prato , find themselves .
Prato is a special case : The situation there has gone out of the control of the national authorities and there is widespread illegality , which is also exacerbated by the crisis in the European textiles sector .
Since we believe that it cannot be just the European textiles sector that pays for our rightful humanitarian solidarity with Pakistan , we ask for three things to be done : 1 ) To set up regulatory instruments to avoid all possible triangulation with other countries that could profit from the duties from which Pakistan is benefiting ; 2 ) Not to aggravate the crisis in the European textile sector , by implementing measures that could instead support it , such as a reduction in the cost of electricity ; and 3 ) To avoid creating a precedent for other countries that suffer such natural disasters .
By working in this way , I think the aid for Pakistan is shared and sustainable , including in the long term , and that is what that country needs .
We have met this evening to discuss the Commission 's proposal to help Pakistan in the aftermath of the flooding .
We should bear in mind that almost 14 million people suffered from the flooding in Pakistan , which was of truly biblical dimensions .
It caused unimaginable destruction in Pakistan itself , and the results will soon be felt all over the world .
Why ?
Cotton , which is also referred to as white gold , and of which Pakistan is one of the main producers , grew poorly this year , and on top of that , has been largely destroyed in the country .
Clothes manufacturers and leading global brands are already forecasting an increase in the price of cotton products .
Cotton is a raw material we come across all the time , and which is used to manufacture clothes , banknotes , coffee filters , tents and fishing nets , as well as even being found in book bindings and many other everyday products .
It is used for a huge number of purposes .
We are in a time of crisis , and increases in the price of daily necessities are forecast .
This makes the scale of the problem huge .
On the one hand , we have large-scale European importers , which will gain from Pakistani products coming into Europe .
On the other hand , we have another small number of large Pakistani textile factories , which are actually outside the areas affected by the disaster , and which will also gain enormously from the Commission 's proposal .
That is the reality .
The winners are not the ill , not the displaced , not the children , not the elderly whose homes were destroyed : the winners are wealthy businesspeople .
What is happening here is that the disaster is being put to use : extreme climate phenomena are being made to serve the interests of big business .
That is what is absolutely intolerable about the proposal that the Commission is making .
They would do well to backtrack .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Madam President , in the past , I have often been sharply critical of British Prime Minister Cameron .
However , Prime Minister Cameron was absolutely correct to ask for trade preferences to be granted to Pakistan .
Now I use the word ' ask ' with some care .
Asking is exactly what the British Prime Minister has had to do .
Since joining the EU , the United Kingdom , the world 's fifth largest economy , does not have the autonomy to determine trade policy even with a Commonwealth country .
Nevertheless , it is in the UK 's national interest that Pakistan should now get trade preferences .
I rarely agree with David Martin but I do on this .
Pakistan is not only a developing country with 170 million inhabitants and strategic borders with Afghanistan ; it is also a country which has some thirty nuclear warheads .
The security implications of a collapse of the Pakistan State would be devastating to the security of the entire developed world .
Trade preferences for Pakistan at this time may perhaps help stop that happening .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I think we should all recall , once again , how dramatic the situation was in Pakistan a couple of weeks ago and indeed still is in many places .
Whole regions have been flooded , regions that are bigger than many of our Member States .
Tens , in fact hundreds , of thousands of people are in major need .
The infrastructure has been destroyed : roads , hospitals , universities , nurseries , schools , businesses .
Many people 's livelihoods have been destroyed .
I do not think we can even imagine what that is like .
We all agree that we have to help .
The problem , though , as we would say in German , is ' wash me , but do not get me wet ' .
What do I mean by that ?
Well , direct financial aid costs money , which , of course , has to be taken from elsewhere in our budget .
Indirect aid - trade facilitation - is what the Commission is now proposing , and there , too , there are , of course , concerns from those who may be affected .
That is why we are quite rightly having this debate on this topic today .
The Commission has not proposed using the Generalised System of Preferences .
That is a good thing , I feel .
Fundamentally , I think the current solution of doing this via the WTO , taking this route and really trying to help people help themselves , is a prudent one .
There are many unanswered questions , however , such as what will the impact on industries in the European Union really be ?
When I look at the Commission 's document , the proposal for a regulation , I see that it states in the explanatory memorandum right at the beginning that the working premise is that net imports into the EU would rise by EUR 100 million per year .
Is that really major , durable aid to Pakistan ?
Will it really help to move the major sums that we are actually talking about here ?
On the other hand , the proposal will entail tariff revenue losses of EUR 80 million from our budget .
Does this ratio add up , too ?
Does it make sense to do without EUR 80 million in customs revenue in order to receive EUR 100 million in increased imports ?
Are these figures correct ?
I would like some really head-on information from the Commission on this whole issue .
I am firmly convinced that we have to help Pakistan .
I am also prepared to explain to the citizens of the European Union , and to those of my electoral district , that we have to do something and that aid for others always has to be paid for by someone .
However , I am firmly convinced , Commissioner , that you should use the opportunity this evening and over the coming days and weeks to really convince the 736 Members of the European Parliament that your measures are the right ones to take , that they are sensible .
You should also use the opportunity , above all , to highlight ways in which the workers of companies that may be affected in countries like Portugal , Italy and Spain , and in the European Union as a whole , can also find routes forward and prospects for themselves .
I believe that these are truly the tasks to be performed in order to achieve a majority for your proposal in this House in a few weeks ' or months ' time .
I believe there is a lot of work to be done by all those involved in connection with convincing people and providing information .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I think we have to be mindful of the crisis that the European Union and its Member States are experiencing on a global level .
With a crisis that is hitting work , employment and growth , I wonder about the logic inspiring some European countries but , above all , the European Commission , in terms of international relations .
The Commission proposal under discussion today will heavily penalise some industrial sectors , particularly textiles and , in a situation like the present one , we must ask ourselves whether it is reasonable .
Some people fear that these decisions are borne from the desire for Europe to take a leading role on the world stage .
In reality , we know that this is not so and that the attempt to reduce the pressure , including terrorist pressure , within or related to some political and institutional systems , has even less to do with it .
The truth is that not even the recent flood has anything to do with this proposal , since the main concentration of the Pakistani textiles industry is not based in the regions hit by the disaster .
The actual reason is that once more , the aim is to penalise a sector in favour of financing the European economy and to favour large-scale retail , rather than the interests of the manufacturing industry located in some European countries .
This is profoundly mistaken in terms of growth , work and employment in a time of serious economic crisis and the need for real EU growth on global markets , in terms of its exports and its capacity for innovation and quality .
Madam President , may I firstly thank the Commissioner and colleagues Martin and Caspary for their very helpful comments .
Following the floods which took place , I actually have travelled to Pakistan to see for myself the extent of the devastation .
The devastation caused by the floods is the biggest natural disaster in Pakistan 's history .
It is certainly beyond anything that I could have imagined or expected to see .
Certainly , when I met with the Prime Minister of Pakistan on 22 September , he was very appreciative of the EU 's response to date and he believed it to be a very courageous response ; courageous in the way that Commissioner De Gucht has described it .
We have to be absolutely sure that we continue to react in an appropriate way .
The Commission has now come forward with a legislative proposal to cut the tariff to zero on 75 tariff lines covering 27 % of Pakistan 's exports to the EU , which would boost Pakistan 's exports by about EUR 100 million a year .
This really is now a test of the EU 's credibility .
We must ensure that we translate the political agreement reached by EU leaders into action that will make a real difference and give the Pakistani economy a lifeline at this desperate time of need .
We are , after all , their largest trading partner .
I hear the concerns made by colleagues in this Chamber and it is only right that we are fair in our response ; fair but ambitious .
The trade concession to be offered to Pakistan needs to represent a credible effort by the EU and bring about meaningful economic benefits to Pakistan , whilst taking into account sensitivities of our own industries as well as other WTO members - in particular , those of least-developed countries .
I believe through this proposal we are being ambitious , we are being courageous , but , above all , we are being fair to ourselves , as well as to the people of Pakistan .
Madam President , clearly the 20 million people hit by the recent disastrous flooding in Pakistan need immediate and substantial assistance , especially the 100 000 children left homeless by the flood and in danger of dying simply because of a lack of food .
Critical to food production at affordable prices are the millions of small farmers and landless farmers now at the mercy of the landlord class .
The distribution of free seeds , fertilisers that are environmentally compatible and other utilities could lay the basis for a rapid recovery of food supplies , but the liquidation of landlordism in Pakistan and the distribution of land to the landless is a key to food sustainability .
It was 140 years ago that the Irish peasantry conducted a major struggle for an end to landlordism , so it is long overdue here .
Tariff reductions must go to the workers and the poor and not to the landlords , corrupt state officials or the profits of industrialists .
Small farmers in Pakistan should benefit from just prices for their agricultural products on the world market , rather than callous speculators on the commodity markets .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are all concerned about the floods that have devastated Pakistan and for the serious effects on the economy , but we are also concerned about the European Commission 's proposal , even if it was brought up on the initiative of the Heads of State or Government .
The regulation proposed by the Commission concentrates , above all , on the suspension of duties in the textile and leather goods sectors - which represent 60 % of Pakistani exports with a turnover of almost EUR 200 million for textiles and EUR 510 million for the leather industry , both of which are characterised by production located in neighbouring areas that are not clearly affected by the floods .

It seemed to us that the political indications were instead directed at choosing an aid policy that did not damage structural sectors for the European economy .
The suspension of duties will have a serious effect on European textiles and leather industries , with a potential loss of thousands of jobs over the planned three years of the regulation .
These measures will be integrated and aggravated by the Generalised System of Preferences which , in 2013 , will be extended to Pakistan as well .
Commissioner , we are all aware that exceptional and unilateral measures are being adopted because we want to help a large , poor country that is in trouble due to the disaster that has hit it and is further aggravated by the economic crisis and the failure to adjust the World Trade Organisation 's rules .
Indeed , the current rules favour countries that are already developed , such as China and India , rather than poorer countries .
Exceptional measures in favour of one country should not , however , cause a crisis in other countries .
The Commission proposal therefore requires significant corrections to diversify the sectors involved , including the production and exports of Pakistan , accepting a different vision and a serious reflection on the respect for human rights and the fight against terrorism .
Pakistan must be helped , but through clear agreements , including those with regard to the political situation in the region .
( ES ) Madam President , Commissioner , the floods in July and August of this year caused 1 800 deaths in Pakistan and affected 20 million people , 12.5 million of whom need humanitarian aid .
The European Union has undertaken a humanitarian effort of EUR 320 million - as you said - and Spain has contributed EUR 11 million .
What we are discussing here is not a trade agreement , but supporting the strategic development of Pakistan .
The Commission , with a mandate from the Council , has liberalised 70 products over three years .
There is no question that Pakistan 's exports will have varying impacts on the different EU countries , taking into account the specific characteristics of each country .
The products that Pakistan may export are ethanol , textiles and leather goods .
The Commission maintains that it cannot amend the lists of products that will clash with textile production .
Spain represents 16 % of the volume of business from the textiles sector .
The Community of Valencia represents 18 % of Spanish textile production , and 17 % of employment is in the Community of Valencia .
The market for the Valencian textile sector is Europe and , within Europe , France , Italy and Germany .
Therefore , textile products being imported from Pakistan reduces their market , both in Europe and within Spain .
You said that there is a strategic study , but has Pakistan 's industrial capacity been evaluated ?
Has consideration been given to reducing the list of textile products ?
Is there going to be an annual evaluation of the impact of this agreement ?
( SV ) Madam President , Commissioner , I would like to say that the abolition of duties and barriers to trade as a step in the provision of aid to Pakistan in connection with this major disaster is extremely welcome .
I will say , probably for the first time in this Chamber , that I am impressed by both the Commission 's and the Council 's swift action and resolve on this issue .
It is certainly the case that money is needed .
However , what is the point of providing support and money - other than to assuage our own bad conscience - if , at the same time , we make it more difficult , by means of duties and barriers to trade , for people to recover by their own efforts .
What we are doing right now , namely comprehensively and quickly abolishing duties and barriers to trade on all 75 different tariff lines , corresponding to 27 % of Pakistan 's exports , is an excellent response to the disaster that this country is facing .
However , we in Parliament now have a responsibility .
We have a responsibility to act swiftly .
In other words , this must not turn into an example of how long the political process can take .
Pakistan needs money and aid now - not in a year 's time .
We must demonstrate that we understand that .
At the same time , I am disheartened to see how wide the opposition to this is .
I received a petition from European textile producers expressing their opposition to this , as they were afraid that Pakistan would export more to Europe , which they did not want .
However , is that not the whole point of it ?
Is it not the intention that they should be able to trade with us in order to get themselves out of poverty ?
If European consumers were to get slightly cheaper textiles , would that be a problem ?
Free trade and solidarity are often embraced here right up until we are to make a decision on them .
Let us here and now demonstrate that these values are most important to us when they are needed the most .
There is probably no better opportunity to stand up for both free trade and solidarity than in connection with this proposal .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , by means of this short speech , I should like to show my disagreement with the possible suspension of duties in favour of Pakistan for some three years and across 74 tariff lines , almost all of them in the textile and clothing sector .
My concerns regard the negative consequences on European industry and particularly Italian industry - and on the loss of jobs in Europe in a sector that has already been sorely tested by the economic crisis .
I am referring in particular to the small and medium-sized enterprises in the sector that we are trying to help anyway , and which would suffer considerable damage .
Also , the fact that Pakistan set a 15 % duty on its cotton fibre exports at the start of this year in order to discourage the supply of raw materials is not insignificant .
It is clear that the aim is to conserve raw materials by seeking to obtain more attractive exchange rates for their export .
I fully understand the need to help a country with serious problems , particularly following the serious disasters it has suffered .
However , the European aid that I would hope for would be contributions towards the construction of roads and infrastructure using local labour .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , it is not easy to hold an objective debate when you are talking about 100 000 children being made homeless , millions of farmers on the streets and people living in absolutely truly bitter poverty .
I think it is right for the European Union to act quickly and provide help quickly here .
The big question that arises for me , when it comes to the measures that you have proposed is , are we giving help in the right place or are we helping the wrong people ?
That is something that I would like explained in more detail , as it is absolutely justified to say , in relation to the textiles industry , that the aid does help Pakistan overall , but whether it reaches the right people , I am not so sure .
Secondly , I would also like to say that , if this aid helps people to help themselves , obviously you do have to take into account what effect all of this has back in Europe .
I think , however , that there is already a drastic situation here , that we need to provide aid , and I hope that the aid does reach the people who really need to be helped .
Madam President , I just want to respond to some of the comments which have been made .
What Pakistan is trying to do at this point is actually to help itself out of the mess that it is in after the devastating floods .
If the factories were in flood-hit areas , they would not be able to produce , so it is not surprising that the factories concerned are not in flood-hit areas .
The direct aid that could be put in is miniscule compared to what the need actually is .
Distribution of the income from the additional exports is important - we know that for infrastructure , for energy supplies , for schools , for roads , etc . - while there are indeed responsibilities that lie with the democratically elected government of Pakistan in terms of its effectiveness , of income , of tax revenue and so on .
People have also talked about the need for greater diversity .
If Pakistan had a greater diversity of industrial sectors , we would not be concentrating so much on textiles .
I appeal to Members to offer that country this opportunity to help itself out of this disaster .
( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , the tragedy in Pakistan demands that Europe show solidarity , but it cannot be a pretext for putting at risk the textile industry in a number of Member States , such as Portugal .
There are other ways of showing solidarity : more effective types of aid that are aimed at the recovery of the affected areas and the improvement of the living conditions of local people , but also fairer types of aid .
Trade concessions are not long-term measures , as I have been saying .
This benefits the large European importers above all , as it fulfils their long-held pretensions .
However , it damages the textile industry , as well as the countries and regions that are most dependent on it ; all this in a context of profound crisis and high unemployment .
While it is true that the measures proposed by the Commission cannot , under any circumstances , be a pretext for more redundancies , we cannot ignore the objective difficulties that these measures are creating .
Measures are needed to defend the European textiles sector and the jobs related to it .
At the suggestion of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , the Union budget 2010 provides for a budget heading allocated to creating a Union programme for the textiles and footwear sector .
Where is this programme , Commissioner ?
What are its key elements ?
I will leave you with these questions .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I think it is paradoxical that instead of defending our jobs , the European Union puts them at risk by concealing the possible consequences of its actions behind well-meaning rhetoric of humanitarian aid .
The possible reduction in duties for the next three years on clothing products from Pakistan risks plunging the manufacturing sector into an even greater crisis than the one we are currently experiencing , with the loss of 120 000 jobs across Europe , and 40 000 in Italy alone .
Pakistan must be helped , but we cannot adopt soft trading measures when my country - Italy - and other Member States are already feeling the effects of counterfeiting of textile products , especially from Asian countries and from China in particular .
The Commission cannot give to charity at the expense , above all , of Italy , which represents 30 % of the entire European textile sector .
I believe that along with Pakistan , our small and medium-sized enterprises must be helped to escape from the crisis by imposing duties and quotas on Asian products .
I am from Prato and my fellow citizens and I have had quite enough of measures like these .
( EL ) Madam President , as far as manufacturing industry is concerned , I would remind the House that Pakistan is the fourth largest cotton producer in the world , accounting for 9 % of global production , with the European Union following with just under 5.5 % .
Clearly , therefore , this is a very serious issue .
Of course , we do not want protectionism , which damages healthy competition ; on the contrary , we want free and open international trade .
On the other hand , however , members have also raised this point .
Mr Melo , who is from Portugal , a country with a fragile economy , was very graphic .
Members referred to Italy .
I would add Greece ; you all know the problems it is facing .
Of course , we should support Pakistan , but we should also monitor it and that is want I want to ask the Commission : do we have mechanisms to ensure that the aid we give Pakistan will be channelled in the right direction and not used for other purposes or for certain industries , to the detriment of European companies and European workers ?
Madam President , I do not claim to be particularly au fait with the intricacies of this situation , but I do recognise the strategic importance of Pakistan .
For that reason , I support the point made by Mr Karim , that it is in everybody 's interest to have a stable regime there in a region of great volatility .
I also have to say that a Union which was founded on the principles of peace and prosperity for our citizens should be in the vanguard of bringing peace and prosperity to other parts of the world , so I support the proposals here this evening , but I would like the Commission to answer very fully the points made by Mr Higgins and others on the Left .
Can they guarantee that the aid we would be giving would be going to those who deserve it and not to big traders and landlords ?
That is the key question this evening .
( DE ) Madam President , the flooding disaster in Pakistan has humanitarian consequences on an unimaginable scale .
I consider it to be the European Union 's duty to make sure that aid gets to the people of Pakistan quickly .
Measures designed to invigorate the economy and employment over the long term are an important contribution for the EU to make in order to help this hard-hit country out of its crisis .
However , I question whether a simple reduction in the customs tariff will have the desired effect .
We need to clear up whether or not preferences for Pakistan flow into Third countries via indirect channels and thus , whether they have the desired effect .
As well as the textiles industry , I am thinking here , above all , about the field of bio-ethanol .
My specific question to the Commission is whether setting up a tariff quota for ethanol is regarded as a truly sustainable and efficient option that will help the people of Pakistan .
Can it be assessed whether the necessary sustainability criteria for imports into the EU are also fulfilled in the production of bio-ethanol .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

Madam President , I just wonder if the speaker appreciates that just this one time , we are actually not discussing aid but are actually simply discussing trade preferences .
This would give the opportunity for Pakistan to earn its way out of its problems by its own efforts and volition .
I wonder if the speaker appreciates that .
( DE ) Madam President , I do believe that that is the core element that we are discussing .
The measures need to be clearly thought through in order to ensure sustainable assistance .
Above all , there is always the question of the extent to which the cost / benefit calculation ultimately adds up for Europe .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Pakistan must undoubtedly be helped following the floods that have hit it .
However , the question we must ask ourselves today is what kind of help this country needs most , and what kind is the European Union best capable of providing .
We must act quickly , but also effectively .
Indeed , it is the effectiveness of the European Commission 's proposal which causes me great concern .
I find it to be a patchy proposal which , by intervening primarily in the textile and leather sectors , would risk not being effective enough , since this aid could generate fresh tensions due to the new instances of poverty it would generate in Europe and would further hamstring the European textile sector , which is already in serious decline .
Then we must consider the fact that by favouring exports from producer businesses , we are actually helping those areas of Pakistan which have not been flooded , whereas our aid should serve to build competitiveness and development , helping the recovery of production in the areas of the country that have been hit by the catastrophe .
For all these reasons , I believe that the path of abolishing duties is absolutely unsuitable and we do not consent to it or support it .

Member of the Commission . - Madam President , first of all , I would like to present very clearly the figures we are speaking about .
We are talking about a trade volume of EUR 900 million .
The effect will be EUR 100 million of additional exports to the European market by Pakistan , but the overall balance for the European Union will only be EUR 50 million because , as a result of the more favourable position of Pakistan to export on the European market , there will also be a certain amount of trade diversion , which means that other importers will lose some opportunities on the European markets .
So , the overall impact will be about EUR 50 million on a yearly basis .
I am saying this because I heard again in this debate that 120 000 jobs would be lost .
Now you all have a calculator tool on your mobile phone ; if Europe is to lose 120 000 jobs because of an additional EUR 50 million of imports on the European market , then there is really a serious problem with the European textile industry , regardless of what happens with Pakistan .
It is simply not serious to put that argument forward .
That is my first remark .
Secondly , we have duly taken into account the sensitivities of the European textile industry and the somewhat difficult position this industry might be in .
Bed linen is not part of the tariff lines that we are proposing , and neither are apparel or household linen , which are three of the most sensitive product lines for Europe .
On the contrary , a lot of semi-finished products are included .
If they are semi-finished , it means that they will be finished in Europe , which should , in fact , generate cheaper imports for those companies which give the final treatment to such products .
So this is not immediately harming us .
I would even say the opposite .
We have really been studying very carefully what would be a good proposal for Pakistan without harming European industry too much at a time when we are also coming out of an economic crisis that is certainly not easy to manage .
A comment was also raised concerning cotton exports .
There is a scarcity on the worldwide cotton market , and it is true that Pakistan is one of the main cotton producers .
What I have in mind is that once we have this agreement , once we see that we are really getting somewhere , we should also ask Pakistan to make sure that our own textile industry gets enough cotton to be able to produce what the market is asking for .
As there is such a worldwide scarcity of cotton , or at least certain varieties of cotton , you might ask why we do not import those cotton varieties from Africa .
Well , because they do not produce the right varieties of cotton we need , and it is not easy to switch to a different kind of cotton production from one day to another , so we will have to pay special attention to that problem .
Let me just conclude by saying that when you look at the situation with respect to Pakistan , what we need is more aid and more trade ; we need both .
The European Union has contributed EUR 320 million already , 60 % of what the United Nations initially asked for .
We will continue to do so ; that is more aid .
Trade is not aid , as has been said in this plenary .
Trade is about giving opportunities to the Pakistani economy to produce and to export and to give jobs to the people that need those jobs .
I think it is an essential tool in economic recovery that we should give additional trading opportunities to Pakistan .
But it is not about aid , which means that you cannot direct those who will be , let us say , the beneficiaries .
It is much easier to direct the process in the case of trade , but we also know that while trade has its frailties we are not going to recover an economy by aid .
I think you need both elements , aid and trade , and that is why we are working on both possibilities .
It is true that we should also bear in mind , as I have been saying in this plenary , that we are talking about a region that has been severely devastated .
Many Members of Parliament from Italy have spoken , and I understand that the territory of Pakistan which is flooded is about the size of the territory of the whole of Italy .
That is what we are talking about , so I think we should help them , but we should also bear in mind that this is a very sensitive region which is geo-strategically very important .
It is also very important to us and to our security .
It would be very dangerous for Europe if this region became unstable , so we should do everything we can to make sure that the stability of the region is not affected by what happens in Pakistan .
So this is an overall array of measures which we are employing .
We have political discussions with Pakistan ; we had a summit with them recently , and we will continue to have such discussions .
Several EU officials have been going there , as well as Commissioner Georgieva , for example , with respect to humanitarian aid .
We have the aid package , which is considerable , and we also have an economic approach in terms of more trade .
I think , and I hope , that this will really mean something considerable for Pakistan . I am also convinced that by helping Pakistan , we also , to a certain extent , help ourselves .
The debate is closed .
Indication of the country of origin of certain products imported from third countries ( debate )
The next item is the report by Cristiana Muscardini , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the indication of the country of origin of certain products imported from third countries - C7-0048 / 2010 - .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , many of the European Union 's main economic and trading partners have , for some considerable time , been applying domestic rules requiring indication of origin for imported goods .
In 2005 , the European Commission proposed a regulation aimed at putting the European Union on an equal footing with these countries , requiring a certain number of manufactured goods imported into the European Union to include a denomination of origin .
This regulation will help offset an imbalance suffered hitherto by European consumers who , compared to citizens of countries outside the EU , do not have the right to choose what they buy in the full knowledge of its provenance .
A democratic right , which presupposes freedom of choice and , hence , the right of knowledge , is therefore compromised .
The regulation makes up for a situation of inferiority for EU citizens and also proposes anew the legitimate right to reciprocity .
It is a regulation requested by many consumers ' associations and supported by many business associations .
Production in Europe will never be able to recover if our producers are not given the same guarantees as other countries in which a regulation on origin marking for products is already in force .
European producers - who rightly have to comply with many obligations imposed by the European Union in order to guarantee product quality and safeguard consumers and who , in order to export , are obliged to identify their products with a mark of origin - are suffering from unfair competition from producers in third countries who can export their goods to Europe , concealing the provenance .
Today , European small and medium-sized enterprises , in whose favour a resolution was approved during the last legislature on 5 February 2009 addressing the problems encountered in enabling them to internationalise , continue to encounter difficulties because they suffer from unfair competition from those non-EU producers that can export to Europe without an origin mark and European consumers are denied their right to an informed choice .
In order for the free market to be just that , it must be based on fair competition and be built on clear , shared and applied rules .
This is why the approval of this regulation will finally remove this democratic deficit and unfair competition still present in Europe , which damages consumers first and foremost .
The regulation has been approved by the European Parliament 's Committee on International Trade with a large majority of 19 votes in favour and 3 votes against .
The European Parliament has already expressed its support during the last legislature with a written declaration voted through with a full majority and , in the current legislature , with a vote on a resolution which obtained 529 votes in favour out of 593 votes cast .
It is truly surprising that today , some fellow Members who signed the written declaration and voted in favour of the resolution in November 2009 have moved an amendment intended to reject the regulation .
With great calmness , I feel I can say that those who are against the proposal do not wish to give European citizens the same rights as Chinese citizens .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , honourable Members , tonight we are discussing a legislative proposal which the Commission tabled in 2005 concerning the indication of the country of origin of certain products imported from third countries - the ' made in ' regulation .
I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Muscardini , for her dedication in support of our proposal and for her hard work .
I wish her much success in carrying it further through the legislative process .
2005 was long before the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty and , therefore , long before this House received equal legislative powers regarding trade policy , but the lack of legislative powers did not prevent the European Parliament from twice expressing its support for this proposal .
Despite our consistent efforts , there has been no progress towards adoption in Council .
Now that we are under the Lisbon Treaty , I am pleased the European Parliament can play its full role in relation to this proposal .
I say this because the EU needs to adopt legislation on origin markings for certain goods from third countries .
Today , the EU does not require origin marking : products can bear an origin mark provided that this does not mislead the consumer , in line with the EC Directive on unfair business practices of 2005 .
The purpose of our proposal is to introduce a compulsory marking of origin on imports of certain products and to establish clear rules on how origin shall be established .
The objectives of our proposal are clear - to enable consumers to know the origin of the goods and to ensure transparency according to a single standard by which origin is determined .
Of course , information on origin does not cover everything the consumer may want to know about a specific product , but has the benefit of being useful and clear .
Secondly , being better informed , consumers will then be free to decide what to purchase according to their preferences .
Incidentally , our proposal can also contribute to reducing the incidence of fraudulent or misleading origin marking .
It is limited in scope , applying to goods such as leather , textiles , footwear and glassware , and it would not apply to sectors like electronics , ICT equipment , chemicals , machinery , cars , etc .
Among the product categories covered , there are products for which information about origin is particularly important : those that are destined for the final consumer .
One of the amendments adopted by the Committee on International Trade clearly refers to this condition , which I find positive .
Of course , we will need to ensure consistency between this principle - namely ' goods for final consumers ' - and the actual products that will ultimately be covered by the regulation , as detailed in its annex .
I will not deny that origin marking has a cost for traders and exporters to the EU .
The cost will notably depend on the production processes and technical marking rules .
Therefore , it is important to keep these costs to a minimum .
The Commission would be in charge of drafting the rules regarding the modalities of the marking , and will pay the utmost attention to minimising costs by relying on international practices , consulting with Member States and all the industries and traders involved .
Setting this proposal in a wider context , other large trading partners - like the US , Canada , Japan and China - have long had such schemes in place .
We are therefore able to draw useful lessons from the experience of others .
In conclusion , I underscore the Commission 's determination to work closely with Parliament in order to have this proposal adopted and to have an efficient , accurate and cost-effective scheme for origin marking .
Mandatory origin marking , or the use of the words ' Made in ' , means that goods imported into Europe from outside the EU are to be labelled with the country they come from .
In my opinion , this is a proposal that belongs in the last century , when something that was manufactured in Sweden , for example , also consisted of parts originating only from Sweden .
However , in this proposal , it is as if world trade , globalisation and global supply chains have been disregarded .
One of my favourite examples is this shirt that I am wearing .
It is made of cotton from Egypt , which was woven into cloth in Italy .
It was designed in Hong Kong and finally sewn together in China .
I think that a much better description than ' Made in China ' , which it would probably receive under this regulation , would be ' Made in the world ' , to quote Pascal Lamy , former Commissioner and current Director-General of the WTO .
That is what the world looks like today .
This is not a proposal that provides better information .
I believe that , on the contrary , this is a proposal that creates new barriers to trade and makes trade more difficult , and it is perhaps even protectionist .
That is precisely why this type of regulation is prohibited within the EU .
On the internal market , it is not permitted , for example , in Sweden to demand that articles imported from Germany be labelled with where they come from .
It is true that many of our trading partners , the United States for example , have this type of regulation .
The United States introduced such a provision in 1930 , but this is not , of course , something we should imitate .
We all know that the 1930s were one of the darkest decades in the history of world trade .
Instead of introducing trade regulations from the previous century , creating new trade barriers and obstructing world trade , I think that we should do the opposite .
In order to get ourselves out of recession , we should facilitate trade .
My message to the Commission is therefore : rework the proposal and do it right !
I will vote against this proposal tomorrow and I am certain that several of my fellow Members will follow my example .

Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am always very happy to speak after Mr Fjellner , as I am always sure that I will not be in agreement with him .
First , I should like to thank our rapporteur as well as all the shadow rapporteurs and , in particular , my friend Mr Susta , for their excellent work and their good cooperation on this text , which will finally enable a system of compulsory marking of origin on certain products imported into Europe to be introduced .
I should like to thank you too , Commissioner , for your commitment .
Our vote tomorrow will , in fact , be the first stage in the introduction of this regulation , which dates from 2005 , and which the European Parliament has always supported and called for .
Origin marking is an important step towards transparency and information , which we must constantly improve in favour of European citizens .
Indeed , European consumers rightly want to know what they are purchasing , where the product comes from and under what conditions it was produced .
They are therefore demanding to be able to consume in a more informed and , hence , responsible way .
With this new regulation , we are responding to this demand , because our citizens will be better informed , in particular , of the social and environmental conditions under which the goods they purchase are produced .
Contrary to what some people want to believe , the consumer is also a citizen , who agrees to pay more for quality European production , because this legislation is also essential for European companies , whose production is associated with a reputation for quality and high production standards .
For those companies that have chosen to maintain production safeguarding know-how and employment in Europe , this regulation will re-establish a level playing field with our third-country trading partners .
The text resulting from the vote of the Committee on International Trade is balanced , which is why , when it is voted on in tomorrow 's plenary , I call on the Members of this House not to call this balance into question and to support this text by voting overwhelmingly in favour of it .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen .
Madam President , if you were to visit the Ponte Rialto in Venice - perhaps with Commissioner De Gucht - and wanted to buy a pair of shoes advertised as Italian , a tie , a traditional mask or a glass from Murano , there is a chance you will be ripped off , realising that the product purchased was not made in Italy at all , but in some country in Asia .
I believe that the proposed regulation under discussion is beginning to inject some order into an ever more confused global market .
It seeks to protect the consumer - including you Madam President , and Commissioner De Gucht , if you go shopping on Venice 's Ponte Rialto , or elsewhere - as well as the European industries that have not relocated ( whilst those that have will be penalised by this regulation ) .
Above all it will correct the asymmetry on the trade markets , which sees Europe as the only large area lacking a regulation on compulsory origin marking .
This is not a protectionist proposal ; in fact , I find it to be very balanced .
It only applies to a limited number of products , to the final product destined for the consumer , and - as far as my group is concerned - it is a 5-year pilot project because we shall support the amendment with the sunset clause .
In addition , we also introduced in committee - through an amendment of my own - a provision that aims to avoid any excessive bureaucratic burden that would harm businesses .
If the vote tomorrow is satisfactory , it will mean that one stage has been won , but it will not be a conclusive victory .
We shall then need the full support of the European Commission in our dealings with the European Council .
The Commission has already been full of suggestions and very cooperative , for which we are grateful , and this is a reason why we must continue to work together .
I am sure that in five years , we shall be satisfied by the result we have obtained .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank the rapporteur for the good work she has done .
We need to be better informed about the origin marking of the products we purchase .
EU law also provides for penalty measures in the event of violation ...
I am sorry , there is a problem .
I will speak later .
( The speaker stops and then resumes at the invitation of the President )
We need to be better informed about the origin marking of the products we purchase .
Community law also provides for penalty measures in the event of violation and of consumers being misled on origin .
The European Court ...
No , it is not working .
I am sorry .
( The speaker stops again )
I understand why the proposal was submitted , but I do not agree with the reasons for submitting it .
I think that the current globalised world hardly allows one to determine the country of origin ; in the end , a guarantee of the quality of this or that product is far more important than its trademark or country of origin .
We also need to note that this proposal does not deal with the protection of trademarks or protective labels , and also cannot be of any help in protecting trademarks or protective labels .
The fact that it will lead to an increase in the specific cost of a product and , therefore , probably also to an increase in the price of the product , has already been mentioned here by the Commissioner .
In the end , the fact that the proposal only relates to certain products - which has been mentioned several times here - could even be described as something like product-based or geographical discrimination .
I would therefore argue here that we should stick with voluntary labelling , because in the end , where consumers put enough added value on such labelling , the majority of EU producers already use this labelling on a voluntary basis .
The European Union is very often criticised for excessive regulation , for passing far too many laws that burden the economic environment .
Therefore , I ask , at least in this case , that we do not contribute to the further burdening of the legal and economic environment in the European Union .
Madam President , Commissioner , I , too , would like to thank Mrs Muscardini for the work that she has done on this report and the shadow rapporteurs for their constructive cooperation .
My group welcomes the approach of providing more transparency for consumers in relation to the origin of products , and supports the road map , as Mr Rinaldi described it , to a stage victory .
In fact , we would prefer further information to be made apparent , such as information on products ' ecological ' footprints ' , on whether workers ' rights are observed in the manufacturing process or on the equitable sharing of profits by producers and workers .
At the same time , we do not believe that this extended wish list belongs in a regulation on the indication of the country of origin , as the name of the country on its own does not provide any reliable information in this regard .
Let us take the example of India , where child labour is prohibited .
While there are black sheep amongst the companies there , the vast majority do comply with the law .
In a European regulation , we therefore have to take into consideration the fact that neither competitors nor nationalists can drag the name of an entire country and its products through the mud .
We advocate the development of certification systems .
Fair trade labels represent a model to follow here , and these should now be further developed with EU support .
Additionally taking account of low carbon production methods and humane working conditions would enable us to incorporate modern challenges .
I call on the Commission to take steps to initiate an additional regulation in this direction .
Allow me to add one more thought .
A consistent introduction of the ' Made in ' provision also has a part to play in solving complicated political conflicts ; for example , the unhindered access of ' Made in Palestine ' products to the EU market , which would deliver the chance of autonomous economic development in Palestine .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Parliament will tomorrow vote on origin marking , on which basis - as the tabled amendments stand - the origin mark would have to be applied to goods for final consumption and goods for the end consumer .
This last definition could cause a serious chain reaction because it does not include semi-finished and intermediate products which - having been produced in non-EU countries - with a final and perhaps insignificant final processing upon arrival in Europe , could be passed off as goods made in a Member State .
In this way , the consumer would not be fully informed of the real origin of the product whilst big industries would be incentivised to relocate to non-EU countries , thereby increasing their earnings many times over for their own interests alone , impoverishing our industrial districts .
For these reasons , we tabled some amendments aimed at extending this definition to semi-finished and intermediate products as well , so as to guarantee transparency and traceability of products imported from third countries , along the lines of Italy 's Reguzzoni law , which fully respects consumer rights .
My fellow Members , this is truly the last chance we have to protect the manufacturing sector , in Italy and across Europe , which is one of the main drivers of the economy , unlike those few industrial giants that serve their own interests and not the good of the entire community .
Restricting rabid relocation , counterfeiting and the exploitation of labour must continue to be one of the aims of the European Parliament .
If we vote through the regulation tomorrow as it stands , we shall be throwing away a big opportunity along with our efforts and , above all , those of millions of workers at small and medium-sized enterprises who will feel betrayed , together with all consumers who trusted in us to make a responsible choice .
The battle we are fighting is not against anyone , but for work , business , our workers and all European citizens .
Madam President , we live in challenging economic times and many small businesses feel burdened with EU red tape and its associated cost .
I believe that , first and foremost , this House and the Commission should be looking at ways to alleviate the financial burden of the red tape that we insist upon here .
In respect of this proposal , we need to strike a balance between the opening-up of markets for European products and ensuring the quality and safety of imported products .
I must say , however , that I do see merit in third-country labelling when it comes to food products .
I know they are not covered by the scope of this proposal , but many of Northern Ireland 's farmers feel let down when they work hard to meet the requirements laid down by Europe , and then have to compete with those who do not have to meet the same standards .
I hope the Commissioner will take note that those of us who represent rural and agricultural-based communities have not forgotten the resumption of talks with Mercosur countries , and we hope that he is not prepared to sacrifice our agricultural industry for further markets .
This place has a habit of taking legislation too far , and I fear that this is what is happening in this particular case .
( DE ) Madam President , first of all , I would like to thank Mrs Muscardini for her hard work , particularly in view of the controversial issues , some of which have already been discussed .
I am convinced that European consumers need to have this matter explained to them .
I am also of the opinion that it must be our goal to protect the citizens of Europe from products that are dangerous and harmful to health .
End users should know what raw materials are used , how these are obtained , where and how they are processed and what social and production standards apply in the relevant countries .
The goal is clear , but we need clarity on how we intend to get there .
Unfortunately , the current version of the proposed ' Made in ' provision tell us nothing about the actual origins of a particular commodity .
I should like to illustrate this with an example : Uzbekistan is the world 's third largest exporter of cotton .
Ninety per cent of the harvest is picked by hand , most of it using child labour .
The gathered cotton is then shipped to Vietnam , where it is processed .
According to the Commission 's current proposals , the textiles now imported into the EU from Vietnam should be labelled ' Made in Vietnam ' , but what about the transparency for the European consumer ?
Nobody knows where the raw materials come from and how they have been obtained .
The level of information is quite inadequate .
The European Consumer Centre in Austria has published an up-to-date analysis , which indicates that the world 's leading and most prominent textile businesses are unable to guarantee that raw materials from state-sponsored companies involving child labour are not used in their production .
A ' Made in ' provision of this kind , which excludes raw materials from the production process , clearly misjudges the requirements of European end users .
I am in favour of more truth in product labelling and therefore oppose this proposal from the Commission .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Muscardini , and all the shadow rapporteurs with whom I have worked on this issue , which is extremely important for us .
I hope that tomorrow , the European Parliament gives the same strong backing to the legislative resolution that it gave in July 2006 , with the written declaration of 2008 , and the favourable vote on the resolution of 2009 .
We are preparing to adopt a measure that should protect the consumer , informing him or her of the origin of products for a more general purpose , which renews equality of opportunity in international trade and reciprocity between the European Union and its main competitors .
It does not add costs for businesses in third countries , which are already obligated to mark their products in all our competitor countries in the world and in many others .
Nor does it create any burdens for the European distribution system which , indirectly , without costing the public finances anything , favours the return to Europe of significant production , slows business relocation and also contributes to the fight against counterfeiting .
It is a combination of very obvious advantages , which cannot be halted by calling perhaps for further measures because here , it really is the case that the best is the enemy of the good .
We must come to the end of a process that began seven years ago , showing our concern for the interests of our businesses - above all , in this time of crisis and unemployment - but also for the potential for a trade system regulated so as to provide reciprocity , consumer protection and correct information which could be further developed in terms of traceability .
If this measure is not voted through by Parliament , there will be trouble .
I should like to thank the European Commission once again and all those who wish to support this measure , because it is helpful for European citizens and for world trade .
( FR ) Madam President , my apologies , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank the rapporteur for the good work she has done .
We need to be better informed about the origin marking of the products we purchase .
EU law also provides for penalty measures in the event of violation and of consumers being misled on origin .
The European Court of Justice decrees that the Commission ...
No , I am sorry , there is a problem , I am going to record it in the Minutes .
( The speaker stops )
( FR ) Madam President , the miracle of free trade and of free and undistorted competition means that a consumer who purchases a knife labelled Laguiole in the Aveyron , its region of origin , has a 90 % chance of acquiring a poor quality blade made in China or in Pakistan , one of many examples .
It is a real labelling con .
If we really want to safeguard and develop industrial employment in the European Union , if we want to avoid misleading European consumers and to protect their health , if we want to prolong the social and environmental acquis of our societies , there is an urgent need to make the origin marking of manufactured products compulsory , even if it means encroaching on the ultraliberal founding dogmas of Europe .
This marking must be serious and not a form of deception which entails presenting a product as having been ' made in Europe ' when it is , in fact , nothing more than an assembly of parts from all over the world , with only the label having been ' made in Europe ' .
The customs services and ministries of justice of the Member States will then need to be given all the means of control and law enforcement to implement strong legislation on the marking of origin and the country of origin .
( SK ) Thanks to an open trade policy , our citizens can buy products made all over the world .
More often than not , however , they have no way of knowing where the product was made , where the materials from which it is made came from , and what technological procedures the manufacturer used for its processing .
At the same time , the maximum amount of information the consumer can have about a product is a basic pre-condition for good decision making when choosing goods .
To this day , our European citizens have no right to elementary information about products , something which has been routinely available not only to the citizens of the United States since 1930 , but also today to the people of China , Japan , Canada , India , Mexico and other countries .
This is why I believe it is time the European Union adopted a norm which will protect European consumers regardless of the particular interests of large distribution chains or certain interest groups , and require suppliers to mark goods imported from third countries with the necessary information about their origin .
In this way , our consumers will be provided with an important source of information when deciding which goods to choose , while third country manufacturers will not be substantially affected in any way because they have long been indicating the origin of their products to other countries .
However , it will be important to think through the mechanisms of the uniform application of sanctions and penalties for the violation of this legislation by any Member State in order to prevent manufacturers from seeking a point of entry to the common market of the European Union which is not properly safeguarded by sanctions , thereby avoiding compliance with the regulations .
I firmly believe that introducing an effective system for marking the origin of products from third countries will be extremely beneficial both to our European consumers and to compliant manufacturers .
( CS ) Czech glassmakers , textile manufacturers and shoe manufacturers have , for a long time , been coming to me and calling for transparency on the origin of products .
They must compete with imitations of unknown origin which are parasitic on the European Union market .
We are mostly talking about poor quality and often harmful goods .
In addition , information on where textiles , shoes , glass , jewellery or pharmaceutical products are produced is not classified information , nor does it constitute protectionism or a barrier to free trade , as liberals are labelling it .
On the contrary , the free market and fair competition work well only if consumers can make good and free decisions on the basis of information and experience .
I fully support the rapporteur , Mrs Muscardini , and I appreciate her contribution to achieving a compromise , which I hope will enable us to adopt the proposal tomorrow .
I understand that , particularly in northern countries , where traditional products have been replaced by imports from other countries , such regulation may be regarded as unnecessary bureaucracy .
However , let us compare the adoption of the regulation with our competitors in the USA , Canada , Japan and China , where ' made in ' is obligatory .
Like the previous speaker , I want to say that it is necessary for the Commission to propose at least minimum standards for penalties , and to ensure that the rules will be followed consistently across the Union and that third-country exporters will not give preference to certain countries because of lower or no sanctions .
We owe this to our citizens .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , during a recent delegation trip on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , I had the pleasure of visiting a number of production sites in Europe , small enterprises that are forced to operate in very difficult conditions : I witnessed superior quality , fair wages , good working conditions and a rational working atmosphere .
This is a direct result of our traditions and European legal order .
However , there are plenty of countries where such principles do not exist , where working conditions are poor , and where no guarantees exist for workers .
I believe that , at the very least , European consumers must be able to recognise in future whether the products they are buying come from a particular country where basic principles do not apply .
This is something that will be required in future thanks to the directive that Mrs Muscardini has so efficiently prepared .
Accordingly , we should agree to the proposal .
To those businesses that have moved their production abroad for their own convenience and in order to avoid bureaucracy , and which are now complaining , I would say : you have only yourselves to blame !
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Europe could not escape from this duty : this is the way we can and have had to react .
I should like to thank Mrs Muscardini for the tenacity of her work and all the other fellow Members who have worked on this issue .
With regard to the traceability of goods from non-European Union countries , I believe that it is right that consumers know the provenance and the origin of products in order to safeguard their health and their freedom , extending this to semi-processed goods in which the supply chain is indicated .
With regard to competitiveness , the lack of a regulation of this kind undermines the right of European citizens and consumers and prevents the proper functioning of the market , which , to be free , must have common and shared rules , without disparities or unfair competition .
With regard to the safeguarding of small and medium-sized enterprises and their national products , it is not the big companies that need such protection .
Indeed , I believe that they absolutely do not need it seeing as they travel the world with their brands .
Furthermore , we must promote the specialties and traditional excellences of our countries , relaunch the European economy and guarantee the respect for the rights of workers in social , environmental and productive terms .
Mr President , Commissioner , I wonder what we have to fear by telling the truth and aiming to establish rules that are equal for all .
We must try not to be cowed , making use of the European ordinary legislative procedure , and prevent the Council from always imposing its will .
Hence , let us try to make this step a reality by supporting the regulation in question .
For the rest , let us wait and see .
( ES ) Mr President , the regulation that we are debating today is of vital importance for the future of the cutlery and similar products sector , which , in my region - Don Quixote country , specifically , Albacete - represents not just the survival of more than 8 000 jobs but also part of its identity and future commitment to craftsmanship as a source of employment .
The ' made in ' stamp on knives has been demanded for some time by social groups such as Aprecu , and the government of Castilla-La Mancha has been fighting for it with the unanimous support of its regional Parliament .
Origin marking is not interventionism ; it is a commitment to transparency in the commercial rules of play and in the fight against unfair competition .
It means increasing the capacity of consumers to make decisions by choosing a product because they are taking into account not only its final price , but also the mark of quality of the place of origin or the social conditions in which it is produced .
Above all , it will represent a new possibility of optimism for many people who are having a difficult time , but who today are feeling that we have not been indifferent in terms of backing fairer trade , while , at the same time , giving added value to those who , as well as producing , do so while respecting social rights and the better conditions of European workers .
I would therefore like to thank the rapporteur and Mr Menéndez del Valle for their social conscience in this matter that is so important for my region .
( SK ) First , I would like to compliment Mrs Muscardini on her approach to the report and the hard work she has invested in it .
The European Union is neither the first , nor the second or third , to request that its citizens be informed about the origin of a product they purchase for their needs or consumption .
The US , Canada , Japan , India and many other countries have long been providing this right to their citizens .
This is in accordance with the regulations of the World Trade Organisation .
So the question is why have we not yet found a compromise ?
All of us agree on the need to inform the consumer citizen .
However , it is also true that the indication of the country of origin , that is , the ' made in ' provision , may be potentially misleading because globalisation in industry means that the end product is composed of parts made in different countries .
Therefore , were we perhaps to add another label to that of ' made in ' , such as ' processed in ' or ' assembled in ' , we might arrive at a broad agreement more easily .
The greatest obstacle , which is the fear of providing incorrect , incomplete or misleading information , would thus be removed .
In conclusion , I would like to express the hope that here in the European Parliament , to which the Treaty of Lisbon has granted greater authority in this very area , and led by the rapporteur , Mrs Muscardini , we will find common solutions which will help our citizens to make better and , most importantly , freer choices .
I would like to apologise , sir , for disturbing you .
The next item is the immediate comments .
There are six of these , so we are able to give the floor to each one .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , all citizens have realised the global scale of the ongoing economic crisis and we believe that they are aware of the importance of adopting common rules to avoid causing distortions in the market and dangerous reductions in trade .
The European Union has acknowledged the need to inform citizens clearly about the products circulating within their borders and efforts have been made in this vein , bearing in mind the interests of both the Member States and citizens .
While the interests of the first group entail promoting their resources without being protectionist , citizens are concerned with always knowing the provenance of each product , even at the expense of waiting some time for this regime to be applied to all categories of goods .
We want the European Union to speak with a single voice , at the same level as all the other voices that express themselves strongly in international markets .
So , tomorrow , we will support the report on the indication of the country of origin of certain products imported from third countries , urging the European Council to do its part to conclude this legislative journey , which has now lasted for six long years , as well as possible .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , five years after the proposal for a regulation , tomorrow , we finally come to the vote on compulsory origin marking for some products imported from third countries .
Over the years , the European Parliament has affirmed on numerous occasions the need for a rule that gives consumers the right to have correct information on the provenance of products , thereby facilitating a more aware choice .
Our products are often the victims of counterfeiting and misleading markings .
This regulation could contribute to giving European businesses greater guarantees and recovering competitiveness on an international level .
I hope that Parliament sends a strong signal , approving by a very wide majority the report by Mrs Muscardini , whom I thank , together with the shadow rapporteur , Mr Susta .
( DE ) Mr President , in the agricultural sector too , consumers are entitled to detailed and unambiguous information about the origin of the products sold in the European Union .
By this means , we can enable them to make well-informed , deliberate purchasing decisions .
However , the long-term goal must be that our high product and security standards in Europe should also apply to imported products to be sold in the European Union .
This is not a question of trade restrictions , but rather , on the contrary , aims to establish equal competitive conditions as a decisive prerequisite for fair global trade .
Unfortunately , the motion for a resolution presented by the Commission will not achieve this aim .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we enthusiastically support this regulation , and should like to thank the rapporteur Mrs Muscardini , as well as Mr Susta and Mr Rinaldi .

I , too , am of the belief that this measure represents an intermediate step .
We must decide whether or not it is right that , when buying a product , a consumer knows where it has been made .
We feel that it is right .
This is a regulation that works towards transparency and the protection of consumer rights .
It matters little to us right now if , in order to protect the rights of transparency and clarity for consumers , some business that has relocated finds itself penalised in some way .
I listened carefully to the words of my Swedish colleague , Mr Fjellner , who hails from Stockholm , to whom I feel the need to respond that I would like to have the confidence to go to his country to buy a typical Swedish-made suit in the certainty that it really was made in Sweden .
This is because it could have the brand of a Swedish business even though it has been produced by a small manufacturing business , perhaps located 10 kilometres from my house .
I should feel quite a fool if I went all the way to Sweden to buy something that was produced in my local area .
Therefore , I welcome the mark of origin if it gives transparency and the chance of clarity and knowledge for consumers and , finally , a minimal response to the great many businesses that have had the courage not to relocate and have been crushed by unfair competition .
( PT ) Mr President , we have advocated and evaluated the possibility that origin marking should exist , because we see it in every sense as an instrument for defending jobs in European industry , not least in small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) ; as an instrument against social and environmental dumping .
An important instrument , but only that : an instrument .
It is not - and let us not delude ourselves about this - a panacea .
It is not the magical , universal solution for tackling the tragic consequences resulting from the liberalisation and deregulation of world trade ; for tackling the terrible damage that results from this deregulation .
Some of those who have benefited from this liberalisation are the same people who have always been opposed to origin marking : Europe 's large importers and distributors .
For our part , we will continue to fight the protectionism from which these interest groups have benefited against the common good and to the detriment of thousands of SMEs in Europe , and of the workers , their rights and their salaries .
We must seriously tackle issues linked to production and processing that cover different geographic areas , but these issues can be overcome , and they must be resolved in the most transparent and informative way possible .
Mr President , I would like to say to my colleague , Mrs Muscardini , that - in the words of Shakespeare - you have done the state some service , because for too long we have been like a fairy godmother to the world , spreading our generosity far and wide , and being treated like a fairy in return .
We have seen that in Copenhagen , and we see it in the United Nations , but thankfully tonight , we will begin to fight back and establish a level playing field for our consumers and for our manufacturers .
It actually makes no sense whatsoever that goods can come into the European Union from third countries without some indication of where they came from .
I would like to see this going much further .
My colleague , Mrs Dodds , said that she would like to see it extended to agriculture and this is at least a first step .
We need to help our consumers to make choices , to know that the choices they are making are correct ones , that there is no counterfeiting , and there is fair play for everybody .
So , well done to my colleague , Mrs Muscardini .
We are on the road at last .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I notice there is much support across Parliament for the proposal , so I will not go into many of the remarks which have been made because most of them support the Commission proposal and the Muscardini report on it .
Let me just say with respect to the rules of origin that this is a very stabilised regime .
These rules are very stable indeed and they are well known , because it is on the basis of these rules of origin that customs duties are paid when products come into the European market .
In fact , our proposal fully relies on them .
There can be no misunderstanding about that .
The second remark I would like to make is about an amendment introduced by Mrs Muscardini , which , in fact , proposes that this ' made in ' regulation would be a kind of pilot project that would be evaluated after a four-year period and perhaps changed .
I consider this an amendment worth supporting , because I imagine that it will enhance the chances that this proposal has in the Council .
The reason why this proposal dating back to 2005 is not EU legislation is simply that the Council does not buy it .
It has refused it until now , but the proposal by Mrs Muscardini to make a pilot project out of this for a five-year period , with an evaluation after four years , is a very good step in the right direction .
That is why the Commission can accept the amendment proposed .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank the Commissioner for the consideration he has shown for the proposals that we worked out in committee .
It has been a long job , with difficult mediation , but we tried to bear in mind the needs of all .
Above all , I should like to thank the shadow rapporteurs , Mr Susta and Mr Rinaldi .
We were able to present a text which , in its entirety , encompasses the majority of problems that were presented to us .
I should also like to thank my fellow Members who this evening have , in the great majority , expressed their support for the regulation , but , above all , for greater democracy and respect of consumers and European citizens .
I hope that tomorrow , the vote can finally get a new phase of the European Union under way ; a phase which , on the one hand , will see the reaffirmation of the political will of the Union and , on the other , the reaffirmation of the right of European citizens to be informed and participate in choices that the Union will make
It has been a long work of compromise and I really am amazed that there are still some fellow Members , representing several countries , who prefer to consider rejecting the regulation rather than guaranteeing their countrymen and women the same rights enjoyed by all Chinese , Indian and United States citizens , and so on .
I hope that the night brings counsel and that each of us remembers that one day , we shall be asked to explain what we have done well , what we have done badly , and what we have not done at all .
Today , we must finally act with the ability to understand what the world represents for us .
Freedom and democracy are defended by knowledge .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 21 October 2010 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
I would like to express my full support for the report on the introduction of country of origin labelling for various products imported from third countries .
Mrs Muscardini 's proposal solves the previous absence of European legislative standards in this area .
The requirement to indicate the origin of products may contribute to the equalisation of conditions on the world trade market , because similar protection for domestic products is also insisted on by various global economies , such as the United States , Canada or Japan .
Protection of this type accordingly helps goods produced in the European Union to be more competitive with goods from third countries .
Indicating the country of origin also contributes to the preservation of traditional production methods , typical product characteristics and quality .
This type of protection of European products will also have a positive effect on maintaining employment in all Member States .
I would also like to state that indicating the country of origin increases consumer awareness and transparency when deciding to buy specific products , and prevents possible fraudulent claims about the origin of products or counterfeiting .
Information about the origin of the products available on the EU market is very important for all consumers .
Indicating the country of origin allows citizens to make informed choices when they buy a particular product , and enables them to avoid the health and safety risks associated with third-country products which do not meet quality standards .
The regulations on origin labelling also give effective protection against counterfeiting and unfair competition .
It is important to define the detailed forms and procedures for origin labelling and to set penalties for breaching the provisions of the regulation .
Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement ( ACTA ) ( debate )
The next item is the Commission 's statement on the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement ( ACTA ) .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , honourable Members , you asked me to come to the plenary to explain where we are in the negotiations on ACTA - the international Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement .
I share your view that this is an important dossier , and I am here for the third time in less than a year to discuss it with you .
Where are we ?
Well , in two words , we are almost there .
Indeed , on 2 October 2010 , negotiators from the EU and 10 other countries concluded the last round of negotiations .
They have resolved nearly all issues with only a few still open .
I will come back to that later .
A consolidated and largely stabilised text of the proposed agreement was made public two weeks ago .
I hope that this has allowed you to find out that the Commission has scrupulously respected the principles that I laid out in my previous interventions in this House .
It is essential to remember that ACTA is an agreement concerning the enforcement of intellectual property rights .
This means that it does not oblige any of its signatories to create new , substantive rights or to change existing ones .
It only commits its signatories to ensuring that the rights holders can fully assert their rights if , when and where they exist .
ACTA is about establishing a new tool that will ensure that existing intellectual property rights are effectively protected .
This is essential if we want to maintain a leading role in the ' knowledge economy ' .
Contrary to what some seem to be claiming , ACTA is not about creating some sort of ' Big Brother ' .
I know that you had concerns with the fact that the negotiations were conducted behind closed doors and that the negotiating texts were not made public .
At the insistence of the Commission , successive versions of the text have been published and our negotiators came here after each round to answer all your questions .
We have taken these steps to ensure that we could debate the topic in a climate of mutual trust .
I should like to mention that the Ombudsman has recently recognised , in the precise context of the ACTA negotiations , that it was justified to maintain the confidentiality of some key negotiating documents .
The Ombudsman confirmed that the preservation of confidentiality was legal and in line with the 2001 Regulation on access to documents .
Let me now highlight some of the main features of ACTA .
Firstly , a broad coverage of intellectual property rights ( IPRs ) .
Given the diversity of IPRs , on which European operators rely to protect their inventions , we have fought for , and obtained , broad coverage .
In particular , we have managed to ensure that Europe 's geographical indications ( GIs ) will be treated equally .
This is an EU success .
It would not be in the draft ACTA Treaty without the European Commission .
I know that it may not go as far as some would have liked - for example , as regards border measures .
Justified differences will remain , and ACTA Parties will not have to adopt the EU system of protecting GIs through sui generis systems .
Secondly , ACTA defines for the first time an international standard for intellectual property infringements on the Internet .
The Internet is the most global , open and fast-moving market environment , where music , films , books and software circulate .
Millions of counterfeit goods are traded every day through the Internet .
ACTA thus represents a ground-breaking - yet balanced - level of harmonisation and transparency for the rules applicable to such infringements , whilst remaining fully in line with the EU acquis .
Let me stress that ACTA will not change the EU acquis .
Our negotiating guidelines requested this and we have scrupulously respected it , as you can see from the text .
Thirdly , ACTA provides a balanced agreement , which replies to the four main concerns expressed by Members , for the following four reasons .
Firstly , the text does not affect the protection of fundamental rights , privacy and data protection .
Secondly , it respects the important role of free Internet and safeguards the role of service providers , as well as the European system of copyright exceptions , such as the European regime of conditional exemption of liability for Internet operators .
European exceptions , like private or educational use , will also remain valid .
Thirdly , the text refers to those provisions of the TRIPS agreement that safeguard the essential balance between the rights of the right holders and the public interest , and that stress the ' need for intellectual property rights to contribute to technical innovation , socio-economic welfare , or the protection of health ' .
Fourthly , ACTA explicitly recognises the importance of guaranteeing access to medicines , by referring to the Doha Declaration on the matter , as well as by explicitly excluding patent infringements from the sections on border and penal enforcement .
What is the state of play and the next steps in ACTA ?
Well , in Tokyo , it was not possible to finalise the text .
The parties kept a few reservations , which still need to be addressed in the coming weeks .
There are , in particular , two issues open .
Firstly , should patent infringements be included or excluded from the scope of civil litigation measures ?
I would be interested to hear your views on this issue .
I am concerned that a blanket exclusion of patents - an important intellectual property right - might risk depriving many industries of the benefits of this chapter .
I am thinking , for example , of the automotive , machinery , pharmaceutical and agro-chemical sectors .
Secondly , the other important issue has to do with the EU proposal that the Internet measures stipulated in ACTA must apply not only to copyright but - at least - also to trademark violations .
As you know , on the Internet , you can find thousands of offers for fake goods using European brands , be it for clothes , cosmetics , watches or even foodstuffs .
I believe we should address these infringements made through the Internet because they are basically identical to real-life infringements concerning physical goods .
To conclude , I am firmly convinced of the importance of tackling the widespread abuse of European intellectual property around the world .
ACTA can provide an important contribution towards this goal , in full compliance with existing European legislation .
ACTA is the first important international agreement on IPRs since the TRIPS agreement in the WTO back in 1994 .
It also strikes a proper balance with the rights of citizens and consumers .
I look forward to a continued close dialogue with the European Parliament and towards the successful conclusion of the agreement and its subsequent approval .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to express my sincere thanks to the Commissioner for taking the opportunity several times in recent months , firstly , to report here to the plenary part-session and secondly , to attend question and answer sessions with the relevant parliamentary committee , either in person or through his staff .
It is right and important that we should assure the European Parliament that the Commission really does report on the status of negotiations in a transparent way .
I believe that this also places us in a position to evaluate , and therefore approve or reject , such an agreement on the basis of solid data .
My impression at the moment is that many critics are running out of arguments against the ACTA agreement .
I think it is a good thing that the acquis communautaire remains unchanged .
It would be really great if the Commission could once again show us that this really is copper-fastened .
There are still some Members of this House who have their doubts about this and I would be grateful if the Commission could explain this issue once again in a clear , unambiguous way - perhaps even having the Commission 's legal service check the matter out .
I believe it is a positive thing that the ACTA agreement is apparently focusing on the implementation of existing law , rather than the framing of new laws .
I particularly welcome the section on the Internet .
It is high time that we took action in relation films , music , books and software circulating on the Internet .
I am not looking to criminalise any of our citizens , but I believe that it must be possible for artists and creators also to pursue their intellectual property rights on the Internet and I welcome the fact that the ACTA agreement offers a first step in this direction .
I would definitely have preferred to deal with the entire issue in the context of the WTO .
However , I also note that we lacked suitable partners in dialogue within the WTO , which is why the ACTA agreement is certainly a good start .
I would be grateful if the Commission , possibly after the conclusion of the ACTA agreement , would do all it can to ensure that as many other countries as possible sign up to this agreement and would also demonstrate a little flexibility in cases where doubts exist .
I particularly welcome the fact that you have succeeded in including information on geographical origin - such as champagne , Scotch whisky , Parma ham , etc . - I would like to congratulate you on this .
I believe this is a huge step forward for the interests of the European Union .
It must be possible to secure and protect our European origin labelling and information in the same way as trademarks like Coca Cola , Kellogg 's Cornflakes , etc .
I believe we must take active steps here in the interests of our producers .
You raised a question in relation to patents : on the one hand , the title of this agreement clearly points in a different direction ; however , on the other hand , our businesses are experiencing enormous problems in this regard and I would suggest that perhaps we could discuss this issue with you in detail on Monday when you attend the meeting of the Committee on International Trade .
Congratulations on what you have achieved .
I would encourage you to show perseverance with regard to the outstanding issues .
I look forward to the day when this House can decide whether to approve or reject the agreement on the basis of the final wording .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are clearly faced with a text whose complexity troubles many of us and , even more , in my opinion , the citizens of Europe .
Commissioner , I asked for transparency and you responded .
Today , I am somewhat concerned .
Indeed , as I see it , beyond the purely technical issues , the main risk is that of the direction we are beginning to take with regard to this increasingly complex relationship between individual freedoms and the Internet .
The world is changing rapidly , and we are all aware of this .
We are all aware of the revolution taking place in access not only to information but also to culture via this tool .
In today 's world , where such access is immediate and free , traditional reference points are being undermined .
Our most complex task is , therefore , to define new regulations , because regulation is necessary not only to protect artists and rights holders ; but I do not want to see individual freedoms ignored .
As regards the protection of freedoms , one of the most important of which is the protection of the right to privacy , one of my main concerns is the possibility afforded by the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement ( ACTA ) of travellers ' personal effects and baggage being checked at borders .
Does this mean that our mobile telephones , our MP3 players and our computers may be searched by customs authorities looking for illegally downloaded files ?
According to the Commission , this is just a possibility , because the precise term used in the text is not binding .
It is said that the Member States may choose whether or not to allow their personal luggage to be searched .
However , let us get serious here for a minute .
How can one expect such wording not to be seen as incitement to carry out such checks ?
Do you really think that a government , especially if it is pressurised to some extent by its music industry - and I cite this example deliberately - will not take this opportunity afforded by ACTA to move its national legislation towards increased screening of passengers entering its territory ?
Another problem is that , if it is proved that the files held by a private individual are for commercial use , punishment is automatic .
However , who determines whether the files we hold are of a commercial nature or not ?
Some may say that a person with 500 songs on his or her MP3 player necessarily has commercial objectives , but why would others deny themselves the opportunity to fix this limit at 300 , 100 , 50 or 10 ?
In fact , for an ill-intentioned person , all it takes is to illegally download a single film in order to make thousands of copies of it , and that then becomes commercial activity .
Finally , punishment will be meted out by the courts of each country , but a European citizen arrested by the border authorities of a signatory country on the basis of particularly binding legislation will have no means of challenging it .
Is it your wish that such an abuse be possible ?
Was it not the responsibility of the Commission precisely to do everything it could to ensure that the agreement prohibits searches of personal effects ?
I have deliberately raised only this issue this evening , but you have raised many more , which we will incorporate into the resolution I have requested and which will ordinarily be voted on in next month 's plenary .
Commissioner , I would ask you to take account of the outcome of this vote , which will be in line with our commitment , that is , to take account of the word of the European Parliament before you sign the act .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the negotiations have been difficult , with strong opposing opinions as well as different interpretations of the consequences of this agreement .
As far I as can make out , the current status of the negotiations provides for an imbalance in the treatment of geographic indications and marks , in favour of the latter , as well as the failure to act , in violation of Article 22 of the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of International Property Rights , on marks that use denominations protected by geographical indications .
' Parmesan ' - one of a number of possible examples - can be freely produced as ' Parmesan ' in the United States and Australia and exported to China or elsewhere in direct competition with European products , one of the strengths of which is geographical indications .
Consequently , European products seem to be propping up unfair competition without any effective protection from the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement .
I should like a clarification in this regard .
' Parmesan ' means ' from Parma ' , not Australia or the United States , and this applies equally to all European geographic indications .
We must be careful because if , in the course of 21st century globalisation , in a few years ' time , we no longer have our geographic indications , it will partly be because of today 's mistaken choices and we shall lose an enormous piece of our identity .
In this regard , if all that were permitted by the ACTA , the agreement would be unacceptable .
There is also the question of the Internet , as already mentioned .
The European Union is in favour of a society of widespread knowledge , open to all , and the ACTA must not in any way constitute a restriction on the freedom of access to the Internet .
Much has been gained on this issue .
The Commissioner has given his important assurances , but it would be unacceptable if the acquis communautaire were tarnished , as still appears to be the case , by the possibility of legal injunctions provided for by Article 2 , and by the possibility of criminal sanctions , including for individual users , as provided for by Article 2 ( 14 ) ( 1 ) .

I appreciate the highly important assurances on access to medicine for developing countries , but we know that the list of countries adhering to the ACTA is very limited and excludes the great powers of counterfeiting , in Asia , in particular , but not only there .
So for this reason , given everything we have to lose on geographic indications and risks on the Internet , the impression - for now - is that the agreement represents only a disadvantage and on this basis , perhaps it is better to let it drop .
Mr President , Commissioner ° De Gucht , it is obvious that the ACTA agreement negotiated will shortly be adopted .
This is an agreement that entails a whole series of commitments by the contracting parties in strengthening the enforcement of intellectual property rights .
We , as Members of the European Parliament , will soon be asked by you , the Commission , to approve this agreement .
However , for months now , Parliament has made it clear that a number of the declarations of intent made by the EU within the ACTA agreement run the risk of going beyond current EU law .
Not only is it unclear whether sufficient competence exists for this kind of trade agreement , involving as it does provisions such as punitive measures or intervention in fundamental rights , we also lack information on the extent to which ACTA will necessitate the introduction of illegal measures in the EU .
For this reason , ACTA will have to be sent back to the negotiating table .
And yet you are willing to sign up to the agreement now .
That is why I would ask you firstly : Have you already signed ?
If not , when do you intend to sign ?
Secondly : When will we receive a detailed impact assessment on the extent to which ACTA could affect fundamental rights within the EU ?
I look forward to hearing your answers .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , I think we should start off by welcoming some of these statements that were made this evening and the fact that , following the Tokyo Round , the Commission released the text to the Parliament , which will ultimately be in a position to give consent or not to these agreements .
I think the move towards transparency is something which should be welcomed across the Parliament .
After all , that was one of the areas of consensus across the Parliament - we may have disagreed on certain elements , but we agreed on more and more transparency .
An increase in transparency means that we reduce false speculation about the content of the negotiations , but also , to be fair , highlights the positive role played by the Commission in trying to persuade the negotiating partners of the need for greater transparency .
I think we played a role in this Parliament in putting pressure on the Commission , so it , in turn , can talk to its negotiating partners about the need for greater transparency .
There are obviously differences of opinion in this House on intellectual property rights .
It is clearly a key issue for copyright and trademark holders .
ACTA , I hope , is an important step in terms of enforcement among all active parties and builds on the TRIPS agreement of the mid-1990s .
Personally , I think a distinction should be made between the digital world and the world of atoms ; in a world of increased processing power , increased storage and increased bandwidth , you see a tendency towards a price of zero and many in the music industry , for example , have failed to react .
I understand from speaking to legal experts , however , that it is very difficult to codify that in an agreement .
When it comes to the production of generic medicines , I am glad that ACTA protects copyrights and trademarks while excluding patents from border measures , so you avoid the seizure of generic medicine in transit through the EU .
But I do have a question since the Commission was not responsible for negotiating on behalf of the EU when it came to the criminal enforcement chapter which was dealt with by the Council on behalf of Member States .
How , when we have this debate about concerns over the criminal sanctions , do we intend to reconcile the two different negotiations between the civil and the criminal chapter ?
It is a question for you , Mr Commissioner .
You can shrug , but it will be interesting to hear your perspective on this .
Mr President , Commissioner , this week , US Senators Bernie Sanders and Sherrod Brown have written to the US Patent and Trademark Office to demand a thorough check to ensure that the wording of the negotiated ACTA agreement can be reconciled with existing US legislation .
Be assured that we in this House are fulfilling our duty by examining the agreement in the context of the laws of the European Union .
My group favours adopting a thorough approach and taking as much time as necessary , even though you have once again offered very detailed answers to the questions regarding the acquis communautaire .
This is because the questions that we were able to ask the Commission in the debriefing sessions which you recently offered us after the negotiations , and for which I would like to thank you , were not really answered to our complete satisfaction .
Your chief negotiator often gave us the feeling that we were - if I might express myself in colloquial terms at this point - a bit like God-botherers who sought to question holy writ , rather than dealing with the concerns we voiced on behalf of the citizens of Europe .
Nonetheless , some of our original criticism with regard to the aspects relating to the Internet has had some effect and some of the more harmful proposals have been dropped .
( DE ) Mr President , the ACTA negotiations seem to be more or less concluded .
The wording of the latest version of the agreement already reads like legislative text as it applies in individual Member States .
Thus , the ACTA agreement will leave the existing legal situation in Europe almost unchanged .
The original aim of the agreement was to improve enforcement .
However , I am unable to identify any specific solutions in this regard from the proposal .
Prior to publication , it became known that the disputed points were to be dropped .
However , this version does not seem to take adequate account of the various conflicting interests .
For example , Article 2 ( 2 ) of the agreement reads : ' Procedures adopted , maintained , or applied to implement this Chapter shall be fair , equitable and provide for the rights of all participants subject to procedures to be appropriately protected ' .
The chapter on temporary measures contains no explicit reference to the right to due legal process , neither is there a provision for verifying the need to destroy counterfeit products .
Last but not least - we hear that the last points of the negotiation are to finalised by e-mail .
However , these last points include the area of application of the agreement as a whole .
Surely this should be defined before we start on the formulation of the content .
Perhaps this would then also give rise to some practical solutions in the agreement itself .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank the European Commission and , in particular , Commissioner De Gucht , for the tough negotiations it is carrying out with the United States , a task that aims to find a point of convergence on an agreement that unfortunately seems to be never ending .
We are still far from a solution to the problems of intellectual property , which continue to be the subject of a dispute between two blocks that differ both economically and politically .
Europe must continue to concentrate on two fundamental points .
It must be compulsory for European geographic indications to be protected in both civil and customs terms , as these are today suffering damage that affects not only the agro-food industry , whose counterfeited products suffer unfair competition through the use of names that copy and evoke familiar European brands , but also damages industries operating in the design and fashion sectors .
This damages businesses , intellectual property , research and - as always - the consumer .
A second central point is the need for common rules controlling online sales : the sale of films , books , music , medicines and millions of other counterfeited goods continue to take place on the Internet , without any controls .
The European Union must send a clear message to the rest of the world : the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement must be a bulwark against all counterfeiting .
( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , international agreements have to be submitted to the European Parliament for approval .
As Members of Parliament , it is vital that we are able to exercise our right of veto as often as is necessary , but our work has now been made virtually impossible .
Time and again , we have been forced to ask the Commission to clarify the state of play in the negotiations on ACTA .
However , we are constantly being fobbed off with words .
First , we were reassured with the argument that the negotiations are far from over and now you have told us that this is merely an enforcement agreement and that no changes will be made to EU acquis or the law of Member States .
In that case , I would ask : what is then the added value of ACTA ?
You have said that it will neither harmonise criminal sanctions nor impose any indirect obligation , in terms of the ' three strikes ' policy .
However , we are standing here , talking yet again about the content of this draft agreement and , specifically , about the points which I have mentioned .
Yet , every day , I receive messages from concerned citizens and companies and , still , there is a general consensus among the groups in the European Parliament that this draft agreement undermines the fundamental rights of our citizens and passengers from third countries .
I will therefore put this question to you in no uncertain terms : what will be the specific benefits of adopting ACTA ?
Do , please , persuade us that this text from 2 October is a positive and necessary thing .
I also have a very specific question for you , Commissioner : when will the negotiating parties meet again to discuss ACTA ?
Which parties have failed to agree to it ?
Why was that ?
One question after another , Commissioner .
Once again , we have been told that the finishing touches have not yet been added to the agreement .
How can we agree to an agreement that is being negotiated in backrooms ?
Mr President , yesterday , the Commission adopted a strategy to mainstream the legally binding EU Charter of Fundamental Rights .
As liberals , we proposed this , so this is music to my ears .
Today , the Commission posted information on ACTA after the end of the last negotiations three weeks ago .
The site has a paragraph called ' positive aspects of ACTA ' , but there are also some questions that might be labelled otherwise .
Firstly , do trade agreements or law enforcement treaties - which I think ACTA really is - also fall under the mainstreaming of fundamental rights ?
Will the Commission do an assessment ?
Secondly , is the Commission willing to go back to the negotiating table if fundamental rights are at risk through ACTA ?
Will the Commission wait to finalise the negotiations to take the Parliament 's resolution of early next year into real account ?
As far as I know , no country has put its initials on a single page of ACTA .
When it comes to the Internet , ACTA even breaks new ground , the statement reads .
The preamble states that ACTA seeks ' to promote cooperation between service providers and rights holders ' .
Article 2.18.3 goes on : ' each party shall endeavour to promote cooperative efforts within the business community to effectively copyright infringements .
This implies extra-judicial measures and challenges the division of power ' .
Article 2.18.4 states that the competent authority , not necessarily judicial , should have the power ' to order an online provider to disclose expeditiously to a rights holder information sufficient to identify a subscriber whose account was allegedly used for infringement ' .
Besides pointing to the word ' allegedly ' , I would like to stress that Internet service providers are concerned that they will have to start enforcing the law .
So , some room needs to be made under the heading ' negative aspects of ACTA ' to assess the fundamental rights aspect that ACTA still has in the current draft and that the Commission from now on is legally obliged to mainstream .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , since the text of the ACTA agreement has become available , we find that it gives rise to far more questions than answers .
This is partly due to the very unclear and vague legal terminology used in places , which seems to rule nothing out and everything in .
Let me just touch on one key issue here , which is the call for cooperation between service providers and rights holders in implementing rights .
Are we to take this to mean that , for example , Warner Brothers would work together with ISPs almost like deputy sheriffs ?
How would this work in detail ?
Would it mean streaming the Internet in order to identify violations ?
This confusion stems from the fact that , for example , the term ' private use or commercial use ' is not adequately defined and a common definition has not been found .
I believe this to be an extremely problematic issue because it entails the privatisation of legal rights .
As has already been mentioned , yesterday , the Commission gave an undertaking that there will be an impact assessment in relation to civil rights in any new provisions .
When can we expect this impact assessment in relation to the ACTA agreement ?
What can we expect from this assessment and when will we actually be able to read it ?
This is decisive in enabling us to evaluate this agreement .
Mr President , we as a Union have been floundering in the dark in meeting the challenges that have been posed in this new Internet age .
Of course , we are not alone and many of our partner nations are in the same position , but we have all got to come together and work towards harmonisation of anti-counterfeiting enforcement .
The protection of copyright is imperative , but a balance has to be struck to ensure that freedom of expression and innovation are not inhibited .
We are keen to ensure that the balance reached in the Gallo report is properly recognised in the agreement to encourage growth , competitiveness and innovation to flourish , whilst providing necessary protections for rights holders .
There is no one-size-fits-all approach in the enforcement , or approach to enforcement , in the agreement .
Flexibility for our Member States is recognised ; we support that .
ACTA , as the Commissioner said , is a good first step to tackling counterfeit groups and piracy on the Internet and wider afield .
For the EU , we expect a detailed copyright proposal and a thorough impact assessment which the European Parliament will review , analyse and scrutinise on behalf of our citizens .
( SV ) ACTA , or the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement as it stands for , is , of course , highly controversial .
It has been highly controversial here in the European Parliament , but also in Sweden , which I represent .
I have been very critical , particularly towards much of what I have seen as secretiveness ; the fact that texts have been kept secret , among other things .
This has created a feeling and an atmosphere in which myths surrounding the agreement could thrive .
The most stubborn of all seems to be the myth that , as a consequence of ACTA , customs will start to inspect ipods and computers .
I heard this most recently here in plenary today .
However , now that we have all of the texts and everything is on the table , I can see that it was wrong and just a myth .
I believe that if Shakespeare had written a play about the debate surrounding ACTA , he would have named this one ' Much Ado about Nothing ' , too .
The Commission has promised that ACTA will not change anything in EU legislation and , on reading this , I understand the same .
The fact that there will be no changes to legislation means that there will be no changes to citizen 's everyday lives and this will not change citizen 's involvement with the Internet , for example .
However , it does not mean that ACTA is not important or that it is unnecessary , as someone said here in this Chamber .
On the contrary , ACTA will create a global gold standard for the protection of intellectual property .
This is important and it is in the interests of both Sweden and Europe .
It will reduce the number of conflicts and , if there is something that I hear when I meet Swedish companies , it is , above all , the need to protect patents and the intellectual property rights that they have .
This is good , particularly outside Europe .
I feel reassured and confident now that I have read the negotiation documents that we have received .
I am certain that citizens will feel that way , too .
This means that I feel quite confident ahead of the continued debating of this matter in the European Parliament .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , as initiator of the written declaration on the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement ( ACTA ) along with my fellow Members , Mr Lambrinidis , Mrs Roithová and Mr Alvaro , I should first of all like to thank you for the efforts you have made to secure transparency and consensus , particularly in recent weeks .

For the moment , my thanks will stop there , because this text remains highly ambiguous on key issues .
Firstly , you say , Commissioner , that this text will not change the EU acquis , but what about the new criminal sanctions for the crime of aiding and abetting copyright infringements , which , however , you wish to distinguish from counterfeiting ?
How can we not think of what is happening in France with the threat of the Hadopi law and potential sanctions against the neutrality of technical intermediaries .
The fact that this text was negotiated by the Council places it outside the Commission 's scope of negotiation and therefore , perhaps , of the EU acquis .
Secondly , it would seem that the ACTA committee has the possibility of integrating amendments into texts .
You will therefore understand our concern at the prospect of adopting a text that might be amended .
Once again , Commissioner , it is difficult for us to present the future ACTA Secretariat with a blank cheque and the reservations we will formulate on the interpretation of the text when we vote on the resolution will dictate our position on the ratification of this text .
Mr President , on 10 March this year , this House adopted , by an overwhelming majority , a resolution saying , among other things , that the agreement should not make it possible for any so-called three-strike procedures to be imposed .
This is because we do not want Internet service providers ( ISPs ) to start acting as private police forces and be forced to take on that role .
The Commission has repeatedly said in various oral statements that this is not the case .
I welcome those statements .
However , when you look at the text , it is already in the preamble , ' desiring to promote cooperation between service providers and rights holders with respect to relevant infringements in the digital environment ' .
Then , in Article 2.18.3 , as Mrs Schaake quoted , ' shall endeavour to promote cooperative efforts within the business community to effectively address corporate infringements ' .
If this does not mean three strikes , what does it mean ?
It is all very well to talk about cooperation between rights holders and ISPs but what are the ISPs supposed to do ?
If they do not want to do it , what measures will be taken against the ISPs ?
I am very concerned that the language in this agreement - as Mrs Castex was saying -is so ambiguous that it is not really clear what it means .
I still have the basic concerns that have been with us all along , and I would very much like to see a proper evaluation of the fundamental rights aspects of this agreement .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , of course , the attempt to reach good international agreements is very praiseworthy and I freely admit that this is a far from easy task .
Nonetheless , when considering such agreements , at some point we must stop and ask : who will benefit and who will suffer as a result ?
I get the feeling that in fact , it benefits just a few people who want to make a fat profit and who have little interest in upholding human rights , freedom of information , etc. and that it actually harms far more people than it genuinely benefits .
I am still not clear about the actual situation with regard to generics .
Admittedly , there is not a lot that can be achieved through criminal penalties .
However , we know that civil actions and the associated major compensation claims , etc. can inflict far more damage than criminal proceedings .
Then the question of trademark protection versus origin markings arises .
We have just had a discussion where it was stated that origin markings are gaining increasing importance and offer opportunities beyond the ambit of trademark protection .
However , everything seems to have got hung up on the issue of trademark protection .
The idea of using Internet providers as a de facto private police force , something that has already been mentioned by other Members of the House , is a concept that I utterly reject .
Who is going to control the providers ?
There is no duty to provide information and no data protection , as should really be the case with public bodies .
These are all things that give me cause for concern .
Furthermore , I do not know what these impact assessments will achieve in terms of human rights and , above all , what the Commission will do if this House forms the impression that this is a watered-down solution and refuses to endorse it .
( NL ) Mr President , I can well imagine that the main purpose of this agreement might be to prevent the counterfeiting of handbags and watches .
However , an agreement which states that the business community must cooperate in order to combat copyright infringement , now that is where it seems to me that things start to get a bit more complicated .
If I may return to the subject of handbags , I take it that a tanner might have to ask a manufacturer of zips and buckles to check the identity of the people that are buying those bags ?
Are we , as authorities , then going to impose such a policing task on those kinds of companies ?
Now , that would be an ill-advised development and you have not given us any clarification of this point in your proposal .
I have heard you say , Mr De Gucht , that you fear that , if we drop patents from ACTA , we will have the pharmaceutical industry on our backs .
I have a different fear , because ambiguities still exist as regards patents and border controls .
That is not to say that something as embarrassing as the seizing of anti-HIV drugs in the port of Rotterdam will not happen again .
Put our minds at ease , Mr De Gucht , and test ACTA against fundamental rights .
Yesterday , your Commission published a strategy to that effect .
Reassure us that people in developing countries have a right to healthcare .
Reassure us that Internet users will not be pried on by commercial companies and that their freedom will not be limited .
( SK ) The ever-growing number of counterfeit and pirated products on the international market increases the possibility of a threat to the sustainable development of the world economy , and undoubtedly also brings financial losses to the original manufacturers as well as infringing on the intellectual property of authors and subjects involved in manufacturing and production .
It also clearly presents a risk to consumers and is the cause of job losses in Europe .
The idea of a multilateral agreement to combat piracy and counterfeiting may be an effective mechanism for curbing such activities .
However , I join my colleagues in emphasising the need for transparency and better credibility in any such negotiations and agreements .
I consider it equally essential that a balance be struck between the rights we are interested in protecting and the rights that are essential in society .
The enforcement or protection of the rights of some must not encroach on the rights and justified interests of others .
I refer , in particular , to the provisions of the agreement which intend to criminalise completely harmless ordinary users but will not penalise the big players .
It seems absurd to me that during border controls , technical equipment containing audio and video recordings for personal use may be confiscated .
In our legal tradition , copying for personal use without commercial purposes is common and not illegal .
Commissioner , why should a student , for example , be unable to make a copy of a book he needs for school ?
Once again , I stress that we need to give the green light to acceptable copyright protection .
However , behind the current version of ACTA is the work of the lobbyists of US recording companies who , in their pursuit of profit , intend to terrorise and criminalise a large part of our society , and the citizens of the Member States of the European Union in particular .
I consider the astronomical fines , inappropriate checks , negotiations on the agreement behind closed doors , and so on disproportionate .
Therefore , I would like to ask the European Commission to resist the enormous pressure from the lobbyists and prepare a rational and well-balanced alternative to the current version of ACTA .
( CS ) Through our written statement , we were striving for transparency in negotiating ACTA , and an assurance about protection of personal data and the EU acquis .
I am pleased that the draft agreements have finally been published and that most of the problems that we criticised have disappeared from the agreement .
However , it would be a failure for the Union if , for example , protection for geographical indications were cut back ; for example , if non-European countries were not required to protect Karlovy Vary waffles , or the aforementioned champagne , throughout their territory .
It is not enough merely to control the borders .
I ask the Commissioner for clarification on this .
However , I also have doubts about the effectiveness of the agreement given that the biggest global counterfeiters from Asia are not parties to it , which , in addition , may cause trouble for entrepreneurs and consumers when implementing the agreement .
Finally , I would ask the Commissioner or the Commission to present to us a detailed analysis of the impact of ACTA on the European Union .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all , there have been several interventions claiming that the implementation of ACTA would lead to limiting civil liberties , and several pointed out the control of laptops , or of air passengers at borders , for example .
The joint declaration of 16 April issued by all the ACTA parties is quite clear .
There is no proposal to force ACTA participants to require border authorities to search travellers ' baggage or their personal electronic devices for infringing materials .
ACTA is about tackling large-scale , illegal activity and pursuing criminal organisations .
It is not about limiting civil liberties or harassing consumers .
ACTA will be in line with the current EU regime for enforcement of IPRs , which fully respect fundamental rights and freedoms and civil liberties , such as the protection of personal data .
One example is the di minimis clause in the 2003 EU customs regulation that exempts travellers from checks if the infringing goods are not part of large-scale traffic .
EU customs , frequently confronted with drug trafficking , weapons or people , have neither the time nor the legal basis to look for a couple of pirated songs on an iPod or laptop computer , and we have no intention of changing this .
We will not change this , and we will ensure that ACTA parties can continue to apply such an exemption .
However , we cannot impose the de minimis exemption as an absolute obligation , because some Member States acting under national rules have kept the authority to carry out certain controls of passengers .
Reference has been made again to the three-strike law or the HADOPI law in France which makes this possible .
However , this is a national rule and the European Union does not have the authority to make a national state change this .
Several have also been asking for an impact assessment on fundamental rights , an impact study on privacy and an impact study on the acquis communautaire .
I have made several statements in this plenary that there has been no infringement whatsoever of fundamental rights or the acquis communautaire in any way , and I must say that in the three debates that we have already had in this plenary , none of you has given an example of problems related to fundamental liberties .
Nobody has pointed to an infringement of the acquis communautaire .
Nobody has been able to give an example .
If you give us examples , we will look into them .
As for negotiating behind closed doors , Parliament has been asking for more transparency on the ACTA negotiations .
It is the Commission that has made sure that this happens ; that you have the text before you that was negotiated in Tokyo , and that you got it a couple of days after it was finalised .
You have it also with the reserves that still exist ; three on the part of the European Union , three on the part of the United States .
You have the result of the negotiations .
How can you say that this has happened behind closed doors ?
The question has been put to the Ombudsman .
Maybe you do not trust me .
I am the Commission .
Maybe you do not trust the Council .
Maybe you do not trust your governments .
I have detected from a lot of speeches here that your trust in national governments is not very deep , but I think you at least trust the Ombudsman .
The Ombudsman has said very clearly that we can keep documents confidential , and what we have been doing is making a large additional step in the direction of transparency .
You would expect that when you do that , you would be applauded .
At least there would be some consideration for the fact , but some of you simply continue to say that we negotiate behind closed doors and that there is no transparency .
So what is the use in making an effort to have more transparency if afterwards , you still continue to say that there is no transparency ?
Maybe I would be better investing my time in something else .
As regards the possibility of the European Commission agreeing on a final text : in the Lisbon Treaty , there are , in fact , very clear rules on how international agreements are negotiated , by whom and how they are concluded and ratified , including the important role of the European Parliament .
There are also clear rules in the framework agreement as to how Parliament must be informed and heard during the negotiating process .
I think we have respected these rules scrupulously .
It is the Commission 's prerogative , as a negotiator , to determine the point at which negotiations are technically finalised and at which the agreement can be initialled .
The agreement is not yet initialled and you have the possibility tonight to make your remarks before we even do the initialling and before we even decide to initial the agreement as such .
We have not yet made a decision in the Commission on what we are actually going to do , because we still have a couple of reserves that we want to settle with the United States before making up our minds .
The initialling of the agreement is part of the Commission 's prerogatives and it does not definitely bind the Union .
The agreement will become definitive once the European Parliament has given its consent .
So let us respect the treaty and let us respect the framework agreements .
In the meantime , we will continue to inform and engage with you as stipulated in the framework agreement .
By the way , according to the treaty , it is the Council which authorises the signature of the agreements , but Parliament always has the last word .
It has to ratify this agreement and if consent is refused , there is simply no agreement at all .
So be a little bit patient .
There is no initialling yet .
Once there is initialling , you have the translation , you have the check by the lawyer-linguists , and then it comes to the Council for signature and to Parliament for ratification .
So no decision whatsoever has been taken at this moment in time , and you have another possibility tonight to make known all the comments that you have on your mind .
Some have also been asking how the EU would benefit by entering into such an agreement if it will go no further than its current laws and if , furthermore , other countries like the US also claim that it will not change domestic law .
This is not about substantive law .
This agreement is about the enforcement of existing law , and that is why I have repeatedly stipulated that we are not going to change the acquis communautaire .
The acquis communautaire is about substantive law and we are not changing that .
An international treaty that would adopt standards similar to those of the EU , but also to those already in place in countries like the US or Japan , would still be a most valuable contribution to the current prevailing international standard as defined by the WTO TRIPS agreement .
Our goal is to promote ACTA standards to key emerging partners , namely through our future trade agreements , but also in multilateral venues .
That being said , several ACTA parties have taken the momentum created by the ACTA negotiations to revise their domestic legislation along the agreed lines .
As far as I am aware , for instance , both Japan and Canada are in the process of reviewing their Internet enforcement regimes .
Moreover , it is often overlooked that ACTA is not only about improved legal standards .
It is also about cooperation between enforcement authorities , the adoption of best practices or the better coordination of technical assistance .
Although the EU has had very successful cooperation with the US in these areas for the last four to five years , we believe that ACTA can also improve those important aspects of the fight against IPR infringements .
We consider that the US enforcement system is generally effective and efficient in the protection of certain intellectual property rights .
The Commission has stressed that ACTA is not a disguised means to circumvent their domestic legislative process and to devise their current laws and so has Parliament .
It is understandable that US officials stress the same line .
Let me add that the principle of cooperation between rightholders is already in Article 15 of the e-Commerce Directive since 2003 , so this is not a new concept .
It is in the e-Commerce Directive and we are simply referring to that .
We are referring to the existing EU law .
Let me further say that what is often overlooked in the debate on ACTA are the number of jobs of EU citizens that relate to intellectual property rights and we often discuss jobs on all sides of the House .
Millions of jobs in Europe depend on respect for intellectual property rights .
Counterfeiting is a serious attack on European industry and on the European economy and on European innovation , because we are an innovation-based economy .
What we are really talking about is jobs .
And I must say that I am a little bit surprised that in the three discussions that we have now had in this plenary , this has never in fact been mentioned .
This reference to jobs has never been made .
The references that are made are to fundamental rights and I am very sensitive to that , but without any confirmative example .
The reference is made to controls at the borders where it is clear that ACTA adds nothing to what already exists .
There is a reference to privacy and I see no reason why privacy would be under attack .
There are references to a kind of nebulous liberty and liberties that you think are under attack , but you do not give any examples of that .
On the other hand , what is very clear , and what is documented in all kinds of impact studies that have already been done by the way by the Commission , on all kinds of items , is that a lot of our jobs are linked to intellectual property rights and that is one of the reasons we attach such importance to that topic .
I am a little bit surprised that this is very rarely mentioned by Parliament .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the next part-session .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
I wish to welcome the progress which has been made in the ACTA negotiations .
This agreement is an absolute necessity for establishing common international standards on the enforcement of intellectual property legislation .
However , I must point out that sanction measures against intellectual property infringements must comply with the principle of proportionality and balance between the gravity of the acts committed and the sanctions applied .
In this case , I am referring , in particular , to intellectual property infringements in the digital media and Internet where a clear difference ought to be made in terms of treatment between large-scale piracy for commercial purposes and isolated , random cases of intellectual fraud .
Furthermore , regardless of the seriousness of the offences committed , the agreement should focus particular attention on protecting freedom of expression , the right to a fair trial and confidentiality .
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting opened at 9.00 )

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , during the night of 18 October the town of Paola , the birthplace of Saint Francis , was hit by a violent rainstorm affecting the whole of Calabria : huge damage was caused to public buildings , private homes , water and sewage networks , and electricity and telephone networks , not to mention landslips and mudslides .
Many families have had to leave their homes , and schools have remained closed .
Episodes such as this have been occurring in Calabria for a long time now , possibly due to the effects of climate change .
A state of natural disaster will be declared shortly , and we hope that the European Solidarity Fund can be activated .
I would like to express my solidarity - which I hope is shared by this House - with the entire population , including that of the neighbouring towns that have suffered damage .
Of course , we are taking good note of the information you have provided us with .
We would like to express our solidarity and our concern about the disaster that has hit Calabria and , naturally , all the members of this Parliament declare their support to those affected in that beautiful region of Italy and Europe .
Documents received : see Minutes
Implemented reforms and developments in the Republic of Moldova ( debate )
The first item is the Commission statement on implemented reforms and developments in the Republic of Moldova .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , when looking at EU-Moldova relations , I believe it is uncontroversial that we have achieved a lot of progress in record time , but domestically the country still faces many challenges .
The referendum of 5 September was meant to resolve the political deadlock by changing the rules for electing the President .
It failed . That is regrettable .
However , whether the referendum would comply with democratic standards was also an important question . Crucially , its effective compliance has been confirmed by the international observers .
This is an encouraging sign .
The elections of 28 November are equally important for the consolidation of democracy in the country .
We will continue sending firm messages in that respect to all stakeholders .
Thereafter , all political forces will have to work together , both to elect a President and to choose a government capable of taking the country through a critical reform path .
At the same time , we will sustain our unwavering support to the structural reforms conducted by the Moldovan Government .
Let me highlight a few important aspects .
The European Union is not only by far the largest donor to Moldova , but in March also succeeded in mobilising over forty donors to support Moldova 's reforms .
They pledged an impressive EUR 1.9 billion for the years 2010-2013 , including our own EUR 550 million commitment .

Over the last months , we have provided timely responses to a number of the government 's specific needs : providing high-level policy advice to ministers ; supporting democratisation efforts in rule-of-law related areas ; helping organise the electoral consultations ; addressing emergency needs after last summer 's floods ; and improving possibilities for Moldovan wine exports .
Alongside the Moldovan government , we have actively engaged with the population living in the Transnistrian region via small-scale projects , mostly in the social area .
Next year , we will start implementing the Comprehensive Institution-Building programme under the Eastern Partnership .
That programme will help Moldova prepare for , and implement , the Association Agreement that we are currently negotiating .
The latest round of negotiations in Chisinau on 13 and 14 October demonstrated yet again that these negotiations are progressing at a very good speed .
Our assistance has also taken the form of direct transfers to the Moldovan budget .
Since the last quarter of 2009 , EUR 37 million has been disbursed as sectoral budget support , with an additional EUR 15 million to come soon .

Out of this , about EUR 8.5 million was directly allocated to help the poorest strata of the population .
Now that President Buzek has signed the relevant legislative decision , we expect to disburse soon the EUR 40 million of the first tranche of macro-financial assistance .
In the same spirit , we will carry on our busy schedule of political contacts and technical exchanges .
In a few days , I will meet with Prime Minister Filat , in Luxembourg .
In November , the EU-Moldova trade sub-committee will examine Moldova 's response to the Commission 's key recommendations in view of preparing negotiations on a deep and comprehensive free trade area .
Additionally , we have engaged with Moldova in a dedicated Dialogue on Human Rights and in an energy dialogue , and are negotiating an aviation services agreement .
We have actively followed up on the visa dialogue launched in June .
Next Monday , drawing on the outcome of the fact-finding missions conducted in September by independent experts , the Foreign Affairs Council is expected to release conclusions that should address this issue .
The purpose of this debate is for us to discuss the reforms carried out by the Republic of Moldova during the last year and the progress made on the path to European integration .
This country has been on the European Union 's agenda for a year because it has met its commitments .
I would like to mention some of those commitments .
A plan has been drawn up with priority measures to be carried out in essential areas of reform , along with another plan for justice reform .
Implementation of both plans has started .
Dialogue on human rights has been initiated .
In addition , the parliament of the Republic of Moldova ratified the Statute of the International Criminal Court in September .
Intensive negotiations are being conducted on the Association Agreement , with excellent results .
Only a year has gone by , but those involved in starting the process guarantee that it will continue .
The Republic of Moldova is the state which has made the furthest progress within the EU 's Eastern Partnership .
This is why I am asking the Council to assess this state individually on its own merits .
Progress signifies political will , hard work and dedication , which need to be rewarded .
We rewarded the Western Balkans for the measures they have taken .
Let us go ahead and do the same for the Republic of Moldova too .
In the dialogue on visas Moldova has made great progress in all four areas .
This is why I am asking the Council at the next session on 25 October to invite the Commission to draw up an action plan so that citizens from the Republic of Moldova can travel without requiring visas .
Direct contact between people is worth more than any declaration .
In the case of the Transnistria region , a solution is vital for the political and economic stability of the Republic Moldova and this region .
The EU must play a stronger role at a political level and we must be involved through joint projects making changes which people can see .
Finally , the European integration process has helped build democracy and freedom at an unprecedented rate in European history .
Let us look in Central and Eastern Europe at how the situation has changed in the last 20 years .
Peace now reigns in the Western Balkans too and reforms are under way .
Let us do what is necessary to achieve the same situation in the Republic of Moldova as well .

on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , the Republic of Moldova has a single option - between ' Transnistrialisation ' and ' Europeanisation ' . That is to say between an oligarchic past of a Soviet nature and a future of security , prosperity and social justice .
Moldova 's development has so far been negatively influenced by its internal political instability .
The fundamental problem of the Republic of Moldova is not linked to the external challenges it faces , but to the internal division among political forces .
That internal political instability has denied the ruling coalition the time to implement its pro-European options .
Moldova now faces a turning point .
The outcome of this early election should aim to lead the country towards a future of European modernisation .
Therefore , we call on all political forces in Moldova that are proposing a future of European modernisation for the country to avoid any unnecessary protagonism or confrontation , and to concentrate on developing a broad vision with the aim of directing the country towards achieving its European goals .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , eighteen months ago this House was shocked by the brutality of the events in Chisinau .
A few weeks later , we had the great pleasure of welcoming here in our gallery the leaders of the democratic political parties from that country , embarked on a new path .
We shared the enthusiasm of Moldova 's people for a new future .
We have been pleased to note since then the progress that country has made .
There is still much progress to be made - not least in bringing to justice the perpetrators of those brutal events - but , if Moldova returns to office the current coalition in the elections next month , there is a good chance that , despite the difficulties of the economic recession , the country can complete its transformation .
The British writer , Francis Bacon , observed that hope makes a very good breakfast but a rather poor supper .
Moldova 's governing parties should be in no doubt that implementation of reforms must follow the legal acts which permit such reforms .
Time is not on our side .
There is much to be done very soon .
My group commends Commissioner Füle and his services for the work they have done to assist Moldova .
We welcome the formation of the Friends of Moldova and the superb meeting of European countries which took place to help Moldova to move forward .
Every effort is being made on the European Union 's side to help this desperately poor country move towards European standards .
I hope that when the Council looks at the visa regime next week it will help us to find a way forward on the visa issue .
As one of our founding fathers said , a country 's European vocation is determined not by the European Union but by the European spirit of its people .
We urge the people of Moldova to show that European spirit in the elections next month .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , we welcome the progress made by the Republic of Moldova and hope that the forthcoming electoral process can further consolidate the democratic institutions and ensure respect for the rule of law and of human rights in Moldova .
We know that there is broad support for Moldova 's future EU membership - not NATO membership - within Moldovan society .
In spite of their different political platforms , all parties represented in the Moldovan Parliament declare that they are for European cooperation and integration as well .
But , taking into account my own country of Latvia 's experience of EU membership , I have tried to explain during my conversations with Moldovan politicians that EU membership cannot be an end in itself .
It is very important to step up efforts to implement deep and consistent economic and judicial reforms , notably through the fight against corruption .
Moldovan society is multi-ethnic and multi-linguistic ; moreover , essential differences exist in relation to the assessment of historical events .
It is therefore quite dangerous to create additional dividing lines within Moldovan society .
In my opinion , a recent decree establishing 28 June as Soviet Occupation Day , which triggered a negative reaction on the part of a large number of Moldovan residents , did not consolidate society but had just the opposite effect .
Moldovan society also varies according to the nationality held by its residents .
The large proportion of residents having dual citizenship creates additional differences in respect of rights as well , and so we have to make every effort to abolish these differences and to provide a visa-free regime for all Moldovans .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , no one is disputing that Moldova has a long way to go before it achieves its ultimate goal of joining the European Union , which is a goal that my group , the ECR , supports .
It remains one of Europe 's poorest countries , despite being in the WTO , and , as such , is vulnerable to organised crime , human trafficking and corruption .
Moldova remains hamstrung by the ongoing frozen conflict with the Russian-speaking and politically Russian- dominated breakaway region of Transnistria .
However , since the Communists were ousted from power 15 months ago , Moldova has begun to make substantial progress .
The parties in the Alliance for European Integration , the current ruling coalition , have shown an impressive capacity to work together to accelerate Moldova 's integration with the European Union .
For its part , the Union should maintain pressure on the Moldovan Government for further progress in economic reforms and , in particular , improving the rule of law and good governance .
But we should also reward and engage more with Chisinau .
The visa issue has been mentioned , but I would also like to raise the issue of Euronest , which offers opportunities for EU and Moldovan politicians alike to debate common interests .
Sadly , Euronest - which was something which appeared in my report in the previous parliament - remains paralysed because of the dispute over Belarus representation , as our Parliament does not recognise its parliament , which was not democratically elected .
I hope that one day all clearly European countries in the Eastern Partnership , namely Moldova , Ukraine and a future democratic Belarus , will become EU candidates .
Mr President , this debate demonstrates Europe 's commitment to the divided Republic of Moldova , and I am extremely pleased about that .
In my country , the Netherlands , citizens have for many years been developing some inspiring social initiatives offering young people from Moldova genuine prospects .
In this context I would also like to mention with pride the Orhei Foundation in Bunschoten-Spakenburg , a village which tackles such things with great vigour .
I can look the people of this Foundation in the eye because we are also talking about this issue here , demonstrating commitment .
Incidentally , Moldova is seeking an in-depth , comprehensive trade agreement with the European Union . Commissioner Füle also mentions this .
Commissioner , what is the situation with regard to this , and has any genuine progress been made yet ?
A broadening of the sales opportunities for Moldovan products , particularly agricultural products and wines from Chişinău , is vital , since Moldova 's main traditional sales market , Russia , regularly closes and restricts its borders for political reasons .
Commissioner , you have already mentioned this , but is there any way in which the European Union can offer comfort in response to this need on the part of Moldova ?
Finally , a question about the German Chancellor Angela Merkel 's ' Meseberg initiative ' .
Is Russia now genuinely committed to finding a solution to the Transnistria question in exchange for enhanced political dialogue between the EU and Russia ?
I am hearing noises indicating that the Kremlin is not taking any action for the time being .
Commissioner , I would in particular like to wish you much success and perseverance in your efforts to bring Moldova closer to Europe .
Mr President , there is ample proof that Moldova 's commitment to European values and standards is genuine and effective .
Moldova is actually the best example of implementing pro-European policies among our Eastern neighbours .
In actual fact , Moldova 's euro-credentials make it fully compatible with Western Balkan states .
The positive precedent set by Moldova should be acknowledged and encouraged .
The deterioration of democratic institutions in neighbouring Ukraine increases the importance of Moldova for the EU 's policies on its eastern flank .
In this context , it is vital that the general elections on 28 November confirm Moldova 's continued drive towards European integration .
It is indeed high time for the EU to send a positive signal to Moldova and the Moldovans .
Thousands of Moldovan families are divided by a visa barrier .
The EU-Moldova visa dialogue presents us with a huge opportunity .
This dialogue should enter an operational phase .
Let us hope that the Foreign Affairs Council on 25 October will invite the Commission to draw up an action plan for visa liberalisation .
A pro-European , integrated Moldova would have a beneficial effect on the EU 's eastern frontier , where weak governance and unsolved conflicts are a continuous threat to European stability .
( BG ) The challenges Moldova is currently facing , which are also part of our overall objective , include strengthening the multi-ethnic state , its identity , the political settlement of the Transnistrian problem and Moldova 's membership of the European Union as an autonomous , independent state .
The visa liberalisation process is particularly important .
As we have seen in similar cases for the countries of former Yugoslavia , it delivers good results .
The tendency to use a fast-track procedure for issuing Bulgarian and Romanian passports simultaneously to Moldovan citizens is not a solution to this problem and entails certain risks .
At the same time , the authorities in Chişinau must ensure that the benefit of the EUR 90 million in macro-financial assistance which the European Union is granting will be felt by all Moldovan citizens , irrespective of their ethnic origin .
This is especially important for the Bulgarian minority in Moldova as well , which lives in one of the poorest economic regions in the country .
( RO ) As a member of the EU-Moldova Parliamentary Cooperation Committee Delegation , it has been a pleasure for me to follow Moldova 's positive progress and I can confirm that the Republic of Moldova 's commitment to the European path has been very clearly demonstrated during the last year .
I would like to remind you at this point of the reforms made to the economy , justice system and public administration .
At the same time , we must be realistic and acknowledge that the transition process in Moldova is not easy and many reforms are still to be implemented .
I am pleased that progress is being made in the discussions aimed at visa liberalisation .
However , I think that we need the Commission to establish a clear road map for achieving this objective and , why not , for getting rid of visas in the future altogether .
The Republic of Moldova will have a crucial test to get through during the parliamentary elections on 28 November and I hope that the European path which the country has committed to will be approved by the population and continue .
Macro-financial and political assistance from European institutions and some Member States has been of paramount importance .
Given the positive results from our policy , I ask Europe 's institutions - Parliament , the Council and the European Commission - to continue their actions in support of Moldova in order to give Moldova confidence and encourage it to continue along the path of reform and rapprochement with the European Union so that it can ultimately become integrated as a full member .
( PL ) Ten days ago , I had the opportunity to visit Moldova as part of a special delegation of the Committee on Foreign Affairs with , amongst others , fellow Members Mrs Macovei and Mr Watson .
We were in Moldova at an extremely important moment for the country - several weeks after the unsuccessful constitutional referendum of 5 September and also several weeks before very important parliamentary elections , which , as you know , will be held on 28 November .
Above all , what we saw was the very large support of the nation and Moldavian society for the process of European integration .
Nearly three quarters of Moldavians support this process .
We also saw the huge progress which has been made by the government of Prime Minister Filat on the road to European integration and the many reforms , including significant progress in the fight against corruption which had previously been eating away at the country .
Of course , problems do exist : problems resulting from the economic crisis and problems resulting from the as yet unresolved situation in Transnistria .
However , in order for the process of reforms to be continued after 28 November , a clear signal from the European Union is needed , so I am hoping that the forthcoming Council summit will manage to push through the visa liberalisation process .
( RO ) I too would like to thank all those who have made this debate possible .
It is our duty to look towards the Republic of Moldova with a sense of great responsibility , especially now with the elections approaching .
The government of the Alliance for European Integration has shown through the special effort it has made that it is ready to launch an extensive process of political , economic and institutional reforms , thereby leading the way in this area within the Eastern Partnership .
This is taking place after eight years of Communist government when basic rights such as the right to freedom of expression and the right to fair justice were seriously violated .
The reform process in the Republic of Moldova must continue predominantly in the area of justice and internal affairs .
An effective battle must be waged against corruption , and freedom of justice guaranteed .
At the same time , safe and humane detention must be ensured so that fundamental human rights are respected .
The Republic of Moldova has been going through a political crisis for well over 18 months now , with the failure of the presidential election and the validation of the referendum .
I believe that the forthcoming elections on 28 November are a huge gamble for Moldova 's path towards Europe .
Democracy is once again going through a difficult test .
I wish to state with full responsibility that a failure for democracy in the Republic of Moldova at the forthcoming elections will also mark , to a small extent , a failure for the EU 's policy in this country .
We need to have in the immediate vicinity of the EU a partner which assumes the values we share .
I wish to end by emphasising that the language spoken by the Republic of Moldova 's citizens is now an official language of the European Union .
This is also another reason why it should receive our support .
( BG ) I am pleased that the European Parliament is devoting its time to discussing the situation in Moldova , a country which is essentially European .
In this respect , we must say that the ruling Coalition for European Integration actually contributed a great deal to the process of bringing Moldova closer to the European Union and it must be given great credit for this .
At the same time , its citizens expect more results in the areas of the economy and social development .
It is no coincidence that this is also turning into the key issue in the current campaign .
Establishing relations with the European Union is not a one-off event .
It is a long-term process and Moldova 's path towards rapprochement must become an irreversible policy .
Failure to amend the constitution led to this state of political instability , which is at risk of being repeated after the present elections .
This is why I am making an appeal to the leading political forces , irrespective of differences and the election result , to do what is required to guarantee political stability in Moldova , which will give them the chance to act in the interest of their citizens and of their country 's European future .
( RO ) Romanian imperialism is how Moldova 's Communists describe the interest being shown and speeches being made by MPs in Romania regarding the situation in Chişinău , regardless of whether it is President Băsescu or MEPs .
In other words , the Communists in Chişinău would like Bucharest to shut up .
In my own view , I must say that I do not think that they are entitled to expect this .
On the contrary , it is our duty to speak out .
The main reason for this is that a large number of primarily European , Romanian and Bulgarian citizens , and other citizens too , live in the Republic of Moldova .
I believe that , just like any other European citizen , those living in Moldova should also enjoy the rights which derive from their political status .
Secondly , we must keep a very close eye on Chişinău because a coalition government there has been acting for well over a year in the name of European integration .
It is not only about the name this coalition has .
Certainly , if it had been called the Alliance for Russia , we would not have shown as much interest in it .
It has been called the Alliance for European Integration , but it is not just the name that matters , but the very brave action of this government .
Mrs Macovei and Commissioner Füle have explained what this brave action entails .
I was in Chişinău and Tiraspol last week and I noticed that becoming European is also at stake in the election campaign which is due to start for the November elections .
Moldova 's citizens will actually decide not only between different political forces , but also between continuing and abandoning its path towards Europe .
Let us not fool ourselves .
I saw that even the head of the EU delegation in Chişinău is starting to fool himself .
The Communists do not want integration .
The Communists demonstrated a year and a few months ago what they want .
The demonstrations in April provided very clear proof of where the interests of the Communists in Chişinău lie .
This is why I hope that citizens will understand the message and attitudes of the parties , and that politicians themselves will also understand the wishes of the people expressed at the ballot box .
( PL ) Let us ask ourselves why we are devoting so much attention to such a small country which lies in the vicinity of the Black Sea but does not have access to it .
Perhaps the reason we are talking about Moldova is because it is a small country where two worlds meet .
One of these , which once symbolised the Soviet Union , is with great difficulty becoming a thing of the past .
Moldova is a divided country .
Part of it is under occupation and is being supported by external forces .
I think this country deserves our support .
It is a small country , which is home to very brave people who want to come closer to the European Union and to build a democracy .
Commissioner , the situation with Moldova is reminiscent of the concept in physics in which it is not the force itself which is important , but the point at which it is applied .
These millions of euro of which you spoke are not very impressive .
It is only a small amount of money , but applied at the right point and at the right moment it can bring about the positive effect we want .
I wish success to all those who want to build democracy in Moldova .
I am not interested in party affiliation , but I would like Moldova to consolidate , to build a better future for itself and to become our partner in the near future .
( SK ) The progress Moldova has made so far indicates that this country could become an example of a success story of a participant in the Eastern Partnership of the European Union .
The current pro-European government led by the Alliance for European Integration presented the citizens of Moldova with a clear and important political perspective for the future democratic progress of the country .
However , it is also true that the internal political situation has been negatively affected by the long-lasting disagreement on constitutional reform .
Following the unsuccessful referendum , the upcoming elections ought to overcome the impasse in the political negotiations between the parties .
I believe that the European Union should explicitly recognise the important progress achieved by the current government in strengthening its relationship with the EU .
On Monday 25 October , the Foreign Affairs Council is expected to issue its conclusions on Moldova .
They should express support for the pro-European steps that have so far been taken by the current government , and most importantly , they could ask the Commission to work out an action plan as regards visa liberalisation .
This is an important issue for the citizens of Moldova .
Of course , the ultimate outcome will depend primarily on the election results .
As far as the European Parliament is concerned , I believe our attitude towards Moldova should be more positive .
We should demonstrate more clearly our support of the country 's pro-European forces and show them that we care about Moldova becoming a future member of a united European family .
We should convince them that such a future is also in their best interest .
Mr President , Moldova has come a long way since the Molotov-Ribbentrop pact divided Europe into spheres of influence and Moldova became part of the USSR .
Moldova today is an independent state .
It is true that it has many problems .
At the same time , it is a democratic country on the way to European integration , so today I would like to encourage all political classes in that country , all the democratic political forces and all the ethnic communities to avoid unnecessary confrontations and concentrate on developing a broad vision for the Republic of Moldova with the aim of directing the country towards achieving its European goals .
Last but not least , there is Transnistria .
Transnistria should be high on our agenda and I welcome the initiative by the German Chancellor , Angela Merkel , and by the political leaders of some other countries to resolve this frozen conflict .
Mr President , Moldova is the last piece of ' Latinity ' outside the EU .
History has played a big role in that .
However , through the neighbourhood policy and Eastern Partnership , Moldova 's prospects of first getting closer , and then being admitted , to the EU after fulfilling the required conditions are improving .
The current coalition , although facing an election soon , has accelerated the pace of reforms , to which the EU has responded properly .
Those in charge on both sides should be congratulated .
Both the pace of internal reform and the EU response should continue to get beyond the point of no return sooner , rather than later .
Moldova 's chances depend , of course , on the solution to the Transnistrian conflict .
In that respect , we are encouraged by the current discussions on this topic announced in Potsdam at the German-Russian summit and , supposedly , evoked at the recent trilateral summit in Deauville , capitalising on the apparent willingness of Russia to find a solution .
Let us all keep faith and work together to bring this last piece of Latinity into the EU .
( DE ) Mr President , when we have considered the Balkans in the past , for example , when we focused on the problems of Kosovo or Bosnia , we have tended to overlook Moldova .
The EU should long ago have taken on the role of mediator in the conflicts involving Moldova and its neighbours .
It is regrettable that Moldova has now rejected the EU 's offer of mediation in the Transnistrian conflict .
It is no coincidence that Moldova is the poor relation in the European family .
This is due to the country 's chaotic , post-socialist economy .
As we know , the prime industrial area in the east of Moldova has declared its independence with the support of Russia and , by doing so , has put the seal on the country 's economic decline , because the economy is based solely on agriculture .
When the citizens of Moldova go to the polls at the end of November to elect a new government , it will be important to ensure that the elections run smoothly , in order to prevent further unrest and an intensification of the conflict with Romania , for example .
( PL ) Commissioner , I had the opportunity to observe the re-elections in Moldova .
When we talked to the representatives of the then opposition parties , we saw great desire for change .
That change has taken place .
The current prime minister , Mr Filat , speaking at the time as a representative of the opposition , clearly declared European aspirations .
We spoke with great approval of the effects of his work when he was a guest here in the European Parliament .
This has been confirmed , too , by the delegation of the Committee on Foreign Affairs which visited Moldova recently .
The internal problems , in particular over Transnistria , and the breakup and disruption of the country , which are a symbol of the past and of division , are all very difficult issues .
We must support the process which will allow the incorporation of Transnistria into Moldova .
A number of problems exist there , including that of migration .
Commissioner , every expression of support for Moldova , and here I agree with my fellow Member Mr ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( IT ) Mr President , last weekend I travelled to Chişinău , in Moldova .
I attended a convention , organised by the Minister for Culture , on Moldava 's integration into Europe with particular reference to culture .
I very much appreciated the great desire for growth , especially through a series of initiatives ranging from the construction of infrastructure and of road , electricity and every other kind of networks , to vocational training for all trades and refresher courses for other professions .
The people of Moldova are very interested in joining Europe .
The government is aiming in the near future for actual integration into the European Union and is working along these lines .
It is fine for Europe to focus at the moment on ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , the number of natural recipients of EU funding is currently just under half the total membership .
As we extend membership to more and more and even poorer eastern states , the proportion of net recipients will increase to perhaps two-thirds .
This will self-evidently be at the expense of current net contributors , but it will also be at the expense of current members that are net recipients .
Easing visa restrictions , we are often told , has nothing to do with migration , by which they mean , of course , legal migration .
It will have everything to do with illegal migration : the trafficking of people to work for less than the minimum wage and less than minimum working conditions .
It will also deplete that country of people of working age who might bring the country out of poverty .
Lastly , I would say that Moldova declared its independence in 1991 from the Soviet Union .
Does it really wish to surrender its independence to the EU , however much it might receive in pieces of silver ?
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I very much appreciated this debate .
I appreciate the timing of this debate and most of all I appreciate the overall clear unity of the message and support of this distinguished House .
The Republic of Moldova is at a turning point in its history .
The Commission has been active in helping the Moldovan Government achieve as much as it can of its ambitious reform programme over the last year .
The reforms that we support reflect without any exception the broad range of objectives of the EU-Moldova action plan .
The success of these reforms is crucial for the future of the Republic of Moldova .
We have expressed our support of the vision of a modern and prosperous Moldova with a society reconciled and its territorial integrity restored on many occasions , and not just on 30 September when the so-called Group of Friends referred to by Mr Watson visited http : / / en.wikipedia.org / wiki / Chi % C5 % 9Fin % C4 % 83u " .
There is no doubt that Europe 's history has a lesson to offer here .
The Republic of Moldova is on a positive trajectory .
I am confident that the country will be able to reach the political compromise necessary to sustain the commitment to reforms .
For our part , and as far as possible , we will all continue to stand by Moldova 's citizens and provide the necessary external support to reforms .
We will continue to support them to successfully pass sustainability tests through the forthcoming parliamentary elections .
I too sincerely hope that after these elections we will see an inclusive political process in Moldova centred on a pro-European agenda , continuing with the transformation process to the benefit of Moldovan citizens and of Europe too .
To conclude this debate , I have received six motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 110 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today , Thursday 21 October 2010 , at 12.00 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
I too welcome the progress which the European Union has made during the last year in relation to the Republic of Moldova .
Allow me to congratulate my fellow Members who tabled this motion for a resolution .
Romania has been committed , since the time of its accession , to championing the Republic of Moldova 's cause within the EU .
I believe that concrete proof of this initial commitment is demonstrated by the number of Romanian MEPs from various political groups who signed the resolution .
The EUR 90 million granted to this country in macro-financial assistance was and still is the lifeline which Moldova and its citizens needed to make progress and , in particular , to meet the commitments it has made in the area of reforms , the rule of law and the fight against corruption .
The Republic of Moldova has two major problems which have to be resolved .
The first one is Transnistria , where European governments have to make a more specific and firmer contribution and negotiations need to be resumed .
The second problem , which obviously depends on the democratic political forces in the Republic of Moldova which we need to encourage , is the way in which the elections will be conducted on 28 November .
We must guarantee citizens both inside and outside de facto access to the right to vote for their central government .
Thank you .
Containers lost at sea and compensation ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission on containers lost at sea and compensation by Brian Simpson , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism - B7-0469 / 2010 ) .
author . - Mr President , as you said , I speak this morning on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism on an issue that has been overlooked for so long , namely containers falling from ships at sea .
It is amazing to me that , in this modern day and age , thousands of these containers go missing each year , with the great majority of them falling off the ships into our oceans .
It is estimated that a staggering 10 000 containers are lost at sea each year .
It would appear to us that shipping lines and insurers are quite happy to accept this figure and do nothing about it .
In European waters , 2 000 containers a year are lost at sea , and this figure would appear to be rising year on year .
These containers are a menace to navigation , they could pollute the seas with both toxic and non-toxic materials , and they leave local authorities with large clean-up costs .
The Transport Committee is now demanding action to reduce this figure and is sending a signal to the maritime industry that we are not prepared to tolerate this state of affairs much longer .
The MARIN Institute in the Netherlands found the main reasons for container stack collapses were faulty lashings , overweight containers and faulty stowage .
In addition , crews on larger container ships have difficulty in assessing when severe loads are moving forward and / or aft due to weather conditions , which can amplify vertical acceleration in these areas beyond the vessel 's actual design specifications .
Moreover , the absence of a strict liability compensation convention for non-toxic substances leaves local government picking up the cost of the clean-up .
Parliament is now demanding that shipping companies accept their responsibilities on this issue .
We would like to see the Commission becoming more proactive in solving this unacceptable state of affairs .
Today I am asking the Commission to study the results obtained by the Lashing @ sea project and to come forward with proposals to improve container lashing procedures and equipment .
Secondly , we would like to see action to ensure that all containers are correctly weighed in port and correctly stowed before a ship sets sail for sea , as well as fitting automated beacons to aid container location .
Thirdly , we are asking the Commission to look at the compensation regime so that local and regional authorities are not left short-changed .
Finally , I want to return to the obligations of the wider maritime industry to get their act together .
I appreciate that containers will be lost in severe storms . What I cannot accept is that containers are lost due to shoddy workmanship , or to containers being overloaded or incorrectly stacked , or because of a laissez-faire attitude to this problem by the industry at large .
Containers falling off ships are dangerous . Losing 20 000 of them a year is unacceptable .
Lives are being put at risk , which is why we are demanding action .
The maritime industry seems unwilling to act .
Maybe we should .

Mr President , I am grateful to Mr Simpson for raising this crucial issue which is of interest to many Members of this Parliament and also to the Commission .
The Commission welcomes the results of the Lashing @ Sea project .
It is primarily the role of the International Maritime Organisation to tackle the issue of containers lost at sea , as this is regulated at an international level .
The Commission will nevertheless work together with Member States to promote actions to adopt internationally agreed procedures within the structures of the International Maritime Organisation .
On the second question of overweight and incorrectly stowed containers , there are no EU rules governing the weighing of containers before loading them on ships or procedures covering stowage or lashing .
This matter is regulated at national level or through international agreements .
The Commission does not plan at this stage to take a legislative initiative concerning this issue .
However , this could change if international discussions are not successful and there are increased problems with the stability of ships , the strength of ships or losses of containers .
Before presenting any new proposal , the Commission would need to fully assess the impact such a measure would have on shipping operators .
Today the Commission does not have sufficient information concerning this specific matter .
Concerning the third issue of tracking systems to locate containers at sea , this possibility could be further explored .
However , equipping millions of containers with tracking devices would be costly and a proper assessment of the benefits must be carried out before taking a final decision to make such tracking systems mandatory .
The Commission could also assess the feasibility of clarifying the provisions of Directive 2002 / 59 / EC that established the Community vessel traffic monitoring system and which obliges the Member States to ensure that the master of a ship reports to responsible coastal stations any sight of containers drifting at sea .
If the option to ensure the traceability of the containers is to be explored , the cost of such measures should be taken into account .
However , such an option could be considered in the framework of the potential development of the traceability of the containers for logistics and security purposes .
Finally , concerning compensation for the damage caused by lost containers ; this can be addressed under Directive 2009 / 20 / EC concerning maritime insurance , and Directive 2005 / 35 / EC concerning maritime pollution and sanctions in the event of offences covers cases when oil-polluting substances have been dumped into the sea .
Directive 2004 / 35 / EC concerning environmental liability also establishes strict liability for operators who cause damage to the environment through the transportation by sea of dangerous goods or polluting goods .
Such operators are obliged to remedy the damage caused to protected species and natural habitats .
Additional measures to put in place a compensation regime for damages caused by lost containers would need to be closely assessed against the proportionality principle justifying EU action .
The Commission believes that at this stage the work of the IMO to improve standards should be the priority .

Mr President , Commissioner , as Mr Simpson pointed out , several thousand containers are lost each year in European waters , and they pose a very significant risk on two counts : they pose a pollution risk , which has been widely discussed , but also , because a number of them do not sink but often float between two bodies of water in which they are difficult to locate , they pose a major risk to the safe passage of ships , whether they be cargo ships or , in particular , the smallest fishing or recreational vessels .
The result , as we know , is serious accidents that endanger human lives .
This is therefore an extremely serious problem , and the Commission seems to be saying that either it does not have the information to act , or it believes that , in view of the existing arrangements , certain measures must be applied .
In reality , that is not the case : nothing whatsoever is being done about this situation .
We therefore want real measures to be proposed .
We want preventive measures , by which I mean measures relating to container loading and stowage methods and to the scope to build into containers - and this can be done in satisfactory economic conditions - a beacon that will enable lost containers to be located and , therefore , either avoided by vessels - thus saving human lives - or retrieved if they contain toxic substances .
In the event that toxic or highly toxic substances are present , this beacon must also be able to emit an agreed signal to enable the environmental risk to be anticipated and contained .
Lastly , this beacon must be of use in identifying the owners of containers , since there is a real issue of liability that has been raised in the oral question .
Indeed , not knowing who the owners are and not being able , in fact , to identify and locate containers means that nothing can be established with regard to recovery and compensation for damage .
We strongly urge the Commission not to just conclude that we do not have the resources or that the existing resources are sufficient , because that is not the case : there is an issue of environmental safety , but there are also lives at stake , and we must remember that .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of my group I would like to second the comments and questions put forward by the Chair of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , Mr Simpson .
The loss of containers - as well as their contents , of course , since we must not forget that we are also talking about that - is without doubt an underestimated and neglected problem .
As has been said , this concerns as many as 2 000 containers a year in European waters alone , with all the consequences for the environment , consequences possibly for the crews , for other ships and for the coastal regions , which of course are fairly often left with the task of clearing up the debris .
This is therefore an issue that we must tackle .
There are various reasons for this problem : bad weather , speed , poor securing and stacking of containers , excessive weight , and so on .
My group believes that this problem has a European dimension which justifies an initiative by the Commission .
We should not stand back passively and wait for International Maritime Organization ( IMO ) measures .
In particular , initiatives could be taken to register such incidents and raise awareness of this issue in European ports .
In the context of the social dialogue - the European social dialogue in the port sector - the Commission could also broach the subject and propose solutions such as new procedures for loading containers or modified training .
Mr Riquet has emphasised , and I too believe , that it is very wise to ensure that containers are traceable : not only in this context but also in the context of monitoring the entire logistics chain .
Commissioner , I therefore expect some slightly more concrete initiatives over the coming months and years .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mrs Geoghegan-Quinn , the arrival of a container full of trainers on an island somewhere , which was received enthusiastically by the residents , has in the past made headline news .
In another case , a contingent of rubber ducks floated ashore .
These are , of course , the pleasant examples of ships ' cargoes going missing , but the fact is that in many cases lost containers can cause serious damage .
It has become clear that we must do something about this .
The Dutch Government was concerned about this problem and set up an investigation to find out why it was happening .
The investigation identified a number of causes .
Although there are EU regulations which specify how cargoes should be secured and although all ships have the manual containing the regulations on board , only 46 % of ships have their cargoes properly lashed down .
This means that we do not need any new rules . You were right about that , Mrs Geoghegan-Quinn .
In many cases , the weight of the cargo has not been correctly balanced .
Another reason is that many crews in the short sea shipping sector unlash cargoes before they have reached their destination to speed up the unloading process .
Stacking errors can also be a cause of the problem , together with old or damaged equipment .
All of this can , of course , have a major impact on the environment .
Around 70 % of items lost from ships at sea sink to the bottom , but this gives rise to the question of what damage they are causing on the sea bed .
A total of 15 % of the goods reach land .
The remaining 15 % float around in the ocean and obviously represent a major hazard for other ships , platforms and the environment .
This means that when accidents happen at sea we must investigate the extent to which containers were involved .
Then we need to speak to shipping companies and port operators to ensure that they comply with the regulations .
In addition , regular inspections must be made .
Two thousand containers really are too many and I think that carrying out feasibility studies would take too long .
We must take immediate action , because the situation simply cannot go on as it is .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - ( SK ) As I see it , the solution to the problem of compensation for damage caused by containers lost at sea lies in having well-organised relations between three parties : the owner of the transported goods , the shipping company and the insurance company .
The operator , the shipping company and the crew in particular are responsible for the security of goods at sea .
The crew is also responsible for preventing the containers from falling off or sliding from the vessel into the sea , that is , for compliance with the international regulations in force , and for ensuring the safe shipping of goods in international maritime transport .
In my opinion , the first step we ought to consider while tackling this issue is ensuring compliance with the regulations on securing goods before putting to sea .
I think this is the central issue in this matter .
Only then should we try to find new , complementary regulations for the transportation of goods .
Only after we know the actual starting position and the situation concerning compliance with the regulations should we seek amendments to regulations which are already established for international shipping and , as the case may be , for the European Union too .
( GA ) Mr President , my colleague Brian Simpson has raised very important questions , and I have to say that I am not at all happy with the response I received from the Commissioner .
Is she willing or ready to do anything about it as regards the introduction of a law ?
This is a hugely important issue and I commend my colleague , Brian Simpson , for raising it because if you look at the statistics things are actually getting worse .
Approximately 50 % of the world 's shipping tonnage carries non-toxic substances as bulk goods .
There has been a rapid increase in the worldwide container ship fleet - which has grown by 140 % from 32.6 million to 78.3 million gross tonnes since 1984 - and the problem needs to be regulated .
There is also a problem in relation to increased speed , because these container carriers travel at a much faster speed than bulk carriers .
They are now travelling at speeds of 27 knots , which is a huge speed in terms of the possibility of crashes or impacts , collisions and so on .
So there is a huge problem there as well .
Then we have the problem in relation to the actual age of the fleets themselves .
When you look at the age of the fleets carrying containers , the bulk of them are in the category of 19-24 years old , which means that there is a major problem from the point of view of actual structural defects .
What we need is a legislative initiative .
We cannot allow a laissez-faire attitude .
What we also need is a strict liability convention , so that ships travelling though EU waters will automatically have to foot the bill for non-intentional toxic releases into the sea due to the loss of containers .
What I am saying in essence is that we need action because the situation is getting progressively worse and , as Mr Simpson has pointed out , in the bulk of cases of accidents we are talking about human error in terms of the way containers are tied down , dealt with and so on , so we really need to take the shipping companies on .
( ES ) Mr President , exactly eight years ago this November , the Prestige , an oil tanker carrying 70 000 tonnes of crude oil , suffered an accident off the coast of Galicia causing a leak through which the tanker spilled 20 000 tonnes of oil .
This initial leak , combined with the misjudged decisions of the Minister of Public Works at the time , Mr Álvarez-Cascos , resulted in an absolute disaster and the worst ecological , social and economic tragedy ever to affect the Galician coasts .
One of the possible causes considered to explain the leak was precisely the presence of lost containers floating on the sea surface at the mercy of the waves and storms .
These containers are potential projectiles that can be thrust against the hulls of all kinds of ships , including oil tankers like the Prestige but also passenger ships , ferries or cruise ships .
The outcome of the Lashing @ Sea project has revealed serious deficiencies and negligence in the different areas concerned , such as lack of training and instruction among loading personnel and stevedores in the ports and also among the ship crews , which are consistently undertrained and undermanned even though the ships they work on are genuine monsters of the seas .
In addition , the best techniques to secure and trace the containers are , on the whole , insufficiently used , and they are frequently overloaded .
Lastly , a cost and risk assessment of the new physical effects generated by these monsters of the seas needs to be carried out .
These effects include , for example , the so-called ' parametric resonance effect ' , which can cause containers to drop from the rear of the ship at a faster rate .
This is why we demand that the European Commission undertake immediate preventive measures , more training , instruction and refreshment courses for stevedores and crews .
We also demand the implementation of technological safety measures : weight controls in ports , improved lashing equipment and stacking strategies , and adequate marking to locate the containers in case of loss , traceability being one of the services potentially provided by the Galileo project .
( DE ) Mr President , I am glad that the European Commission did not exist in the 15th century .
If it had existed , Christopher Columbus and his companions would probably have sailed in the next container , which would promptly have sunk , and they would never have reached the continent of America .
We know what the cause of this problem is .
We know that something needs to be done about it .
What does the Commission say ?
It says that it is not possible to do anything .
This is simply not acceptable .
We know that inaccurate stowage is the cause , that the containers have faulty lashings , that they are overweight , that they fall into the water even when the weather is not stormy and that individual countries with their own regulations cannot change any of this .
Who else should be bringing about change , if not the Commission , which is responsible for ensuring that things like this do not happen in European waters .
It is not only the environmental damage that we are concerned about .
Human lives are also being put at risk .
What would happen if a small boat with a plastic hull were to ram one of these containers in mid-Atlantic ?
It would sink .
It would not just be the boat itself that would sink , but also the people on board .
Spending a long period in the water in the middle of the North Atlantic wearing a life jacket is not much fun .
This is something which we need to take into account .
Therefore , I think it is wrong that nothing is happening .
I believe that the European Commission must introduce regulations as quickly as possible in order to put an end to this situation .
It is dangerous , it is wrong and something must be done .
I am calling on the Commission to take urgent action , because it is responsible in this case .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I consider the question on containers lost at sea , which we are discussing today , to be very important , since it raises an issue of extraordinary importance above all for the economy of EU coastal regions .
Hence , I believe the European Commission must strive to create an insurance fund that can provide compensation for any damage caused by the leakage of what are at times hazardous substances from containers lost at sea .
Furthermore , it is advisable to raise the maritime safety level through stricter legislation on the control of goods stowage operations and the prevention of the illegal stowage of harmful toxic goods on ships .
This insurance fund is something that I have already requested on other similar occasions .
author . - Mr President , in short , I am disappointed with the Commission 's response to our oral question .
I appreciate that a world agreement would be ideal and I appreciate that we need to involve the IMO , but the IMO has got to be one of the slowest international organisations the world has ever come across .
It works at the pace of a tortoise , and we want action now .
Commissioner , if I drop 2 000 heavy metal boxes into the sea , deliberately , with a load of materials in , then I would be prosecuted .
Yet we allow this to happen every year in EU waters .
I make a plea : you cannot play Pontius Pilot with this and wash your hands of the problem .
It is a problem that is increasing .
It is a serious problem and it is a problem that you have to address .
It is not a problem you can hide behind , saying ' well , we need to assess this ' and ' we need to assess that ' , or whatever .
You have heard what the Members have said .
Please now get on with trying to sort it out .
Mr President , I am grateful to all Members who participated in this debate and I would like to emphasise that I fully understand the importance of the topic we are discussing and how important it is in the opinion of Members that the Commission press ahead with a policy that would resolve this particular matter .
I believe that the debate , and all that everyone has contributed , has shown the importance of the affair .
I also believe the debate showed the importance to be attached to the protection of the environment .
Interestingly , the debate has gone from Mrs Meissner 's rubber ducks and shoes all the way to Columbus , who folklore says paid a visit to my home port in the west of Ireland .
I am very glad that he took that famous voyage !
However , I would like to emphasise again to all of the Members , but in particular to Mr Simpson who has taken such a keen interest in this area and who has put so much work into it , that we are very serious about this particular issue .
We are aware of the large increase in the number of containers that are lost and , as I said earlier , Commissioner Kallas is looking at this problem .
He believes it is not just linked to the lashing of containers but also to overweight containers .
It is also due sometimes to the strength of the ship which was an issue that was raised , and the age of the ships - an issue raised by Mr Higgins .
Safety and protection of the marine environment , as I said earlier , are very important priorities for the Commission .
We cannot compromise on those issues and we , and Commissioner Kallas in particular , will certainly consider whether further action is necessary .
I am sure he would be very happy to work closely with you and your committee , Mr Simpson , in coming to a conclusion on that .
We already have quite a number of tools at our disposal to ensure safety , as well as the prevention of pollution , including from containers lost at sea .
With regard to concrete action on the issue , I believe that action at an EU level does not seem necessary at this stage .
However , I do take your point that the IMO as an organisation is moving very slowly and that the Commission needs to get involved to push for quicker solutions .
I still think , and I know that Commissioner Kallas feels very strongly , that the adequate forum to discuss these issues is still the IMO , and I suppose a review of the recent results of the lashing @ sea project could be encouraged there .
That project also confirms the importance of having a global approach when we are developing procedures and standards so that we keep this level playing field that we talked about earlier between operators from Member States and indeed other states .
Let me conclude by emphasising that these issues should first be discussed in the IMO .
The Commission participates as an observer in the IMO and the Commission prepares positions together with the Member States .
I can assure you that I will convey the results of the debate here today to Commissioner Kallas and the issue , I know , will be looked at by him and promoted in that context .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
I would like to offer my congratulations on the decision to take up the subject of containers lost at sea .
On 8 February this year , ferries sailing from Poland to Sweden were in immediate danger .
The Finnish freight vessel the Linda was sailing from Rotterdam to St Petersburg , and while crossing lanes used by Polish and Swedish vessels it lost three containers containing 8.3 tonnes of substances classified as dangerous to the environment , 7 tonnes of products which are hazardous to marine life and 5.5 tonnes of flammable substances .
Fortunately , this time it was possible to avert a tragedy .
I agree that all containers should be weighed in port and correctly stowed before vessels head to sea .
This is , however , a long-term plan .
The plan for today is for the Commission to introduce a regulation which provides for particular supervision of containers with substances classified as hazardous .
Therefore , I would like to ask the Commission a question : when may we expect the first action on this matter ?
Integrated Maritime Policy ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Meissner , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on integrated maritime policy ( IMP ) - evaluation of progress made and new challenges - .
Mr President , Mrs Geoghegan-Quinn , ladies and gentlemen , I wish that the Chamber were full to bursting , not on my account or because this is my first report , but because of the subject matter , which is unfamiliar to many people , but nevertheless highly important .
Hardly anyone has heard of integrated maritime policy , but it is a decisive subject for us all , because it really is true that our future lies in the sea .
A total of 70 % of the earth 's surface consists of water .
Population levels are growing , not in Europe , but throughout the rest of the world and by 2050 they will have reached 9 billion .
The earth is becoming too small and many experts have already discovered the significant potential of the oceans .
Our objective must now be to keep the resources of the seas safe for future generations by means of the integrated maritime policy .
So far only 10 % of the oceans and their resources have been explored , but we already have 50 000 products which come from the sea .
Efforts are now being made to produce energy from the sea and to extract raw materials for medicines , cosmetics and industry .
While we are developing our overall maritime policy , it is important to ensure that the sea does not strike back , as it did in a sensational novel by bestselling author Frank Schätzing . We have the opportunity to turn the maritime economy into the largest area of growth in our economy as a whole .
For this reason , people are talking today not only about green jobs , but also about blue jobs and blue growth .
The coastline of the EU is 23 000 kilometres in length and one third of the population lives by the sea .
Green shipping and offshore energy are areas where Europe has extensive expertise which can be developed further .
For this reason , we need an integrated approach so that we can achieve all of these objectives with great care .
Which individual areas are covered by integrated maritime policy ?
The first of these areas is transport .
Shipping can be described as the powerhouse of European transport , because 95 % of global trade and 40 % of internal European trade travels by sea , via ports with hinterland connections and logistics .
Further growth is being forecast and therefore we must ensure in particular that we can reduce emissions by developing greener ships .
The next area is shipbuilding .
We have a great deal of expertise in this field , as I have already mentioned .
We must make sure that we use this expertise productively to secure existing jobs and create new ones .
Of course , maritime policy also includes fisheries and aquaculture .
Fish are not just a source of food .
In addition , aquaculture is the area of agriculture and fisheries which is showing the highest levels of growth .
It is important for us to be aware of this .
In the field of energy there is a great deal happening on and around the sea .
We have oil and gas pipelines , oil platforms and offshore wind farms and there are already plans to fit tankers with sails so that they can cut their energy consumption by 20 % by using wind energy .
Wave power is an area with future potential and microalgae , which can be used as biomass , represent an almost unlimited source of energy .
In the area of research there is a focus on using blue biotechnology to develop medicines .
We already have painkillers and anti-malaria drugs and work is currently underway on cancer medicines .
Protecting our coasts is an important issue which is also covered by integrated maritime policy .
Our coasts are threatened by storm tides and we need to protect them , not only against the tides , but also against oil , piracy and smuggling .
In addition , we must deal with the problem of asylum seekers in Italy .
Finally our coasts are also , of course , very popular tourist destinations and we are working on developing a sustainable tourism concept for the coastline .
You can see that there are many individual areas involved here , all of which are related to water .
The objective of the integrated maritime policy is to develop these areas carefully and in harmony by working together .
Many people are not aware of this , but it is hugely important .
The European Union has already achieved a great deal in this respect , but it needs to do even more .
For this reason , I have focused in this report not so much on the individual areas , but primarily on what has happened in the last few years since the 2007 Blue Paper was published , what still needs to be developed and what has to be continued .
These are the areas which I will mention again briefly in my conclusion .

Mr President and honourable Members , I would like to say firstly that my colleague Commissioner Damanaki is in Portugal on behalf of President Barroso today at an important conference on marine affairs and marine policy and she regrets that she cannot be here today .
Let me say first , however , that this debate is proof that maritime policy matters .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Meissner , on this very fine report .
The Commission very much welcomes this excellent report and its favourable view of our integrated maritime policy .
This report is more than a mere stock-taking exercise .
It also sets out an ambitious , inclusive and detailed vision for the future of maritime policy .
Not for the first time in discussing integrated maritime policies , the Parliament has led by example .
The report is the product of admirable , cross-committee cooperation which adds democratic legitimacy to our policy .
Moreover , it opens up new horizons , not least with the welcome participation of national and regional parliaments and authorities , to help shape our integrated maritime policy to become a truly operational policy of relevance that will create more jobs and better quality jobs .
The Commission is confident that the policy demands in this report will impact positively on future maritime policy for three important reasons .
Firstly , in taking a forward-looking approach to the maritime dimension of the Europe 2020 strategy and ensuring sustainable growth in maritime sectors and coastal regions .
Secondly , they will point the way towards emerging policy objectives where the Commission and Parliament should work together .
These include Europe 's approach to climate change mitigation in coastal regions and to sustainable coastal tourism , support for greener , safer and more competitive shipping through the common maritime space without borders , and further action on maritime safety and accident prevention .
Thirdly , this report provides a coherent and constructive set of proposals for future actions .
I very much look forward to hearing the views expressed during this debate .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Fisheries . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mrs Geoghegan-Quinn , firstly I would like to thank Mrs Meissner for what is , in the truest sense of the word , integrated work , not only because it concerns the integrated maritime policy , but also because it includes all the specialist areas .
As far as fisheries are concerned , I would like to say once again that fisheries and aquaculture , of course , make up a substantial part of the integrated maritime policy .
It is important for me also to mention once more that we in the European Union produce around 2 million tonnes of fishery , fish and aquaculture products , but we consume 8 million tonnes .
We are one of the largest export regions for fishery products in the world .
Therefore , we are faced with particular challenges when it comes to protecting our resources .
One decisive point in this respect which has already been mentioned is maritime spatial planning .
It is important for us to identify where the priorities lie .
Fishing grounds and protected areas definitely have a high priority , together with the shipping routes and , of course , in this context , maritime safety .
Particular care must be taken in very busy shipping lanes .
We have been talking a great deal about renewable energy .
The offshore wind farms which are being built in large numbers to generate energy must also be included , from the perspective both of fisheries and of maritime safety .
This represents a major challenge .
There is one other subject which I would like to bring up in this context .
We must promote research and development with regard to fishing methods .
The EUR 50 million made available by the Commission will not be enough . I would like to ask you to take this message back with you , Mrs Geoghegan-Quinn .
The integrated maritime policy will , of course , not come to an end at Europe 's borders .
We need to work together with our neighbours .
We only need to think about Iceland , the Faroe Islands and what has happened there in recent years , the Mediterranean region , Libya and Egypt which present a major challenge .
Mr President , Commissioner , sustainable use of the maritime environment is vital to the sustainability and growth of the whole of Europe , especially countries whose economies are directly linked to the sea .
Balanced growth in basic sectors , such as fisheries and aquaculture , energy , transport and tourism , can guarantee citizens ' professional future and income .
From a regional development point of view , making use of territorial cohesion as a new basis for further integration of the internal market is of vital importance .
For the maritime sector , this means further promoting short sea shipping and ensuring better links between peripheral maritime regions and islands and between them and the mainland and economic centres .
This is vital if we are to achieve social , economic and territorial cohesion .
The innovative approach adopted under the integrated maritime policy is also important and has replaced the fragmented approach to maritime policies .
Taking advantage of synergies has a double benefit for the citizens of the European Union : it improves the results obtained and saves money .
Mr President , the integrated maritime policy is vital to the European Union .
We need it in order to fully exploit one of Europe 's basic advantages : its strong maritime tradition .
The strategic objective of an integrated maritime policy is to strengthen Europe 's leading position in maritime research and technological development , in sectors such as shipbuilding , the exploitation of maritime resources and the development of off-shore energy sources , through better coordination of policies relating to the sea .
The integrated maritime policy must support European shipping , which is unrivalled in the world , so that it can play a leading role at international level .
That is why we must safeguard the competitiveness of our shipping as a valuable asset ; it is very important to Europe .
That is why the international solutions adopted by the International Maritime Organisation , which must have a sovereign role , need to be applied at global level .
Mrs Meissner 's report quite rightly underlines and analyses the importance of maritime governance , of maritime surveillance and of maritime spatial planning .
However , there is a sine qua non to all of this : compliance with the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea .
As such , paragraph 25 of the report , in which the European Parliament asks the coastal states of all the maritime basins , especially the Mediterranean , to resolve delimitation issues on the basis of the Law of the Sea Convention , is extremely important .
The report highlights the huge importance of Exclusive Economic Zones to Europe .
I wish to congratulate Mrs Meissner on her excellent efforts and on the cooperation between us and to thank all the shadow rapporteurs for their efforts .
At the same time , however , as an ardent advocate of the competitiveness of European shipping , I personally have serious reservations and grave concerns about the amendment which Mrs Meissner tabled a few days ago .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , firstly I would like to congratulate Mrs Meissner on her report and thank her for all her hard work .
We share the approach taken by this report which puts the focus not on the sectoral structure of maritime policy in the individual Member States , but instead emphasises the importance of coordinating maritime policy within and across the Member States .
If we look to the future , we will see the space available in our seas and oceans becoming more restricted .
The oceans are transport routes , sources of raw materials and energy , suppliers of foodstuffs and water reservoirs .
The economic exploitation of the oceans is growing and this brings an accompanying increase in the environmental impact on them .
Conflicts of interest will arise and we will have to resolve them by means of effective coordination within and among countries .
It is not possible to comment on every issue , but I would like to mention briefly the sulphur emission control areas .
It was not my intention to make the limits less strict .
When the Commission presents its study , we will be able to tell to what extent the limits will result in a shift from sea to road transport , in particular in the North Sea and the Baltic .
Then we can discuss this issue further .
However , the basic conditions for competition within the European Union between the North and the South must remain at the same level .
This must also be one of the Commission 's objectives .
There is one point which we are not entirely happy about .
We have been talking for a long time about the strategic importance of the shipbuilding industry in Europe .
We have also said that innovation is very important in this industry , because this is the only way that it can survive .
We need a coordinated strategy for our policy on the shipbuilding industry .
I believe that the call from the Member States to put funding aside for shipbuilding was also very important , but it has not been supported by the Liberals and the Conservatives .
Ladies and gentlemen , how do you propose that we should support the shipbuilding industry in Europe ?
Coming out with platitudes and good wishes for the workers in the European shipyards , who are concerned about their jobs , is simply not enough .
We Social Democrats expect better measures and better proposals in this area .
Mr President , a third of European citizens live in coastal regions .
The EU is the world 's largest maritime power .
An integrated policy in line with the objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy will help us strengthen our leadership .
However this requires a global , cross-sectoral policy that takes into account all civil society actors as well as the strategies and responsibilities of local and regional authorities in coastal areas .
We must continue to view our coasts and seas as an opportunity .
For this reason , we need to strengthen our sustainable fisheries policy , taking on board the difficulties of people who make their living from the sea , who , incidentally , are a highly responsible sector .
We have to reinforce the safety policy so that fishing vessels operating under European agreements can be protected .
This means fighting piracy and therefore strengthening Operation Atalanta .
We have to show our full commitment to the strategically important shipbuilding industry , which is going through hard times due to competition from Southeast Asia and needs and expects solid support from Europe , which is currently amiss .
We must develop motorways of the sea to reduce CO2 and further the development of renewable energies .
Innovation , inter-institutional coordination , appropriate financial instruments and a clear definition of Europe 's strategy in every sector involved will enable us to achieve economic , technical and sustainable development , as well as research to a degree that allows creating high-level jobs and protecting something we all care for and something we all want to keep alive : the sea .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Meissner , for drawing together this report and developing it alongside the other political groups .
As 71 % of the Earth 's surface is covered with water , it really does make sense to try and develop an integrated maritime policy .
Europe , of course , has 305 000 kilometres of coastline .
That was the Commission 's intent back in 2009 when it announced a more horizontal policy approach on areas such as maritime transport , the marine environment and regional and fisheries policies .
Today we see the response of the Committee on Transport and Tourism to this fresh direction , in the shape of Mrs Meissner 's report .
We will be supporting this report .
It is a useful step in the right direction towards caring for , and the sustainable use of , our maritime resource .
However , we believe there is still much work to be done .
We welcome the report 's suggestions on maritime governance , on sea basin initiatives and strategies , on maritime spatial planning and surveillance , a maritime research framework and observation and data network , and a fund for maritime infrastructure .
I am particularly pleased that the report now includes the integration of carbon emission reduction targets and support for renewable solar and wind energies on board vessels .
When it comes to the votes later on today , I would particularly like to ask Members to support the rapporteur 's amendment which seeks to include the option of including emission trading schemes in the EU and IMO rules .
This was an issue over which the Committee on Transport was evenly split , with 20 votes each side , so it is perfectly right that Mrs Meissner has brought it here today for plenary to vote on .
I would ask Members to show some ' 20-20 vision ' and vote for the rapporteur 's amendment , which recognises that these measures sit squarely alongside our wider strategic objectives around CO2 reduction and the Europe 2020 project .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , I welcome the development of an integrated maritime policy that enshrines and enhances the principles of subsidiarity , competitiveness and the sustainable use of marine resources .
I do not , however , support the resurrection of the concept of a European coastguard .
This was rejected once before .
I do not believe it is necessary . I believe it is far too expensive at a time of financial stringency .
I also believe that a directive on maritime spatial planning would be an unnecessary luxury which would not , in my view , add value to the current process of cooperation between Member States .
Can I also mention in this context the impact of offshore wind , wave and tidal energy projects , together with the designation of marine protected areas ( MPAs ) , on inshore and artisanal fisheries ?
We cannot simply draw lines on maps designating vast areas of inshore waters as MPAs or for renewable energy .
Small-scale fishermen cannot be arbitrarily displaced without full consultation .
The designation of such areas must be a bottom-up and not a top-down process , and it must involve stakeholder consultation .
on behalf of the GUE / NGLGroup . - ( CS ) The Integrated Maritime Policy is not being discussed in the context of the European Union for the first time , but it is still very difficult to reconcile the protection of the environment , fisheries , transport , energy , industry , science and research and to embed the various aspects of development into a single plan .
The Commission 's report answers the question of how the action plan contained in the Blue Book from 2007 is to be implemented .
It emerges from the report that 56 out of 65 proposed measures have been initiated or completed , and generally as legal acts by the Commission or Council .
For inland regions , however , the priority is to connect maritime policy with a policy of better , rational use of the main European waterways ; see point 40 of the report .
Here , attention is traditionally focused on the Rhine , the Maas and the associated system of waterways in France , Belgium , the Netherlands and Germany , including the Rhine - Main - Danube link .
Unfortunately , the central section of the Danube downstream of Vienna and the tributaries of the Elbe upstream of Magdeburg have been left in the shadows by these efforts .
The use of these waterways for traffic is discussed far less often , and investment in improving navigability is of peripheral interest to the European Commission and Council .
This is definitely a shame , because the great energy potential of these waterways remains unused , while unnecessary pressure is put on the expansion of terminals in port cities , which transfer cargo from ship to rail and road while river ports have idle capacity .
Of course , in addition to connecting ship , rail and road traffic , it is necessary to fundamentally address issues of nature conservation and energy use in coastal regions .
Here it is reasonable to provide additional questions to the ones that Mrs Meissner put in her report , on two other issues : the relationship of maritime and river transport , and connecting them .
I welcome the dozens of measures contained in the report .
I would emphasise the need for consistent application of the third maritime package .
In point 21 , I consider the work on ecological solutions to the cleaning of oil tankers and the disposal of old ships to be a key initiative to avoid pollution .
The current status of this issue is pathetic .
I agree with the report by the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - ( DA ) Mr President , I would like to thank Mrs Meissner for a well-thought-out and comprehensive report , to which there is scarcely anything to add .
Like Mrs Meissner , I am a strong supporter of coherence between policy areas , interdisciplinary research programmes and new challenges , but what concerns me most of all are the problems relating to the pollution of our seas .
We adopt so many reports in this House that they are , unfortunately , forgotten soon after they have been adopted .
I would therefore like to remind the Commission of an additional protocol that Parliament adopted on 26 January this year , in other words nearly nine months ago .
It concerned the establishment of cooperation between EU Member States for combating disasters in the North-East Atlantic .
This is a subject that Mrs Meissner also mentions in paragraph 4 of her report .
To this day , I have not received any feedback from the Commission on this subject , either with regard to whether any steps have been taken towards the establishment of such cooperation or preparedness amongst Member States , or whether the Commission itself perhaps intends to establish a state of preparedness for the EU .
All of this is despite the oil disaster in the Gulf of Mexico that we have only just finished dealing with and the threat posed by the far too old and rusty oil wells in the North Sea .
So , I would now - once again - like to ask the Commission : What has happened with regard to the disaster preparedness for our seas ?
Will we have to wait for something serious to happen first before Europe wakes up ?
( DE ) Mr President , as far as our oceans are concerned , time is running out .
If we continue to destroy them at the current rate , we will ultimately destroy ourselves , because 70 % of the world 's oxygen is produced by marine flora .
It is not enough to promote the protection of the environment within the EU , as we are always so keen to do , because it is a well-known fact that wind and waves are no respecters of borders .
Therefore , I really do not understand why we are not putting clear regulations in place , when rich industrial nations are able to shift their environmental problems to the developing countries .
I think we need specific regulations for ship breaking .
Ships consisting of tonnes of waste polluted with asbestos are sent from Europe to India , Bangladesh and Pakistan to be broken up , where they contaminate whole stretches of coastline .
However , this all comes back to us in the form of contaminated seafood , which ends up on our plates via the food chain .
We have not even mentioned the workers in these countries who risk their lives as a result of inadequate safety precautions .
A day , a ship , a death .
This is how the shipbreakers in the Indian town of Alang describe their dangerous job .
We also have no clear regulations for deep sea drilling .
In this context , I would like to highlight the very positive move made by Mr Öttinger , who is attempting to put in place regulations governing the safety of drilling platforms .
There are no regulations for busy shipping lanes , such as the Bosphorus , where compulsory pilotage has not yet been introduced .
Large tankers pass through these straits every day .
Another positive feature that I would like to mention is the fact that shipping companies are playing an active role in protecting the environment and marine animals .
For example , an Italian shipping firm has installed a system which will prevent its ships from colliding with whales .
It would be a very good idea for the EU to support positive measures of this kind taken by private companies .
( FI ) Mr President , I wish to thank the rapporteur for her excellent work , and especially for the proper way in which she views the International Maritime Organisation 's decision on sulphur emissions .
I hope that the Commission will actually take this decision into account , one that today is bound to be adopted unanimously in Parliament .
The IMO 's decision was a hasty one , with no assessment of environmental impact and no estimates of costs .
The EU should not repeat the IMO 's mistake .
If different emissions limits are set for the north compared with the south , competition will be distorted and so will the rules within the EU .
The emissions limits must be the same .
I am absolutely certain that it will be contrary to EU competition law if this goes ahead .
What will this mean for my country , for example ?
It will mean that industry will face an additional bill of approximately EUR 1 billion a year .
Finnish jobs are at risk , even though we are doing all we can here to increase the number of jobs in the EU .
We speak of the Europe 2020 strategy , but we make other sorts of decisions that take these jobs away .
Cargo for Finland is transferred to Russian ships , which then take the goods to Finland on trucks , because Russia is not going to ratify this decision by the IMO .
This can hardly be what the EU wants .
The Swedes have said that they will start to transport by truck what now goes by ship .
We would therefore be making a bad decision for the environment and a bad decision for future European jobs .
I hope that the Commission actually understands this decision , which is being taken unanimously in Parliament today .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank the rapporteur .
When it comes to integrated maritime policy , we must go beyond the stage of good intentions and give fresh impetus to a strategy that will represent a route to growth and development in the European Union , making up for the huge amount of time lost in the prevention of environmental disasters , and in the fight against climate change and pollution .
Only this morning Mr Pirillo reminded Parliament of yet another catastrophic event that occurred the other day in the town of Paola , in Calabria .
The Commission must prove that it is making a real effort , that it is not just using its instruments of governance but actually implementing targeted legislative measures , and duly learning its lessons from past mistakes caused by an approach that was often too sectoral in nature .
We are fully aware that this is a very complex process , but we are at a difficult and demanding juncture where no lapse in attention can be tolerated and where adequate investment and shared governance mechanisms are needed both at interinstitutional level and in international cooperation for the regional basins , among which the Mediterranean stands out because of the complexity of its jurisdiction .
That is why it will be crucial to view the management of the Mediterranean basin as an asset shared by all the coastal States , on the basis of the res communis omnium , or common heritage , principle .
Otherwise , the increasingly widespread practice of unilaterally declaring exclusive economic zones or the like in the Mediterranean Sea , as well as running counter to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea , would undermine the idea of effective , shared governance .
I would point out in this respect that , only a month ago , this interpretation on the part of Libya resulted in an actual armed assault on a European fishing boat , and it would be wrong to argue that this is just a matter between Italy and Libya .
( SV ) The Integrated Maritime Policy is a very welcome strategy , because our seas are interconnected and all sectors that exploit the seas have a combined effect on the marine environment .
This means that it would be devastating and irresponsible to continue to take decisions relating to the marine environment without taking account of the cumulative effect on the marine environment of fishing , dredging , shipping , wind and wave power , tourism and other activities .
The Marine Strategy Framework Directive forms the environmental pillar of the Integrated Maritime Policy and it states that all Member States shall have attained a good environmental status for our seas by 2020 .
If this is to be possible , the Member States must , as soon as possible , implement a form of maritime governance that is integrated in practice , with a single centre for decision making .
I will give you an example of how wrong things can go when the various users of the sea are governed by different authorities and different laws .
In the southern Kattegatt in Sweden , Sweden and Denmark have agreed to protect the spawning ground of the cod in a desperate attempt to protect the last remaining cod stocks .
Recently , another authority in Sweden decided that the municipality of Falkenberg should be permitted to dump enormous quantities of dredging waste from ports into the sea , precisely in the spawning ground of the cod .
The Member States now have a duty to attain a good environmental status for the seas by 2020 .
Only by collating the decisions affecting the seas and carrying out marine spatial planning will this be possible .
Marine spatial planning will also allow us to see more clearly who has an interest in the seas , who wishes to exploit the seas and to be clear that the same rules must apply to everybody .
Fishing operations must also carry out environmental impact assessments , and they must follow the best practice principle .
They must also comply with the precautionary principle , exactly like gas pipelines on the sea floor or wind farms do .
This would be a very big step in the right direction .
( PL ) The Report on Integrated Maritime Policy makes us think more carefully and requires that we give the matter greater attention .
The short presentation of the report pursuant to Rule 48 of the Rules of Procedure , the reduced possibility to table amendments , which is against the rules , and the rejection of most amendments tabled by the European Commission do not fill us with optimism or hope that the Committee on Transport and Tourism will approach the subject of integrated maritime policy in a fully responsible way .
Let us remember that the maritime industry in the European Union finds itself in a huge crisis .
The industry is being destroyed by dumping and competition from the Far East and by the taking over of shipping companies by cheap operators .
This is happening as a result of the lack of a European integrated maritime policy .
We are facing a crisis in the shipbuilding industry .
I will add that in my country the two largest shipyards have recently been closed , and that this took place under the influence of pressure from the European Commission and in the face of the ineffective action of the Polish Government .
This has caused huge economic migration and has increased unemployment .
Therefore , I appeal for appropriate attention to be given to integrated maritime policy and for a fully responsible approach to the subject .
( PT ) The large number of activities and sectoral policies on the marine environment - from fishing to maritime transport , and including tourism , energy , science and technology , among others - requires an integrated policy that promotes a beneficial interlinking of all these areas within a framework of sustainability of the marine environment , and of preservation of the related ecosystems .
This is because specific local and regional features are of crucial importance within this relationship , and the effects of this integrated policy will be felt at this level too .
Beyond simply being implemented , it must also be defined at this level , involving the coastal communities that work with the marine environment , who bring it to life and depend on it .
We must also not forget the joint vision that is necessary or the collaboration and cooperation that are crucial in view of the fact that the oceans and seas are interlinked and interdependent .
Any Union initiative in this area must safeguard the sovereignty and powers of each Member State with regard to the management of its territorial waters and Exclusive Economic Zones , while at the same time contributing to promoting the resources that are present there as part of their endogenous potential and their comparative advantages .
Amongst other things , such as the promotion of marine research and the development of the various aspects of maritime technology and engineering , such as shipbuilding , a comprehensive vision of an integrated maritime policy must cover the following : the promotion of maritime transport that is more environmentally sustainable and of port infrastructure as part of their public management ; promotion of fishing ensuring the modernisation of the sector and its environmental sustainability and socioeconomic viability ; adequate and independent funding that does not take resources away from the European Fisheries Fund ; and finally , the role and special characteristics of the outermost regions .
Mr President , before taking advice from any expert it is wise to examine their record to check that they are competent .
The Integrated Maritime Policy report is partly the work of the Committee on Fisheries , so before buying into its grand schemes it is worthwhile taking a critical look at the European Union 's record on the management of the seas .
Inevitably , this means assessing the situation in the former sovereign UK waters , secretly betrayed to European bureaucracy control in 1973 , since nearly 70 % of so-called ' EU fishing stocks ' are actually British fishing stocks .
How have our fish and our fishermen fared under the common fisheries policy ( CFP ) ?
The figures tell us far more than all the fine words in this report .
88 % of the EU 's stocks are overfished , against a global average of about 27 % .
30 % of our fish species are now officially outside safe biological limits , because there are too few adult fish left for normal reproduction .
Under the CFP 's obscene quota system , nearly a million tonnes of fish are discarded dead into the North Sea alone every year .
Meanwhile , the industrial hoovering-up of species such as sand eels has led to crashing populations of bird species such as puffins .
To Europe 's south , the picture is just as bad .
West African fishermen , whose lifestyle had been sustained for generations , are being forced to switch to people trafficking because EU-registered vessels have helped fish their waters to extinction .
It is time for the EU to acknowledge that its record in maritime management is the worst in the entire world , a typical example of what is known as the tragedy of the commons - the phenomenon by which shared resources always get exploited ruthlessly , because anyone who exercises restraint is disadvantaged by the unscrupulous .
It is time to restore control of the seas and fishing grounds to the sovereign nations , whose track record has shown them fit to exercise such stewardship .
In the case of the two-thirds of EU waters that the EU has fished to extinction , that means the British nation and British fishermen .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I think the rapporteur , Mrs Meissner , must be congratulated .
We have had dissimilar , even conflictive positions , but she has found compromise solutions that allow us to stand together today on this important issue .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Transport and Tourism has decided that all the seas should be protected in a similar way , arguing that any other solution would bring about a situation of unfair competition .
We accept the position of the majority in favour of a legal situation with uniform rules for the entire Union , although I will not spare Members the fact that such a solution also clearly implies a certain degree of unfairness .
It is obvious that the Baltic Sea , the North Sea and the English Channel are more polluted and , in my view , sulphur monitoring will have to be stricter .
The measures to reduce transport time and handling costs in ports are certainly positive initiatives .
Nonetheless , I will repeat this again and again : we still have work to do on this matter .
Unless we liberalise our ports resolutely , they will not be able to expand the key role they will be required to play in the context of co-modality .
The promotion of a CO2 reduction strategy aimed at altering the specific consequences of climate change is also to be welcomed .
I think this is a good report that must be adopted .
But we must not forget that this report is in the context of a serious disaster , namely that affecting the Gulf of Mexico .
In this respect , the Commission is urged to judge whether it is necessary , within the framework of revision of the Regulation of the European Maritime Safety Agency , to strengthen the role of the Agency in carrying out preventive inspections and post-hydrocarbon-spill clean-up tasks .
Commissioner , this , I believe , is a necessary reform and the necessary mandate must be used to support these tasks .
( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by thanking Mrs Meissner for her excellent work and the way in which she has managed to bring about broad consensus with her report .
As coordinator of my group , I would also like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to our former colleague Mr Piecyk , who sadly died two years ago and who did some groundbreaking work in this Parliament to flesh out an integrated European maritime policy - something we can build upon today .
Clearly this is a complex sector with many aspects and we will therefore have much to do to achieve our goal .
To begin with , we must bring about a new dynamism in the sector by putting effective structures and appropriate measures in place ; after all , this sector provides large numbers of jobs throughout Europe both directly and indirectly and , in particular , is essential for the development of our coastal and port areas .
The structure has already been referred to , and that also includes European structures .
The European Maritime Safety Agency ( EMSA ) must really be strengthened and given a greater role , and be given the appropriate competences and resources .
The issue of the oil disaster and oil drilling has also been raised .
As far as that is concerned , I believe that it should be clear that any subsequent amendment of the competences should strengthen EMSA 's position .
EMSA should also be playing a major role in promoting cooperation between national inspection services , coastal monitoring services and so on in the Member States .
In addition , there are of course some major environmental challenges .
Shipping creates more pollution than it needs to .
There is , therefore , still much scope for improvement .
We are talking about sulphur standards , which should be the same everywhere , and about a system of emissions trading - and I call upon the Commission to really keep up the pressure within the International Maritime Organization ( IMO ) in this regard .
In addition , we need to have effective spatial planning , of course .
My final point : I believe that it is also important to take steps on a social level to enhance the image of the profession among young people .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , integrated maritime policy is a forward-looking area .
The oceans are being used increasingly intensively for transport , maritime economic activities , offshore energy and fishing , and the development of these areas must be coordinated .
The space available is limited and , therefore , the various maritime sectors must take a responsible and thoughtful approach to working together .
The use and the protection of the seas must not conflict with one another .
These two areas are mutually dependent , because the oceans can only support us if they are healthy .
I would like to highlight the positive cooperation between countries bordering on the Baltic who are working together to promote the dynamic development of the fisheries , the environment , the infrastructure and tourism in coastal regions .
We must continue to focus on the fishing industry , which is in a weak position and is often regarded as being a low priority , but which , because it provides us with food , represents a vital link in the coastal economy .
I would like to congratulate Mrs Meissner on this positive report .
( FR ) Mr President , I believe that the report clearly demonstrates the challenges posed by the marine environment in terms of fisheries , aquaculture , transport , tourism , energy , mining and biological resources , and climate change research .
There is considerable potential for development , and it should be safeguarded , protected and enhanced in a lasting way , because the future of the human race depends on it .
The report also rightly notes that the European Union is the world 's leading maritime power and that its outermost regions ensure that it has the world 's largest exclusive economic zone .
Therefore , in the light of such a finding , it is the European Union 's responsibility to implement an ambitious policy , a major maritime policy .
If the world 's leading maritime power does not do so , who will ?
It must be said , however , that the resolution does not go very far in this direction .
One cannot claim to be the world 's leading policymaker with only EUR 50 million .
Lastly , although the outermost regions have a recognised strategic position due to their presence in every ocean , it would have been sensible to make them play a leading role in a major strategy for the oceans .
Unfortunately , this was not taken up by the rapporteur , and I regret that .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , the oceans and seas represent 70 % of the planet 's surface , they were the birthplace of life , and throughout human history they have been a source of food through fishing , as well as a means of communication between peoples and cultures via maritime trade .
That is where we find the origin of the concept of traditional maritime activities : fishing and transport .
The sea is currently gaining a new role in the context of the global world , as a geostrategic and geopolitical stage that gives Europe a central role .
Moreover , we are currently living in the so-called period of new uses for the oceans , such as the exploitation of its energy , mineral and genetic resources , which , as along with fishing and maritime transport , require a holistic perspective and concerted action ; as a matter of fact , Mrs Meissner has sought to give an impression of this , for which I warmly congratulate her .
It is essential for the European Union to plan the European maritime space and its uses , especially for coastal regions and even more so for the outermost regions .
For the integrated maritime policy to be greater than the sum of its parts - and to focus on fishing here - it is vital that this activity be represented in the clusters of maritime activities , so that desires can be incorporated in a collaborative way and difficulties resulting from the overlapping of interests in the use of the maritime space can be overcome .
In this area , in order to comply with the decisions reached at the 2002 Johannesburg Summit , it is imperative to protect the marine biogeographical regions that are most sensitive from a biological viewpoint and to promote sustainable fishing using increasingly selective methods .
It is , therefore , important to guarantee the creation of cross-sectoral political instruments that bring together the different sectors of the various maritime activities , defending their respective requirements and specific features in terms of utilisation of the maritime sphere .
Protecting the oceans is a moral obligation that we have for ourselves and for future generations .
( EL ) Commissioner , almost every civilisation in the history of Europe has been based on the sea .
Today , the Treaty of Lisbon imposes new policies and tools to minimise conflicts , promote dynamic synergies and eliminate unfair competition , in order to protect the environment and create jobs .
The integrated maritime policy requires a cross-sectoral , global strategy for the sustainable development of coastal and island areas and the seas .
A basic tool for the rational delimitation of uses of the sea is cross-border maritime spatial planning .
We must encourage the adoption of single , integrated maritime governance structures at regional level and the development of strategies for the Union 's maritime macro-regions .
We need to look into the prospect of creating a European coastguard for efficient integrated maritime surveillance .
Finally , no-one can disagree that the shipping industry needs to help reduce carbon dioxide emissions .
We need to exert coordinated pressure for global IMO regulations , given that a unilateral decision by Europe to create an ETS for shipping would , I fear , have disastrous consequences for European shipping by putting off a proper solution , namely international regulations , not forgetting that shipping is an international activity par excellence .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am grateful to Mrs Meissner for her report on integrated maritime policy , and I agree with her on the need to strengthen maritime transport and the shipbuilding industry , to safeguard coastal regions and to promote innovation and research activities .
Today , maritime transport plays a fundamental role in trade .
As a result , we must encourage cooperation between small and large ports that face one another in the same sea basin and which can facilitate more fluid trade .
Furthermore , in order to ensure intermodality , we must invest in port and dry port infrastructure , especially in ports that can be connected via European corridors .
Lastly , I believe it is important not to overlook another issue , namely port security .
All the measures relating to safety within all European ports must be harmonised so as to better protect maritime transport and prevent unfair competition from harming those ports which actually have to incur greater expense in order to guarantee a higher level of safety .
( RO ) The development of an integrated maritime policy is an absolute must , given the fragmented approach adopted in the past which led to inefficiency and conflicts in this area .
Mrs Meissner 's report reiterates the European Parliament 's view about creating an integrated , coherent and common decision-making process with regard to the oceans , seas , coastal areas and maritime sectors .
The integrated maritime policy facilitates a cross-sector approach to maritime governance , by helping identify and utilise areas of synergy between the European Union 's policies which come under this area .
The proposal for a regulation envisages a programme which will provide a stable framework for maintaining the assistance granted to the initiatives in this area and will result in a more coherent use of funds for the development of the seas and coastal areas .
Unfortunately , the only viable and feasible funding solution in the current economic climate was the modest financial contribution from the EU .
Nevertheless , I hope that this funding method will enable the objectives of the integrated maritime policy to be met both in the short and medium term .
( PT ) Mr President , the smart growth advocated in the Europe 2020 strategy can only be achieved if we intelligently mobilise the various types of potential inherent in European diversity .
The European Union has the largest Exclusive Economic Zone in the world , at 25 million square kilometres .
We have 32 000 kilometres of coast , on which one third of our population lives ; the coast generates 40 % of our gross domestic product and 95 % of our foreign trade .
These last figures should alert the Commission and Council to act , in the sense that they cannot do without an integrated European maritime policy in achieving the smart growth that is essential to the success of the Europe 2020 strategy .
I would draw particular attention to the potential biogenetic and mineral wealth that our deep sea and seabeds contain , about which we currently know little ; I would draw attention to the need to increase our research and development efforts in these areas .
( DE ) Mr President , Mrs Geoghegan-Quinn , ladies and gentlemen , we must preserve the world 's oceans as an ecosystem .
However , the oceans and the concept of globalisation are not mutually exclusive .
Shipping routes are essential to our prosperity , because they are the arteries of world trade .
There is a lot to be done in this context in order to ensure that we protect the environment and that our transport routes are secure .
In future , we will also have to secure our supply of raw materials .
Scientists are predicting that valuable raw materials can be found on the sea bed and in the sea itself .
The important consideration is to extract them in an environmentally friendly way .
The third aspect I would like to look at is the link between the oceans and inland waterways .
I believe it is important to establish a connection with inland waterway transport .
The development of the Danube plays a major role in this respect .
As the longest river in the EU , in combination with the Rhine-Main-Danube canal , it can link the Black Sea with the North Sea .
We should be creating a connection between integrated maritime policy and inland waterways .
Mr President , it should not surprise anybody that the EU wants to integrate maritime policy , just as it intends to integrate everything else across Europe in every aspect of life and public policy .
I enquired in 2007 of the UK Marine and Fisheries Agency how many fish were being caught in British waters .
I was told ' we cannot identify UK waters .
They are now identified as being part of EC waters ' .
So the UK no longer has its own territorial waters .
Perhaps it is apt to be discussing this today because , as I am sure you will all be aware , it is the 205th anniversary of the Battle of Trafalgar on 21 October 1805 when Admiral Lord Nelson and many other brave men gave their lives and died so that Britain could remain a free and independent country .
His dying words were ' Thank God , I have done my duty ' .
UKIP MEPs will do their duty this afternoon and vote against this .
( DE ) Mr President , we still know far too little about marine ecosystems and many areas of the deep sea in particular are just white patches on our maps .
However , the seas and the oceans represent one of the major challenges of this century and not just because they provide us with food and protein .
Their role in our climate system and , therefore , their contribution to the welfare of the human race should not be underestimated .
The example of the Great Barrier Reef demonstrates that marine ecosystems can regenerate if the necessary environmental protection measures are put in place .
In the protected areas of the reef , the fish population has increased by between 30 % and 75 % in only two years .
Given the fact that more than 40 % of the world 's population lives less than 100 kilometres from the sea and could therefore be hit by a tsunami , I very much welcome the plan to implement a joint European disaster prevention strategy for our coastal areas .
However , the establishment of differing emission limits within EU waters conflicts with the integrated maritime policy , which aims to take all factors into account .
We need to be consistent in this area .
( RO ) The importance of the integrated maritime policy is unarguable in circumstances where the European Union is the number one global maritime power and 40 % of the EU 's GDP is produced around the seas and coastal areas .
When implementing the objectives of these policies , particular consideration must be given to the specific regional features of the seas around Europe .
Every maritime area is unique and requires individual attention in order to achieve a sustainable balance with its users .
At the same time , we must ensure that this policy will enjoy appropriate funding in the outlook for the forthcoming programming period , thereby creating a new approach aimed at encouraging optimum development of all maritime activities in a sustainable manner , and which will cover all sea basins .
This will allow us to enjoy much greater benefits , while easing the environmental impact .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , the rapporteurs and members have spoken in depth about the content of the integrated maritime policy .
I should like to focus on the issue of shipping emissions .
It will , indeed , be no easy task , but we must include shipping emissions in plans to reduce overall emissions .
In order to be effective , this is something which needs to be done as a matter of priority under an international IMO agreement .
If no such agreement can be reached then , obviously , we shall seriously consider adopting regional measures at EU level .
As Mr Danellis said , this will be no easy task and , if we are to have any chance of success , we need to follow the example of the aviation industry .
These measures need to be applied on the basis of the port of call of merchant vessels and we must decide how to tax emissions .
The ETS has proven to be fairly complicated and inefficient ; we need to find a simple but effective solution ; perhaps a carbon tax or other hybrid methods which are simple and effective .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to highlight once again the European Union 's transport strategy .
Our aim is to move goods from the roads to the sea and to provide efficient and environmentally friendly means of transport .
However , in certain areas of shipping we must not set our environmental objectives as high as the sulphur emission control areas in the Baltic and the North Sea , otherwise the cost of transport will rise dramatically .
Mr Itälä and Mr Fleckenstein have already referred to this .
I would like to call on Mrs Geoghegan-Quinn to evaluate the study which is being drawn up very carefully .
We do not want to move transport from the sea back to the roads and we want fair competition in northern Europe , in the European Union and in the Mediterranean area .
That is one of the fundamental requirements .
On the subject of maritime safety , I would also like to say that it should play a greater role in integrated maritime policy with regard to the very busy shipping lanes and straits .
For example in the Kadet Trench and in the Bosphorus , as one of my fellow Members has mentioned , there should in future be compulsory pilotage .
Where large tankers pass through and highly complex cargoes are being transported , compulsory pilotage would increase levels of maritime safety .
( RO ) Shipping and the shipbuilding industry contribute significantly to the economic prosperity of EU countries and provide valuable services to European and global industry , as well as consumers .
I congratulate Mrs Meissner on her report .
I wish to stress the importance of a maritime space without barriers .
At the same time , we call on the Commission and Member States to evaluate and preserve small maritime ports , expand the short sea shipping network in order to minimise land transport distances , support research and innovation on cargo modes , cargo handling and logistical solutions with the aim of finding solutions which reduce transport time and handling costs , and to support port infrastructure development and ensure intermodality .
With an emphasis on the Black Sea 's geostrategic importance , the European Council should ask the European Commission to draw up a European Union Black Sea strategy .
Unfortunately , too little attention has been devoted until now to the Black Sea , which is of geostrategic significance to the European Union .
Mr President , the development of an integrated maritime policy is of vital importance to the Irish , the European and indeed the global economy .
As an island-based economy , maritime transport is the cornerstone of Irish industry .
Over 99 % , and I repeat 99 % , in volume terms of all Irish trade is transported by sea .
It is estimated that the Irish marine industrial base is responsible for the employment of some 8 000 people generating over EUR 1.5 billion within the economy annually .
The sector connects the Irish economy with the rest of Europe and the rest of the world .
The sector is strategically vital to my country and to the recovery of the Irish economy .
The rapidly evolving nature of the maritime sector requires a unified approach at European level , and the growth in maritime activities such as maritime transport , development , aquaculture and tourism - combined with new uses of the sea such as underwater technologies , offshore renewable energy and the blue biotech - is increasing pressure on an already limited maritime space .
( ES ) Mr President , the integrated maritime policy is a cross-cutting , regional and sectoral policy and the fisheries and aquaculture policy must be a part of it , in a way that does not make it subordinate to other policies .
We must all address the environmental and economic problems affecting society as a whole and the fisheries sector in particular : new technologies , fishing gear , development of species , a maritime economy programme to create more and better jobs , quality supplies , international relations aimed at preventing piracy and favouring the governance of the sea , which is devoid of barriers , and not having any sustainability problems , as in the case of Iceland .
This is what needs to be done if we intend to work towards an integrated maritime policy , and if we intend to work for the environment and sustainability .

( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , integrated maritime policy has a horizontal role : it incorporates various aspects , from the environment to marine and maritime research .
Integrated maritime policy does not provide for monitoring of the boundaries of international territorial waters for illegal fishing or the crossing of those boundaries .
I hope that serious consideration will be given to this aspect within the context of the funds earmarked for implementing this policy , and that those funds will help strengthen controls thanks to modern surveillance systems such as the Global Monitoring for Environment and Security ( GMES ) services .
The horizontal aspect that characterises integrated maritime transport will be guaranteed - I hope with the forthcoming funding package - by the EU budget and not by the fisheries resources , which are used for specific actions .
I am very grateful to the rapporteur for this important text , and I hope that the Commission and the Council will grant our requests in full .
Thank you very much , Mr Pirillo .
I have not included your initial remarks in your speaking time , because what you have said is important .
However , I can assure you that all the Vice-Presidents make a great effort in this respect .
I would like to invite you to take part in a competition with me .
We will pull the names of Members of this House out of a hat and see who is better at pronouncing them .
Nevertheless , mistakes sometimes do happen in the heat of the moment and I would like to ask for your forbearance .
( ES ) Mr President , thank you for your generosity .
I should like to congratulate Mrs Meissner very warmly on her excellent work and also on her ability to integrate our colleagues ' requests and amendments .
I am particularly grateful for two specific amendments .
The first is the one in which the Commission is urged to improve the working conditions of maritime workers and finally transpose into EU law the International Labour Organization ( ILO ) Maritime Labour Convention .
The amendment also includes a proposal for a qualification and training programme for seafarers , which will specifically provide for the recruitment of young people and the inclusion of third countries .
I am also grateful for the amendment in which we call on the Commission to help Member States in implementing a localisation and mapping programme for underwater shipwrecks and relics , which are part of Europe 's historical and cultural heritage -I come from Spain , a country with a large amount of relics off its coasts .
This programme will facilitate the understanding and study of this underwater heritage and help to prevent looting , thus enabling its proper preservation .
I think these two aspects , in addition to Mrs Meissner 's excellent proposals , will play an important part in creating to the new marine awareness that Europe needs .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I know that at the beginning of the debate Mrs Meissner expressed her disappointment at so few Members being here in the Chamber .
I think she should be very pleased that 37 speakers contributed to the debate .
Indeed , we had a very lively debate which has thrown up fresh ideas to encourage us to aim even higher in terms of the maritime policies that we pursue .
We must manage the finances of the EU concerning maritime issues in the context of the European Commission 's proposal for a regulation to finance the integrated maritime policy in 2011 , 2012 and 2013 .
The purpose of the proposed funding , namely of EUR 50 million , is to continue the work undertaken since 2007 to remove policy barriers and to unleash synergies by bridging all policies that impact on the sea , such as transport , fisheries , customs and marine environmental protection .
The Commission looks forward to working with Parliament on the timely entry into force of this regulation so that we can implement our future integrated maritime policy actions .
Furthermore , maritime surveillance is an important new initiative , which is set to engineer a huge change in all future actions by maritime authorities at sea and aims to install a common information-sharing environment for the EU maritime domain .
The communication from the Commission concerning this initiative came out only yesterday .
It is the culmination of intensive work that has produced a six-step roadmap to achieve in a short time the integration in maritime surveillance which seemed extremely difficult to achieve just a few months ago .
I turn now to a number of specific questions raised .
On sulphur emissions , the Commission is fully aware of the concerns expressed by industry groups about the impacts that may occur due to the new marine fuel quality standards adopted by the IMO in 2008 .
That is why the Commission has called for - and subsequently hailed - the IMO agreement which is now estimated to reduce emissions of sulphur dioxide by up to 90 % and , most importantly , emissions of secondary particulate matter by up to 80 % .
The Commission will present a proposal to align EU legislation with the IMO decision within the next months .
The proposal will be accompanied by a detailed report that will also include the outcome of our ex-post impact assessment relating to the IMO decision , as well as possible measures that the Commission could take to mitigate undesired impacts on the sector .
Mr de Grandes Pascual raised the issue of sea basins .
The EU is aware of different situations in sea basins and is developing appropriate strategies for each sea basin , tailored to specific needs .
Finally , Ms Rosbach and others raised the issue of an anti-disaster scheme .
The European Maritime Safety Agency is in charge of monitoring shipping safety .
At present it does not have legal competence to regulate in the area of environmental disasters , but discussions are under way - within the context of the Commission extending or renewing the mandate of the European Maritime Safety Agency at present - as to whether more powers should be given to the Agency in coming years .
Of course , Parliament will be centrally involved in this issue .
Finally , in my capacity as the European Commissioner with responsibility for research , innovation and science , I was very glad to hear several Members here in the Chamber raising the issue of the relationship between maritime policy generally and , specifically , research into marine and maritime policy .
Last week , the Belgian Presidency organised a very important conference in Ostend which dealt specifically with this issue and brought together scientists involved in this area .
This is a very important pillar of our integrated maritime policies .
I would like to thank Mrs Meissner again for her comprehensive and far-reaching report .
I believe that we can now pursue the implementation of all future maritime initiatives with renewed vigour and confidence .
Thank you and my apologies to the interpreters if I was speaking too quickly .
Mr President , I think it is good that you have been counting , Mrs Geoghegan-Quinn .
I did not know how many speeches had been made , but 37 really is a lot .
I would like to thank everyone who has taken part in the debate today .
Right at the beginning , I also forgot to thank all the shadow rapporteurs for their work .
We really have worked together very constructively and I enjoyed it very much .
I have covered a lot of subjects in the report , because it is very important to me to have a convincing majority in this crucial area .
Many of the speeches on different subjects have highlighted the fact that we need joint action on research , planning , implementation and control of maritime activities by means of joint governance , spatial planning and monitoring .
This is what the report is all about .
However , it is a very varied subject .
I should now like to discuss a few of the speeches .
Mr Fleckenstein raised the problem of the sulphur emissions .
We have included it in the report because it was important to us that there is no distortion of competition , but we also need to make sure that shipping is more environmentally friendly .
However , what you said about shipbuilding , Mr Fleckenstein , is not quite true .
It is not the case that the Liberals and the Conservatives did not want to include this .
It was simply a question of how we should implement it , of whether we should create a new fund at a European level for refitting old ships or whether we should put in place a strategy .
That is the current wording .
The subject of my amendment was also raised , which I introduced in order to include emissions trading in the report .
In the committee it was rejected by a very small margin , but in my opinion we are all convinced that we must continue to follow this route .
For this reason , I am hoping for support in these areas .
Mr Kohlíček , you said that it was difficult to link all the areas together , but I know that this is possible .
A group of stakeholders and business people from all the different maritime areas meets twice a year to share ideas .
These are prominent players at a European level and they all very much value the opportunity to come together .
My last point concerns the reference to the fact that there are so many different regions .
I have included the position of islands in the report and it is not true that this has been omitted .
The only area not covered by the strategies is the North Sea .
I live closest to the North Sea and , therefore , I wanted to mention that when we talk about the Black Sea , the Mediterranean and the Danube , we should not forget the North Sea .
Finally I would like to express my thanks , in particular for the remark that we should take moral responsibility for the sea and for future generations .
This is why I have chosen the title ' We need a new awareness of the sea ' .
If we continue to work on this , we will be able to achieve a great deal .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to raise a point of order .
I would like to thank the chair for bringing the debate to a close today a quarter of an hour before the vote , because this is a dignified way of ending the debate , which allows us to finish speaking calmly and gives the Members time to come in .
Yesterday things did not work well at all and the planning was not how we would like it .
Today everything is as it should be and I hope that the chair will take this into account in future and schedule sufficient spare time between the end of the debate and the start of voting .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12.00 .
Written Statements ( Rule 149 )
It is important for the EU to ensure that its coasts are protected .
It is also necessary for the legislation in force to make oil exploration and extraction safer .
The Lisbon-based European Maritime Safety Agency ( EMSA ) provides support and technical assistance for drawing up and applying Union legislation on maritime safety and protection , as well as on pollution caused by ships .
In June of this year , I submitted a written suggestion to Commissioners Oettinger , Kallas and Georgieva to extend the mandate of the EMSA to create mechanisms for supervising safety on European oil platforms located in the North Sea , the Black Sea and the Mediterranean , and to make it responsible for preventing environmental disasters related to oil exploration .
This suggestion enables an economy of scale at the level of financial , human and technical resources .
I welcome the Commissioners ' response , which demonstrated openness to reviewing the EMSA regulations , expanding its mandate as regards intervention in maritime pollution incidents .
I call once again for the European Commission to expand the EMSA 's mandate , so as to ensure that our coasts are protected .
in writing . - ( ET ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as is well known , the International Maritime Organisation has imposed , under MARPOL Annex VI , various requirements on the amount of sulphur in different regions .
The Baltic Sea , the North Sea and the English Channel have been declared a sulphur emissions control area , and more stringent requirements have been established for these regions to reduce pollution significantly .
In these regions , from 2015 , marine fuels can be used if their sulphur content does not exceed 0.1 % , while for other regions the sulphur content is required not to exceed 0.5 % from 2020 .
This issue was also dealt with at the International Maritime Conference , which took place on 24 September in Tallinn in my home country .
I believe that it will not be a solution if the European Union comes out with its own requirements , but they do not apply to third countries ; that is , we will subject ourselves to unequal competition in the maritime sector .
The situation must be resolved internationally , so that the requirements imposed would be real and would apply to all those sailing in the Baltic Sea , not only to vessels from EU Member States .
In addition , the imposition of irrational standards involves moving the transportation of goods from the sea back on to the roads , which is much more dangerous and hostile to the environment .
On this issue , I therefore support the standpoints of the Estonian and Finnish governments , as well as the European Community Shipowners ' Association - the International Maritime Organisation 's decision should be reviewed and should impose equal rules on all EU regions and vessels operating there .
in writing . - In my capacity as rapporteur on EU Strategy for the Black Sea , I noticed with regret that matters related to the Black Sea are almost ignored in the Union 's integrated maritime policy ( IMP ) .
Though the Black Sea was included in the IMP concept in 2007 , concrete EU action on this dimension seems to lag behind .
I strongly urge the European Commission to redouble efforts to develop the Black Sea approach of this policy .
IMP is an important tool for addressing opportunities and challenges in EU sea basins in a coherent manner which is aimed at comprehensive development of the coastal zones .
I am deeply convinced that the Black Sea , as a sea partially within the EU , and its littoral States have an acute need for proper application of this tool .
The international dimension of the IMP is a crucial aspect for successful implementation in the Black Sea region , which also encompasses seven non-EU countries .
The European Parliament is currently preparing a report on establishing an EU Strategy for the Black Sea .
I hope that the Commission will follow this initiative and will regard the future strategy as an important basis for strengthened IMP implementation in the Black Sea area .
Sakharov Prize 2010 ( announcement of the winner )
Colleagues , I have just come from the Conference of Presidents .
It is a great privilege and honour for me to inform you about the very important results for all of us .
We are fighting for human rights in our Parliament on behalf of 500 million citizens .
Following a substantial debate today involving very wide and deep discussions , the Conference of Presidents decided to award the 2010 Sakharov Prize for the freedom of thought to Mr Guillermo Fariñas .
( Applause )
Guillermo Fariñas is an independent journalist and political dissident .
He was ready to sacrifice and risk his own health and life as a means of pressure to achieve change in Cuba .
He used hunger strikes to protest and to challenge the lack of freedom of speech in Cuba , carrying the hopes of all those who care for freedom , human rights and democracy .
I hope to present the award to him in person here in Strasbourg in December , which would be a tremendous moment for the European Parliament and for all Cuban prisoners of conscience .
I sincerely hope that , together with Guillermo Fariñas , another Cuban laureate from 2005 , the Ladies in White - Las Damas de Blanco - will also be able to collect the Sakharov Prize in person .
Let me add that all the candidates were excellent from the point of view of our feelings on human rights and fighting for these all over the world .
We can congratulate all of them , but we had to make a choice , and there was no other possibility .
I would like to underline that we have a lot of winners all over the world and we support all of them .
Let us say that once again .
( Applause )
( FR ) Madam President , I wish to make a point of order .
I believe that the conditions in which the Sakharov Prize has been decided this year are scandalous .
As I see it , political choices are taking precedence over the actual defence of human rights .
( Applause )
This will be the third time in the history of the Sakharov Prize that it has been awarded to a Cuban .
I am the first to denounce the way in which human rights are threatened in Cuba .
I have no hesitations on that score .
I have always fought for the protection of human rights , without distinction .
However , I think that awarding the Sakharov Prize to a Cuban for the third time in its 20-odd-year history is a lot , and we are sending out a political signal that devalues the Sakharov Prize .
That is why I call for the decision on who should receive the Sakharov Prize to be taken not in the Conference of Presidents but by Parliament as a whole .
( Applause )
The next item is the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes )
1 .
Instrument for Stability (
2 .
Financing instrument for development cooperation (
3 .
Financing instrument for the promotion of democracy and human rights worldwide (
4 .
Financing instrument for cooperation with industrialised countries (
5 .
Financing instrument for development cooperation (
6 .
Indication of the country of origin of certain products imported from third countries (
Madam President , Parliament has already , on several occasions , expressed its support for the aims of the regulation .
With a vote in favour today , the people of Europe will have the right to know the origin of what they buy .
However , if we reject the regulation , as we are asked to do in Amendment 45 , it would mean denying Europeans rights that are already enjoyed by the people of China , India and the United States .

I am grateful to the shadow rapporteurs , Mr Susta and Mr Rinaldi , and to all those who worked to reach a compromise , and I hope that the democratic deficit that European consumers have endured up to now will finally cease to exist .
- That is clearly rejected .
It was very clear , colleagues .
- Before the vote on Amendment 19 :
Madam President , we call for the words ' or commercial ' in the second paragraph of Amendment 19 to be deleted in order to make the text clearer and more applicable .
( IT ) Madam President , I call for a check on parts 2 and 3 of paragraph 43 .

No , it was clear and I am not going back now .
7 .
Future of European standardisation (
8 .
Ukraine (
Madam President , if we cannot find a majority , then I want to ask the House to move the vote on the resolution to the next meeting in Strasbourg .
We had a very open discussion yesterday and many of us expressed concerns about some of the developments in Ukraine .
We will have a debate with the Foreign Minister next week .
We will have an election observation mission .
We will have the PCC meeting in Kiev and Odessa at the beginning of next month .
So it would be fair if we have the vote on the resolution immediately after that visit , at the Brussels part-session .
I hope Members can agree to that and support it .
Thank you , Mr Swoboda .
I will take another speaker in favour if there is a speaker in favour .
( PL ) Madam President , I would like to support Mr Swoboda 's proposal .
I think it will be , on our part - on the European Parliament 's part - a sensible thing for our assessment of the situation in Ukraine , which we discussed yesterday , to be moved to the next part-session of Parliament .
This will be after important events have taken place in Ukraine and our perspective will then be significantly broader .
We will have at our disposal the report of our fellow Members who are going to the elections in Ukraine , and it seems to me that Parliament will act wisely by moving the vote .
Thank you , Mr Kamiński .
I think I have a speaker against in Mr Gahler .
Is that correct ?
Madam President , I ask my colleagues to vote against the postponement .
We must speak out before the elections , so it must be now .
It is an issue about fair elections in a European country and that cannot be a partisan issue .
Last time in 2004 we could only speak out after the falsified elections and we were united .
This time there is ample evidence beforehand of security service interference and a massive practice of non-admittance or of fake local party lists to confuse voters .
So let us be united again for the sake of democracy .
I think the massive lobbying of the Ukrainian Embassies throughout Europe towards us to prevent this resolution is proof of how right we are to speak out now .
I now put to the vote Mr Swoboda 's proposition that the vote should be delayed .
( IT ) Madam President , please can you just clarify whether the request is to refer it to Brussels or to Strasbourg , because I have heard both versions ?
It seems to be to Brussels : is everyone clear that the proposition is to refer it to Brussels ?
On that basis , I put the proposition to the vote .
( Parliament approved the request to postpone the vote )
9 .
Implemented reforms and developments in the Republic of Moldova (
Madam President , the oral amendment is on amendment 1 to paragraph 3 .
It proposes the replacement of ' road map ' with ' action plan ' as this is the correct formulation .
So this amendment will now read ' Calls on the Council to invite the Commission to quickly develop the action plan ' and so on .
Madam President , I wish to move an oral amendment which is simply a stylistic improvement to paragraph 11 .
This will ensure the dignity of our House , which should not ' call on ' or ' ask ' an illegitimate de facto authority to behave better .
In making a reminder of the right of Moldovan citizens to vote , ' calls on ' should be replaced by ' states that ' and after ' Transnistria ' , ' have no right to prevent ... ' should be inserted .
Please support this oral amendment .
We should not ask the authorities , but insist .
10 .
Integrated Maritime Policy (
( NL ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I concur with the rapporteur and the shadow rapporteurs that in order to underline the need for a worldwide agreement on environmental measures within the International Maritime Organization ( IMO ) , a minor amendment of the text is needed .
Specifically , reference is made to the outcome of the 61st session of the IMO 's Marine Environment Protection Committee a few weeks ago .
The following words , which I will quote in English , should be added immediately after this : ' and maintaining its call for further substantial progress within the IMO ' .
Are there any objections ?
It seems not to be the case so we will proceed with the vote on Amendment 1 by roll-call vote .
11 .
Trade relations with Latin America (
Voting time
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
( PL ) Thank you very much , Madam President .
In that case , I will start again .
In recent years , the European Union economy has often suffered because of crises and financial instability both at local and global levels .
In order to prevent similar dangerous situations in the future , pre-prepared support plans must exist , and there must be an appropriate reaction both before and after the problem .
The Instrument for Stability fills this role very well .
Financial and technical support should also include the promotion of human and economic development as well as consultations in the event of the violation of human rights , democracy and fundamental freedoms .
I also support the position of the rapporteur on improvement of the strategic planning sector .
This is particularly important in the prevention of social conflicts and in the creation of the External Action Service .
- Mr President , having voted for the Brantner report , I would like to use this opportunity to turn the Commission 's and Council 's attention to the need to reach a tripartite agreement on the modification of the stability instrument in the shortest possible time .
The disputed issue relates to the delegated acts and Parliament 's options to exercise its rightful scrutiny over the use of the EU 's financial instruments .
What we need is a rapid political solution based on balance between the EU 's three institutions .
I would also encourage the Commission to improve its reporting to the European Parliament on such issues as project design , implementation and review .
While Parliament receives information from the Commission on exceptional assistance measures , the Commission 's reporting on broader strategic and analytical terms is still falling short of Parliament 's expectations .
( PL ) The instrument for development cooperation contributes directly to the spread of democracy , the rule of law and respect for human rights in partner countries and regions .
It provides support , not only for lasting social , economic and political development , but also for gradual integration of these countries with the world economy .
As a member of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , I would like to point out yet one more benefit arising from this cooperation , namely international cooperation in the management of natural resources , protection of the environment and care for biodiversity .
I support , in particular , Amendment 5 , which draws attention to the importance of the sugar sector to the economy .
We should not forget that food security is of enormous importance to developing countries .
- Mr President , I was delighted to vote in favour of this report .
I would like to say that the rapporteur , my colleague Mr Gay Mitchell , could not be here today as last night he was in Ireland launching a book he had written .
Of course , he was recognised as MEP of the year for his work in the whole development area .
One point that I think we need to stress more is education .
An Irish educationalist once said ' educate that you may be free ' , and I think we need to home in on this a bit more in the whole area of development and third countries .
Finally , I just want to say jocosely that my suit was stolen from my office last night ; do I qualify for development aid as a result of that ?
( HU ) I welcome the Commission 's proposal to review the European standardisation system in order to correct its deficiencies and create a proper balance among the European , national and international dimensions .
We need a system that contributes to European innovation and sustainable development , increases the competitiveness of the European Union , and strengthens its position in international trade .
I would also like to add that although SMEs are fundamental parts of the European market , I believe that they do not participate in the standardisation system sufficiently , therefore they are not able to take full advantage of the benefits of standardisation .
The improvement of their representation and participation in the system may be of fundamental importance in the future .
The unifying nature of European standardisation improves the efficiency of the internal market , and , at the same time , emphasises the European Union 's role as an economic and political partner on the world market .
( ET ) I would like to speak about Mrs Muscardini 's report .
I did not support it , having given careful consideration to all the issues contained therein .
Why ?
Because the rest of the world would interpret the European Union 's imposition of such a measure at this time as a protectionist step .
The monitoring of this measure would require much more time , and potentially also more staff , unpacking of items and other procedures .
The obligatory marking requirement will be an incentive to start counterfeiting parts of anonymous goods .
So instead of an actual labelling of the specific country , we may find fake ' made in Italy ' , ' made in France ' labelling , and we do not want that .
( LT ) I voted for the motion for a resolution on Moldova .
Moldova has come a long way since the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact divided Europe into zones of influence and Moldova remained in the Soviet sphere of influence .
Today Moldova is an independent state , which admittedly has many problems , but which is following the road to European integration .
Today once again I would like to call on the whole of Moldova 's political class , its political elite , all of its democratic political forces and national minorities to reject counterproductive confrontation , and to develop a culture of consensus and political compromise .
I think they should offer society an inclusive vision of the Republic of Moldova , whose objective is European Union Membership for the Republic of Moldova .
In the resolution we also speak about Transnistria , the frozen conflict .
Transnistria must be high on the EU agenda and all countries , including Russia , must respect Moldova 's territorial integrity .
Transnistria must be part of the Republic of Moldova .
( LT ) I voted for the resolution on integrated maritime policy ( IMP ) , because the maritime sector is vitally important and I want to leave future generations clean and safe seas .
The geostrategic importance of the seas has increased greatly .
We must adapt the seas and their resources and coordinate actions , therefore the integrated maritime policy is important as all areas of maritime policy will be linked : maritime transport , fishing , aquaculture , energy , safety at sea , protection of the maritime environment and scientific research as well as tourism .
In particular I would like to draw attention to the economic and social importance simply because the European Union has 320 000 km of sea coast and a third of our citizens - and the trend is rising - live on the coast .
I believe that the seas should continue to be the driving force of economic growth .
( SK ) The European Union represents the biggest source of direct international investment in Latin America .
Even though trade between these two regions has intensified , mutual trading between the EU and Latin America is less dynamic compared to trade relations with other regions of the world .
The recently concluded agreement on free trade zone with Korea is an example of good will , while in the case of the Latin American trade group MERCOSUR , negotiations have been conducted since as early as 1999 , having even been interrupted for five years .
I personally support the process of strengthening and diversifying trade relations with Latin America , including the establishment of a firmer legal framework .
This opens up a market of nearly 600 million consumers to the European Union entrepreneur .
The fact that Latin America shares with Europe common values , language , history and culture is also of some significance for European Union traders .
Mr President , I would like to commend the rapporteur on trade with Latin America for this eventually well-balanced and timely report .
The deepening of trade relations with the Latin American countries is already under way , as the European Union has recently concluded a Free Trade Agreement with two Andean countries , Colombia and Peru .
Recently , we finished the longest-standing dispute in the WTO with Latin American countries on trade in bananas .
We will soon start negotiating a milestone Free Trade Agreement with all of the Mercosur countries with which we conduct more than EUR 62 billion of trade in goods .
The EU 's investment stock in the Mercosur region amounts to EUR 167 billion a year .
These numbers are only set to grow in the coming years .
The conclusion of such an agreement , along with the upcoming free trade negotiations with Japan and India , will undoubtedly be one of the most significant steps in implementing the EU 's strategy of becoming the most important trade player in the world .
Mr President , if any of our constituents felt a ' twitch in the force ' yesterday afternoon , it was because of the extraordinary coincidence of timing that , at the very moment when the British Chancellor of the Exchequer was on his feet in the House of Commons announcing the most severe spending reductions that my country has known since the 1920s , we in this Chamber were voting through increases in the European budget which will cost the United Kingdom taxpayer GBP 880 million .
That is not our share of the budget .
That is our share of the increase .
Since we announced yesterday 490 000 job losses in the public sector , it is perhaps worth quantifying that sum in terms of public sector appointments .
It would have paid for 15 000 National Health Service doctors , for 30 000 nurses , for 35 000 police officers or for 50 000 army privates .
It is not just Britain .
All of our Member States are looking to make reductions in their national budgets and yet the European Union budget keeps expanding , soaking up their savings .
If only the hunger of this Chamber for new powers were matched by its interest in exercising properly the powers it already has - above all to hold the executive to account and to keep spending under control .
Our voters deserve better of us .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to respond briefly to what Mr Hannan has just said .
It is , of course , essential for this Parliament to have a seat , but the seat is established by our treaties and it is here in Strasbourg .
You are right to say that we need to save taxpayers ' money and that we must work towards being based in one place .
However , the refuge of parliamentarianism , Mr Hannan , is here in Strasbourg .
This is where we as Members of Parliament and representatives of the people can work together .
Excuse me , this cannot be continued .
This is not an explanation of votes .
Contributions are now welcome to the next report , the Estrella report .
( PL ) During yesterday 's vote on the Estrela report , I endorsed fully-paid 20-week maternity leave , because we need a fair and adequate minimum standard concerning the length and payment of maternity leave throughout Europe .
I abstained from voting on the question of paternity leave and adoption leave , because the European Commission has announced that there will be a separate directive on this matter , and out of concern for the transparency of Union law I do not want the directive on the protection of pregnant workers to include questions of paternity leave .
I hope the European Commission will soon finish its social consultations and present satisfactory proposals on paternity leave and adoption leave and also on the self-employed , so that all young mothers in Europe will have the same entitlement .
( LT ) I doubt if anyone would argue that the bond between a child and its parents in the first months of life is especially important , thus the new European Union directive will ensure mothers ' right and opportunity to take care of their children for longer without fear of losing income or their job .
The situation varies across the different Member States .
For instance in my country Lithuania maternity leave plus parental leave last up to two years , but other Member States have a minimum amount of maternity leave , therefore I believe that the threshold we set yesterday is a very important achievement .
I also welcome the inclusion of both paternity leave and leave related to adoption .
As said , Member States have competence over family policy , but here we are talking more of worker protection and certain incentives to enable parents to reconcile work and family life .
( FI ) Mr President , yesterday we did indeed vote on Mrs Estrela 's important report on maternity leave , how long it should be , and the money paid while it lasts .
After this vote the media called and asked me a number of times whether I had voted for or against .
I said that I had voted for women .
I voted for maternity leave to last 18 weeks and for women to receive 75 % of their pay .
I think that we have a good system in my country , Finland .
If they adopted the system that we agreed on yesterday there , the position of women in the labour market would be substantially weaker , because employers would have to continue to agonise over whether they could take young women on , because the costs of maternity leave would increase significantly .
Opportunities for women to find work would therefore decline .
That is why I wanted to make this statement .
( FI ) Mr President , I am also from Finland , and I know that we have an excellent maternity leave system .
I nevertheless voted in favour of maternity leave lasting 20 weeks .
I was thinking about the issue from the perspective of the other Member States of the European Union .
I believe that longer periods of maternity leave are important for children 's development .
Newborn children are Europe 's real capital .
Mothers , children and families are the trinity on which the future will be built .
Obviously too , mothers should not have to suffer financially if they want to have children , and the femaledominated sectors should not either .
Women must also have rights when it comes to pay .
We should be idealistic , however .
We should have faith .
This was a moral decision in favour of women , in favour of new life , and in favour of a new Europe .
( DE ) Mr President , the Estrela report yesterday covered a very important topic .
I would like to say at this point that it was rather difficult for me to vote in favour of it .
As a young father , I was present at the birth of both my children and I have to say that I do not know why I would have needed a holiday then , because I did not give birth , my wife did .
This is all about maternity leave and we have included fathers .
It is difficult point .
Nevertheless , it is important for young women to have the opportunity to have a child and then to return to their professional life .
I believe that this will be possible under the new system .
Although I would personally have preferred 18 weeks , I did eventually vote in favour of 20 weeks in the final vote .
We must now ask ourselves whether this will bring more justice and more children in Europe .
Family policy in Europe is an issue for the future .
I hope that we are sending out a signal that we have taken action in this area .
Now we just have to hope that the Member States take corresponding measures .
Written explanations of vote
I voted in favour of this report amending the Regulation establishing an Instrument for Stability because I consider a broader revision of the EU 's external financial assistance to be essential .
The implementation of the Instrument for Stability reinforced the EU 's potential to respond to crisis or emerging crisis situations .
With this in mind I believe that the Commission - while respecting the undertakings that have been made , namely with regard to promoting stable conditions for human and economic development and promoting human rights , democracy and fundamental freedoms as the main objectives of the European Union 's external action - should , on the one hand , improve its strategic planning and increase disbursement of the funds available for the Peace-building Partnership and , on the other hand , present a plan for mobilising financial resources for any emergency external assistance facilities or mechanisms created outside the Instrument for Stability in order to avoid having to draw on the funds allocated for this Instrument .
To this end , I believe that the Commission should increase the low levels of budget disbursement in the future , based on a strategic vision for better use of its instruments .
I voted in favour of Mrs Brantner 's report , since it is a text that first and foremost proposes bringing European legislation into line with an important Court of Justice ruling on small arms .
A text that calls on the EU to pay greater attention to civil society within the context of stability funding for crisis situations outside the EU , even though I believe that the European institutions , especially the Commission , should be vigilant in ensuring something that does not always happen , namely that the recipients give an undertaking that they are politically ' trustworthy ' .
Furthermore , with this report Parliament is asking the Commission to involve it more than it has done previously in matters relating to the use of financial stability instruments .
Our Parliament , which represents the European nations and citizens , must play a more active role in these matters , and the other European institutions must get used to the idea that a parliament must be informed of the spending decisions made by an executive : at stake is the effectiveness not only of individual actions , but of the democratic nature of the European political system as a whole .
The European continent has been shaped by long and bloody conflicts , which have finally been stemmed by , among others , the institutions in which we work .
We should therefore be the ones who , in the first instance , demonstrate the greatest sense of responsibility with regard to the use of force in international conflicts .
Moreover , even when force proves necessary , the current state of our civilisation calls for surgical rather than wholesale methods .
Believing as we do in this cultural model , we have to set an example to everyone else and show that it must not be greater economic strength that makes a difference in the resolution of conflicts , but a range of instruments that always put human life first , and which permit the use of violence only in extreme cases , especially to protect the lives and strategic interests of the European public .
It is not a question of taking a stand a priori , but of adopting a consistent and rigorous approach in which military capacity is merely a deterrent and will never become a vehicle for radically changing the nature of the European Union or promoting a system of values other than the one upheld .
The EU is the world 's largest donor of foreign aid , being responsible for over half of public development assistance .
Together , the Member States awarded EUR 49 billion in aid to the world 's poorest countries : the equivalent of almost 0.4 % of their gross income .
These figures are a good demonstration of the importance of European development assistance and , naturally , of the significance of the Instrument for Stability .
That is why I see the strengthening of this instrument and the Union 's greater commitment to development cooperation as important .
Nevertheless , I cannot fail to stress that , while I consider it absolutely crucial that the EU remains committed to its foreign development-cooperation and humanitarian-aid missions , I cannot understand how it is possible that aid for third countries can be released more quickly than that for Member States that are the victims of disasters as has , unfortunately , been the case with Madeira : several months after the tragedy , it has still not received any aid from the Solidarity Fund .
The Instrument for Stability is very important for strengthening the EU 's ability to respond to situations of crisis or emerging crisis .
Since the EU is the world 's main donor of external aid and responsible for more than half of public development aid , it needs instruments that allow it to deal with crises , taking into consideration the EU 's horizontal and geographical objectives and priorities , while simultaneously complementing the Union 's geographical policies , objectives and instruments .
In terms of development , the EU 's objectives should be the fight against poverty and its causes .
in writing . - ( ES ) My vote against this legislative resolution is based on my outright rejection of the Instrument for Stability established several years ago without the support of my parliamentary group .
From my point of view , this is yet another of the Commission 's mechanisms designed to interfere freely in the internal affairs of third countries under the pretext of seeking the political stability of those countries that are considered unstable at the Commission 's discretion .
It wants the European institutions to be the ones to decide how , when and why to use this tool , freely and without the need to coordinate with the authorities of the country to be stabilised ; this makes it a de facto mechanism designed for the covert defence of European interests .
I therefore voted against the report .
in writing . - Conflicts in Haiti , Kosovo , Iraq , and more recently in Afghanistan have shed light on the crucial role that small arms and light weapons play in terrorism and organized crime , and in igniting new rounds of bloodshed after formal cease-fire .
It is important that the Community adopts a truly comprehensive approach to the problem of SALW proliferation by targeting all levels of the illicit SALW trade chain .
Given that 70 % of global SALW stockpile is in civilian hands , EU should recognize and support the indispensible efforts of civil society in monitoring SALW trade and production at the local level and in raising public awareness .
In addition , the SALW issue reveals the multidimensional nature of 21st century conflicts in general , and thereby the need for a stronger focus in pre- and post-crisis capacity building .
I voted in favour of this report because I believe that EU should strive to hone its ability to manage crisis in the most innovative , efficient and cost-effective manner .
Only then would EU be able to lead the world as a foremost global civilian power .
in writing . - With this vote , Parliament has followed AFET 's position in welcoming the Commission 's proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and the Council amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1717 / 2006 establishing an Instrument for Stability , as part of a wider review of the external financial assistance of the EU .

Among other things , AFET , and now Parliament as a whole , agrees that a revision of Article 3 ( 2 ) ( i ) and Article 4 ( 1 ) ( a ) of the original regulation are necessary in order to bring it into line with the ruling of the European Court of Justice of 20 May 2008 , which found that measures against the proliferation of small arms and light weapons may be implemented by the Community under its development policy .
The Presidency , on behalf of the Council and along with the Commission and Parliament , is invited to develop a ' Declaration on a European Consensus in support of EU Action on SALW ' , which takes into account the respective competences of all institutions .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the report on the financing instrument for development cooperation ( DCI ) because I believe that Parliament has closely monitored the way in which the DCI 's provisions have been implemented since it came into force in 2007 .
In its legislative proposal for the mid-term review of the DCI , the Commission only suggested a technical amendment to allow the costs relating to taxes , duties and other charges related to the financing of the actions covered by the DCI in beneficiary countries to be financed from the DCI budget .
I believe that this amendment will make it possible for these costs to be financed in exceptional circumstances , thus creating greater flexibility in the implementation of programmes and projects .
I abstained from voting on this specific report , despite the fact that I agree and support the proposed amendments , especially those which restore the controlling role of the European Parliament .
I abstained in the final vote on the financing instrument for development cooperation , because the money has been used , directly or indirectly , to arm and train the police and the military in various areas of Africa .
In my opinion , financing for development should not , under any circumstances , be used for military or politico-military purposes .
in writing . - ( RO ) We are all aware that the Development Cooperation Instrument ( DCI ) does not provide for any exception to the principle of non-eligibility for Community financing .
As a result , this allows a certain degree of flexibility on a case-by-case basis .
The authorising officer can , if appropriate , decide to fund these costs to ensure the smooth running of the programmes and projects .
However , this flexibility is essential for certain recurring situations where deadlock occurs because tax exemption mechanisms are absent or impractical .
In these situations , the rigid formulation of the DCI instruments may make the action financed by external aid extremely difficult .
This is why I support the proposal to submit a request to the Commission to table legislative proposals for alignment with the RPS procedure and to ensure that this instrument complies with the new comitology requirements .
in writing . - ( PT ) I am voting overall in favour of the proposal presented in this report .
The financing instrument for development cooperation ( DCI ) improves the European Union 's previous development cooperation framework by combining the various geographical and thematic instruments into a single instrument .
In conjunction with the technical amendments related to the financing of the actions covered by the DCI , which aim at greater flexibility in the implementation of their projects and programmes , the mid-term review of this instrument provides an ideal occasion for adapting the DCI comitology procedure to the new comitology requirements .
The amendment in question is merely technical and is aimed at allowing costs related to taxes , duties and other charges to be financed from Union aid in exceptional circumstances .
These exceptional circumstances may be justified in individual cases , enabling increased flexibility in how projects and programmes are implemented .
The unanimous support that it received in the relevant committee demonstrates the consensus behind the proposal .
in writing . - I absolutely agree with and support the tabled amendments , especially the ones on the delegated acts and restoring the European Parliament 's right of scrutiny .
But I abstained on the final vote on the Instrument ( DCI ) itself as , directly or indirectly , the African Peace Facility was funded through this instrument , and this funding was used inter alia for police and army training missions .
I am of the opinion that development funding must not be used for any military or civil-military purposes .
The financing instrument for development cooperation is another very important argument for strengthening the EU 's ability to respond to situations of crisis or emerging crisis .
Since the EU is the world 's main donor of external aid and responsible for more than half of public development aid , it needs instruments that allow it to deal with crises , taking into consideration the EU 's horizontal and geographical objectives and priorities , while simultaneously complementing the Union 's geographical policies , objectives and instruments .
In terms of development , the EU 's objectives should be the fight against poverty and its causes .
There was a need to ensure that costs relating to taxes , duties and other charges relating to the financing of actions under the Development Cooperation Instrument ( DCI ) could be financed from the DCI budget in exceptional circumstances .
The overall objective of the DCI is to eradicate poverty within the context of sustainable development , with efforts to achieve the Millennium Development Goals ( MDGs ) included in this .
This amendment will create greater flexibility in the implementation of geographical and thematic programmes .
It will help partner countries to achieve the MDGs and to better integrate the global economy .
As a whole , all five European Parliament reports on the financing instruments address the need to ensure greater control over the financing instruments for development cooperation , for the promotion of democracy and human rights and for cooperation with industrialised nations .
In view of the excessive bureaucracy and not always rational use of the opportunities open to the EU , this type of resolution could serve as a catalyst and speed up the processes described in the reports .
In the given situation , Members of the European Parliament become participants in the stabilisation and improvement process , by being given the opportunity to observe and control fund allocation processes .
in writing . - Parliament has closely scrutinised the way the provisions of the DCI are implemented ever since it came into force in 2007 .
In the exercise of its right of scrutiny under the Comitology procedure , Parliament has raised a number of problems and objections regarding the way the Commission implemented the instrument , and the interpretation it gave to some of its core provisions .
Parliament , however , did not find any major shortcomings in the provisions of the instrument as such .
One of Parliament 's major concerns , the propensity of the Commission to finance under the geographical programmes measures not eligible , under the internationally accepted criteria of the OECD / DAC , as Official Development Assistance ( ODA ) , has recently been solved by the Commission when it proposed , at Parliament 's request , the creation of a new legal basis for such measures under the Instrument for Cooperation with Industrialised Countries .
I voted in favour of Mr Mitchell 's report on establishing a financing instrument for development cooperation .
Indeed , the adoption of the Mitchell report will enable non-governmental organisations operating in developing countries to benefit from tax concessions .
By adopting these procedures the European Parliament will assume a more important role with regard to the strategic financing decisions that the European Commission will have to make , and the rules for implementing EU development policy will be more clearly defined .
I voted in favour of the report on the financing instrument for cooperation with industrialised and other high-income countries and territories ( ICI Regulation ) which aims to support economic , financial and technical cooperation , as well as research and academic exchange falling within the Community 's spheres of competence .
I believe that the changes proposed by the Commission are substantial , since all the current references to partner countries ( which , so far only covered the industrialised and other high-income countries and territories ) , including their qualitative assessment , must also begin to include the developing countries listed .
This broader geographical coverage represents an opportunity , as programmes currently funded under the ICI Regulations can now be extended to other countries .
However , this also presents a greater challenge .
It is therefore important to make very clear to whom this financing can be given , for what and under what conditions .
I am voting in favour of the set of proposals presented in this report .
The EIDHR , as a financial instrument that aims to promote the development and consolidation of democracy and the rule of law , as well as contributing to respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in third countries , is an important channel for the Union 's aid in terms of rights , freedoms and guarantees .
The Commission 's legislative proposal for a mid-term review of the EIDHR provides a suitable opportunity for reviewing the legal basis of this instrument , ensuring that henceforth it complies with the new requirements set out in the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ( TFEU ) .
In particular , these include the delegated acts procedure ( Article 290 TFEU ) , which significantly strengthens Parliament 's powers and grants it the right of veto , requiring the Commission to present an amended proposal for acts adopted under codecision .


Like the resolution arising from the report drawn up by my colleague Mr Mitchell amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1905 / 2006 establishing a financing instrument for development cooperation , and Regulation ( EC ) No 1889 / 2006 on establishing a financing instrument for the promotion of democracy and human rights worldwide , this resolution too recognises the need to make an eminently technical amendment to legislation along the same lines .
I believe that the European Union should continue to play a central role in defending and promoting democracy and human rights , not just in its discourse but above all in its political practice ; it is absolutely necessary , and even urgent , to do this in a way that is coordinated with the United States .
With today 's vote we have taken steps to align two important legislative instruments with the Treaty of Lisbon .
I refer specifically to the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending the Regulation establishing a financing instrument for development cooperation ( DCI ) and the Regulation establishing a financing instrument for the promotion of democracy and human rights worldwide ( EIDHR ) .
Technical amendments have been tabled in order to allow the costs of taxes and charges relating to the financing of common actions in these fields to be financed from the budget for the two instruments .
Until now , in fact , there have been no exceptions to the principle of non-eligibility of such costs .
To conclude , I would emphasise that these amendments have a great practical impact , in that they will enable EIDHR and DCI projects to be implemented with greater flexibility than at present .
The financing instrument for the promotion of democracy and human rights worldwide is another very important argument for strengthening the EU 's ability to respond to situations of crisis or emerging crisis .
Since the EU is the world 's main donor of external aid and responsible for more than half of public development aid , it needs instruments that allow it to deal with crises , taking into consideration the EU 's horizontal and geographical objectives and priorities , while simultaneously complementing the Union 's geographical policies , objectives and instruments .
In terms of development , the EU 's objectives should be the fight against poverty and its causes .
In the specific case of this instrument , this legislative proposal is aimed solely at a technical amendment that will make this instrument more flexible when implementing programmes and projects .
in writing . - ( ES ) I voted against this report because , although it seeks to give Parliament greater democratic control over the ' instrument for the promotion of democracy and human rights worldwide ' , the instrument itself , whether or not it is controlled by Parliament , is a means for the EU to interfere in the internal affairs of third countries .
Using this instrument , the Commission , applying its own criteria to decide what is meant by promoting democracy and human rights , and what constitutes the risk , abuse or repression of those rights , has the option of using its own discretion to finance and support associations , political parties , foundations and even specific individuals from third countries without communicating or coordinating with the government of the country in question .
My vote against is based on my outright rejection of this instrument , which , four years after its adoption and as we said at the time , has become a tool for the covert defence of EU interests in third countries , disguising that defence under the discretionary mantle of human rights and democracy .
in writing . - In its legislative proposal for the mid-term review of the Development Cooperation Instrument ( DCI ) and the European Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights ( EIDHR ) , the Commission only proposes one technical amendment allowing costs related to taxes , duties and other charges related to the financing of actions under the DCI and EIDHR in beneficiary countries , to be financed from the budget of the instruments .
So far , DCI and EIDHR have been the only financial instruments not to provide for an exception to the principle of the non-eligibility of such costs .
The amendment will allow for the financing of these costs in exceptional circumstances , thus creating greater flexibility in the implementation of programmes and projects .
For EIDHR projects , this is particularly important , given the special circumstances in which they are carried out .
Governments might indeed be reluctant to grant exemptions for projects they do not support .
The proposed amendment by the Commission should therefore be welcomed .
I voted in favour of the report on the financing instrument for cooperation with industrialised and other high-income countries and territories ( ICI Regulation ) which aims to support economic , financial and technical cooperation , as well as research and academic exchange falling within the Community 's spheres of competence , because I believe that the changes proposed by the Commission are substantial , since all the current references to partner countries ( which , so far only covered the industrialised and other high-income countries and territories ) , including their qualitative assessment , must also begin to include the listed developing countries .
This broader geographical coverage represents an opportunity , as programmes currently funded under the ICI Regulations can now be extended to other countries .
However , this also represents a greater challenge .
It is therefore important to make very clear to whom this financing can be given , for what and under what conditions .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted in favour of Mr Scholz 's report because I believe that trade policy plays a crucial role in creating wealth and consolidating political ties .
The instrument for cooperation with industrialised and other high-income countries and territories encourages long-term political and economic ties , with the aim of consolidating the EU 's profile and influence on the international stage .
I wish to congratulate Mr Scholz for his excellent cooperation with the other political groups during the negotiation of this report 's content .
In this regard , I support the amendments which have been tabled as they explain the purposes for which this financing instrument can be used .
On this point , the wording has been simplified and certain restrictions have been set on the framework of actions which can be financed .
There are also some amendments aimed at creating a closer link between the issues covered in the programming and execution phase .
I finally wish to emphasise how important it is to consolidate Parliament 's role in terms of its involvement in programming , evaluation and reporting activities .
Parliament must be more involved in drafting and revising the multiannual cooperation programmes , as well as be able to lodge objections against proposals of this kind .
I voted in favour of the European Parliament resolution as I believe that it is in the interests of the Union to further deepen its relations with developing countries , in particular in areas such as economic , commercial , academic , business and scientific exchanges .
The Union therefore needs a financial instrument that allows for the financing of such measures .
On the other hand , extending the geographical scope of Regulation ( EC ) No 1934 / 2006 brings the developing countries concerned within the scope of two different external action financial instruments .
Care should be taken to ensure that these two financial instruments are kept strictly separate from one other .
Parliament has advocated the extension of the geographical scope of the financial instrument for cooperation with industrialised countries and other high-income countries and territories .
This instrument allows us to establish economic , trade , university , scientific and diplomatic relations with major partners of the world economy such as India , China and Brazil .
We have decided to give this instrument a wider geographical scope in order to allow new countries to benefit from it , countries which are developing ever more rapidly and which will soon be significant trading partners for the European economy , such as countries in Asia , Central Asia , Latin America and South Africa .
I consider it essential for Europe to establish strong relations with certain regional and global players , by supporting them and establishing strong political and economic ties .
I would particularly recall two countries with which Portugal has strong historical and emotional ties : Brazil and Angola , two important global players in South America and Africa , respectively , that the EU should increasingly view as partners .
Given that the main general goal of Regulation ( EC ) No 1905 / 2006 is to eradicate poverty by achieving the Millennium Development Goals , cooperation is essentially limited to financing measures that have been designed to satisfy the applicable public development assistance ( PDA ) criteria .
That often excludes other types of action that do not come under the umbrella of PDA but that are , even so , essential to the Union 's foreign policy .
It is precisely in order to regulate such practices - that include economic , trade , academic , business and science agreements and exchanges with developing countries - that the adoption of this regulation is being proposed .
The financing instrument for cooperation with industrialised countries and territories is a financing instrument for cooperation with industrialised and other high-income countries and territories .
It aims to support economic , financial and technical cooperation , as well as academic and research exchanges .
The aim of this regulation is to broaden the scope of this instrument substantially to include cooperation with developing countries , for which the overall financial framework should be increased .
The geographical expansion proposed here is an opportunity to take the programmes to new countries and is also a major challenge , meaning that it is important to make it very clear to whom this financing can be given , for what and under what conditions .
in writing . - ( DE ) The bilateral relationships between the industrialised nations and other high-income countries and territories , in particular in North America , East Asia , South-East Asia and the Gulf region , have been developed by the EU in recent years .
The main objective of this is to enhance and strengthen the role of the EU in the world as a whole .
Now the list of countries that come within the sphere of competence of the ICI regulation , which establishes a financing instrument for cooperation with industrialised and other high-income countries and territories , will be significantly extended .
This will result in a considerable increase in costs for the EU Member States .
I have voted against the report , because it is likely to cause costs to skyrocket .
I voted in favour of the European Parliament resolution as I believe that it is in the interests of the Union to further deepen its relations with developing countries , in particular in areas such as economic , commercial , academic , business and scientific exchanges .
The Union therefore needs a financial instrument that allows for the financing of such measures .
On the other hand , extending the geographical scope of Regulation ( EC ) No 1934 / 2006 brings the developing countries concerned within the scope of two different external action financial instruments .
Care should be taken to ensure that these two financial instruments are kept strictly separate from one other .
in writing . - The objective of Community financing under Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1934 / 2006 establishing a financing instrument for cooperation with industrialised and other high-income countries and territories ( hereinafter ' ICI Regulation ' ) is to support economic , financial and technical cooperation , as well as research and academic exchange falling within Community 's spheres of competence .
As the Committee responsible for ' Union 's ... external economic relations ' , including " financial , economic and trade relations with third countries ” ( i.e. with both developing and non-developing countries ) , the Committee on International Trade ( INTA ) was also the lead Committee at the time of adoption of original ICI Regulation enabling INTA not only to analyze this Commission proposal in detail , but also to look at a broader historical and institutional context .
The Commission 's proposal for amending the ICI Regulation / 2 ) is proposed in order to significantly extend the geographical scope of the ICI Regulation to include cooperation with developing countries ( listed in the Annex of the proposal ) and the overall financial framework would be significantly increased in relation thereto .
Even though the changes proposed by the Commission may seem few in formal terms , they are substantial as all current references to partner countries ( so far covering only industrialised and high-income countries and territories ) , including their qualitative assessment , would include also the listed developing countries .
I voted in favour of the European Parliament 's resolution .
However , I believe that the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council , by drastically reducing the margin of heading 4 of the multiannual financial framework for 2007-2013 , does not leave sufficient room for manoeuvre to face and to react appropriately to a potential upcoming crisis .
By exercising its right of control as part of the comitology procedure , Parliament has highlighted a number of problems and raised a number of objections .
They generally concern the way in which the Commission has implemented the instrument and interpreted some of the instrument 's basic provisions .
These objections form the basis for the amendments proposed by the European Parliament 's specialist committees , which have been noted by the European Commission .
They resolve the problem raised by the Commission 's proposal to introduce an identical amendment for both Regulation ( EC ) No 1905 / 2006 ( DCI ) and Regulation ( EC ) No 1889 / 2006 ( EIDHR ) , which come under the remit of two different European Parliament committees - the Committee on Development for the DCI and the Committee on Foreign Affairs for the EIDHR - by splitting the proposal into two different legislative proposals which we are due to approve today .
in writing . - ( RO ) I agree with the measures being proposed , which can be integrated at an earlier stage in the multiannual financial framework , as the problem to do with the trade in bananas is still going on .
I am voting in favour of the proposals contained in this report in general .
I believe that the role of the European Parliament is eminently political with regard to the Commission 's proposal to create a programme of accompanying measures for Africa-Caribbean-Pacific ( ACP ) banana-producing countries .
I also believe that this programme can only legitimised by a paradigm shift from a purely commercial angle to the broader and more integrated one of development and the fight against poverty ( goal number one of the Millennium Development Goals ) .
As EU-ACP preference agreements are incompatible with the agreements signed between the EU and the World Trade Organisation and since positive results have been obtained in the ACP banana-producing countries under previous preference agreements , we should support the adjustment , reorganisation and competitiveness of the banana exporting sector in these countries .
In a broad sense , these accompanying measures for the banana sector should have a positive impact , not only for the producers , the first link in the production chain , but also with regard to the criteria for the fight against poverty .
In this way , the whole chain may benefit from decent , acceptable living conditions and easier access to the markets .
Economic , financial and technical cooperation , as well as exchanges at the academic and research level , between the Union and third countries constitute one of the priorities for European foreign policy : efforts in this area must be supported .
The amendment of the regulation that the Commission is proposing enlarges the sphere of its application to a large number of developing countries .
As the rapporteur makes very explicit in his explanatory statement , this change constitutes an opportunity , but it is also a larger challenge to the proper utilisation of this instrument , which could lose in consistency that which it gains in scope .
This expansion requires additional financing and , at the same time , for resources to be made available in a way that is even more discriminating and rigorous , at the risk of dispersing funds that could be mobilised for cooperation projects that are effective and fruitful .
The reasons justifying our abstention on this vote are the same as those justifying it in the vote on the report on the budgetary review to establish financial assistance for countries of the African , Caribbean and Pacific Group of States ( ACP ) that will be affected by the liberalisation of the banana trade between the EU and 11 Latin American countries .
This liberalisation will mainly benefit the US multinationals that dominate the world market in the sector .
As for the ACP countries , as several of their representatives have already stated , including some local producers , there is no chance that the sum of EUR 200 million that the EU is proposing to allocate to them will compensate them for all the effects resulting from these measures .
We must therefore ask : what was the basis of the impact assessment carried out by the Commission following the signing of the Geneva Agreement ?
Once again , the EU 's proclaimed objectives in the field of development , particularly as regards poverty reduction , are subject to the commercial interests of its economic groups .
Therefore , saying that the aim is ' improving the living standards and living conditions of people in banana growing areas and banana value chains , specifically small farmers and small entities ' unfortunately has little meaning .
I abstained on the report establishing a financing instrument for the restructuring of the banana sector in the African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) States .
Firstly , I regret that this financing instrument has a budget of EUR 190 million , when the ACP countries have estimated that they need a minimum of EUR 500 million to enable them to restructure the sector and become competitive .
Secondly , I regret that this report attempts , under the guide of agricultural diversification ( an objective that nonetheless receives little support from the EU in the Economic Partnership Agreements under negotiation with the ACP countries ) , to use a financing instrument to manage the rapid disappearance ( in the space of three years ) of the banana sector in the ACP countries , for the benefit of Latin American producers , who are already leaders in the global market with a share of more than 70 % of the export market .
I did not wish to vote against this report , either , because the ACP countries and Europe 's banana-producing regions urgently need assistance to cope with the consequences that have already made themselves felt following the Geneva Agreements and other bilateral agreements that have brought the customs duties on Latin American bananas down from EUR 185 to EUR 74 a tonne .
The financial instrument for development cooperation is yet another element that is extremely important in reinforcing the EU 's ability to respond to situations of crisis or emerging crisis .
As the EU is the world 's largest donor of external aid , and as it is responsible for more than half of the public aid provided for development , it needs instruments that allow it to handle crisis situations , considering the EU 's horizontal and geographic objectives and priorities , while simultaneously making these actions complementary to the Union 's geographic policies and its objectives and instruments .
When development is the issue , the EU 's objectives must be to fight poverty and its causes .
in writing . - ( DE ) It is important and right to support the poorest countries by providing them with targeted and sustainable development aid .
We must help the local people to help themselves in order to reduce the flow of migrants to the EU from developing countries .
I therefore voted in favour of this report .
I voted in favour of the resolution of the European Parliament , despite the fact that the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council , by drastically reducing the margin under heading 4 in the 2007-2013 Multiannual Financial Framework , does not leave sufficient room for manoeuvre to face and react appropriately to a potential future crisis .
in writing . - The aim of the Commission proposal is to support the main banana-exporting countries in Africa , the Caribbean and the Pacific ( ACP ) via banana accompanying measures ( BAMs ) , which are intended to last four years ( 2010-2013 ) .
Although measures for which funding was provided in the past ( special framework of assistance , SFA ) were designed to help the ACP countries adjust to changing trends in international competition , we are still faced with similar problems today , and ' the sustainability of ACP banana exports remains fragile ' .
We must therefore look at the issue from the point of view of development aid and combating poverty .
Our job in the EP has been to check that the proposed measures seek to attain the main objective of the EU 's development policy , which is to reduce and ultimately eradicate poverty .
I voted for this report because European consumers are entitled to know the origin of the products which they purchase .
In other words , they enjoy the same rights as citizens and consumers in other large countries .
This regulation ensures that , finally , consumers in the European Union will enjoy the same rights as millions of other consumers around the world , albeit for a limited number of product categories .
In cases where there are various conflicting interests , we have a duty to protect our consumers , regardless of the interests of large distributors or individual lobby groups .
Our fellow citizens must be better informed about country of origin marking and must be able to make purchases in full knowledge of the facts .
Europeans still do not know , in fact , whether they are buying goods that have genuinely been produced in Israel or which have come from Israeli colonies in Palestinian territories .
The standardisation of origin marking practices in the Union , particularly for agricultural products that come from Israel and the Palestinian territories , is directed to this end .
I support this report because I firmly believe that origin marking based on a clear and effective method is necessary information for European consumers , who have to be able to choose to buy a product knowing where it has come from .
Origin marking , in fact , is indicative of many other equally fundamental factors relating to the country or countries in which the production stages are carried out .
I believe that the European Union should take a step forward in guaranteeing greater protection for European consumers .
By voting in favour of the report on country-of-origin markings on certain products from countries outside the EU , Parliament is responding to the expectations of consumers for improved transparency in products .
The European consumer will henceforth enjoy , as do Chinese and American consumers , the right to know the provenance of products .
This proposal for a regulation will allow European businesses to promote their know-how , traditional methods of production and the high quality of their work .
Finally , it provides fair conditions of competition between European businesses and the trading partners of the European Union which , in their case , already enjoy this kind of legislation .
European businesses manufacturing high-quality products of excellence will then benefit from an instrument to protect and promote them in order to support them in the face of tough competition from countries outside the European Union in certain sectors .
I voted for the report on the indication of the country of origin of certain products imported from third countries , because I consider it important to inform consumers accurately so that they can exercise freedom of choice .
European consumers have the right to know where the products that they buy come from , so that they can make informed choices .
If there is one area in which the EU 's involvement has been useful , it is in protecting consumer rights , by imposing rules that defend their rights and guarantee consumers enough information to consciously exercise their freedom of choice .
This has been one of the standards to which European consumers have become accustomed and to which European producers have adapted .
Therefore , for the sake of transparency and of protecting consumers , but also of protecting European producers , it is essential for goods imported from third countries to be correctly identified as such , noting their origin .
I would even go further : if Europe is so restrictive in the rules that it imposes on its producers , it should only allow products that comply with these same rules to be imported ; the rules for livestock rearing are a good example of this .
The alternative is to allow low-cost products that have been made without respecting Union law to enter the market and , therefore , enter into unfair competition with European products , the production and / or manufacture of which is far more expensive .
Our vote in favour of indicating the country of origin of certain products imported from third countries is linked to the need to make clearer the route that products have taken prior to reaching EU countries .
We must go further , given that this indication on its own will have a minimal impact unless accompanied by other measures .
A break with the current World Trade Organisation guidelines is urgently needed to enable countries to prioritise the development of their own production and markets , by monitoring imported goods , imposing the same minimum quality and technical criteria demanded of companies within the EU , combating dumping , effectively regulating the capital markets , penalising the relocation of companies , taxing financial transactions , and putting a stop to tax havens .
The establishment of more equitable and fairer economic relationships is needed .
These relationships would serve peoples and countries ; they would support development and cooperation based on equality between states , and the establishment of alliances and agreements with countries on all continents ; and they would combat the profound social injustices and inequalities of hunger , disease and poverty .
I welcome the approval by Parliament , by an overwhelming majority , of the introduction of a European marking system for goods imported from third countries .
It has been voluntary until now , and will become mandatory from now on within the Union .
Let us remember , in this respect , that the Union is not doing anything new in this domain .
The United States , for example , brought in a requirement of this kind in 1930 .
Nowadays , it is , indeed , essential for consumers throughout Europe to be better informed about the origin of the goods that they wish to purchase .
Only a system with clear rules is able to tell them about the social and environmental conditions of manufacturing , protect them from health risks and , finally , help them make informed decisions .
It is a victory not only for consumers , but also for European exporting companies which are already subject to strict requirements .
With this vote , the European Parliament has signed the defeat of a system of unfair competition , and has thereby ensured that those European businesses which have opted for high quality and employment are not unfairly penalised by more lax regulations applying to their competitors throughout the world .
in writing . - ( DE ) Without a doubt , European consumers have a right to be informed about products imported into the EU from third countries .
The highest possible level of transparency and maximum rights are needed in order for it to be possible to make objective purchasing decisions .
I am in general in favour of a project that aims to inform EU citizens of the origin of the raw materials used , the stages of production , but also the production , social and working conditions prevalent in the country in question .
Unfortunately , the Commission 's proposal does nothing of the kind .
The mandatory ' made-in ' regulation contained in the current version says nothing about the actual origin of a product or about the conditions under which it was produced and processed .
Even prominent European textile firms , despite voluntary self-regulation , are unable to guarantee that raw materials obtained from companies in third countries and used in their production have not been extracted using child labour .
I understand product transparency for consumers to mean something different .
This proposal does not go far enough and does not meet the information requirements of interested end users .
For these reasons , I was unable to support the Commission 's proposal .
in writing . - ( NL ) The Dutch People 's Party for Freedom and Democracy ( VVD ) in the European Parliament today backed the line of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe on origin marking , with the exception of Amendment 37 on pharmaceutical products .
We voted in favour of compulsory labelling of pharmaceutical products since we believe that consumers have the right to know where their medicines and so on come from .
In addition , labelling is important as it enables counterfeit medicines to be traced more effectively .
Fake medicines are the most commonly encountered of all the counterfeit products in the EU .
The European Parliament , which has always stood up for diversity , in defence of the cultures and traditions of individual countries , regards the regulation on compulsory origin labelling as being a necessary instrument to increase clarity , placing European consumers on an equal footing with the consumers of our trading partners .
It is also a way of developing trade relations and traditional economies more satisfactorily .
I am convinced that this proposal fulfils the aim of informing consumers accurately so that they can exercise freedom of choice in the purchases they make .
For many years we have clearly expressed our desire to place consumers , and consumer rights , at the heart of political and commercial decision making , in the belief that rules are necessary to make the global market fulfil more effectively its function , which is to boost development in the world and make it more homogeneous .
We regret that the Council has not yet reached a common position .
On the other hand , we have referred to the need to have clear legislation with definite rules that can at last protect our producers and our consumers , as happens in the rest of the world .
Thanks to the pressure that the Italian Government has been rightly exerting for years , an extremely important proposal has finally arrived in Parliament that will be of great use to consumers , in particular : they will be better informed about the geographical origin of certain categories of products .
At the same time , Europe is bringing its legislation into line with that of its most influential trade partners .
The aim is to create a level playing field between European producers and producers from third countries ( the United States , Japan and Canada ) , which , moreover , as stated just now , lead the way where these kinds of measures are concerned .
It will now be much more difficult for imported goods to bear misleading or downright false indications of origin .
I voted in favour of the report .
The voting indicates that the designation ' made in ' is essential for market transparency and for proper clarification for consumers on the origin of the products they consume .
It is necessary to strengthen the Union 's economy by improving the competitiveness of EU industry in the global economy .
We will only attain fair competition if the rules are clear for producers , exporters and importers , while also taking common social and environmental parameters into account .
This regulation , therefore , is an important step for EU consumers to finally have the same rights that millions of consumers all over the world have .
Although this law is still not applicable to every product imported by the EU , we must continue to develop so that every imported product has its indication of origin .
The introduction of a European marking system for manufactured goods imported from third countries must enable consumers to know exactly which country the goods they buy come from .
They will thus be able to identify those goods by the social , environmental and safety standards commonly associated with that country .
European consumers have a right , in fact , to know the origin of the goods they buy and hence to enjoy the same rights as the citizens of other countries .
This regulation will also help create a level playing field with many trading partners of ours which already impose mandatory origin marking on imported goods .
It is in fact essential to guarantee fair conditions of competition with the producers of the EU 's main partners .
I believe that these rules could also help increase the volume of exports from developing countries , since many European consumers are anxious to protect these countries ' craft businesses and small businesses in the face of the multinationals .
Lastly , due to the specific nature of pharmaceutical products , I share the view that they should not be included in the list .
in writing . - ( DE ) Origin labelling is intended to provide consumers with information which will allow them to make informed purchasing decisions .
Many countries label their products accurately .
However , in the past items which were advertised as coming from one country frequently came from somewhere quite different .
Labelling is an area where it is easy to deceive the consumer .
In principle , more accurate labelling is a good thing , but this report is apparently not in a position to guarantee that label fraud can be totally prevented .
The procedures are not sufficiently precise and leave room for interpretation .
Therefore , I cannot vote in favour of the report .
in writing . - ( LT ) I agreed with this document , because I believe that consumers must know the manufacturer of goods they have chosen .
As stated in the document adopted , information guarantees safety , and consumer safety and informing consumers must be underlying principles .
Very often European Union Member States are only a link in the chain - a product may be manufactured here from raw materials obtained in a third country , so it is difficult to say who the true manufacturer is .
An indication of the country of origin is also necessary to make it possible to protect small manufacturers , who are often crushed by large companies imitating original articles .
It is also necessary to ensure the entry into force of common marking rules for standards of environmental protection according to which goods are manufactured .
I voted in favour with conviction and enthusiasm .
Mrs Muscardini 's report is fundamental for the European economy and European consumers and is a measure that the entire production and manufacturing sector has been waiting for for a long time - too long , in fact .
These are not protectionist measures but , instead , provisions to safeguard the health and freedom of our consumers , as well as the EU 's strategic production sectors .
The regulation brings our legislation into line with that of our important trading partners , such as the United States , Canada , China and Australia .
European citizens have the right to know the origin of the goods they buy in the same way as other consumers throughout the world .
With this regulation , we have an opportunity to grant consumers this right , even though the scope of the regulation is limited to certain categories of goods .
I voted in favour of the draft legislative resolution of the European Parliament on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the indication of the country of origin of certain products imported from third countries , as I believe that consumers have the right to know where products they purchase come from so that they have information with which to make their choice .
This measure is even more necessary in today 's globalised world , as foreign trade is increasingly breaking down borders .
Therefore , it is important to make sure that the provenance of products is clearly identified , and not just products that circulate inside the EU .
This may also be an important step for progressing with more detailed labelling of various products in order to not only guarantee consumers ' rights more fully , but also to ensure reciprocity in production requirements imposed on EU and non-EU producers .
in writing . - The legislative resolution passed with a surprisingly wide majority of 525 in favour , 49 against , and 44 abstentions .
This was mainly due to the fact that , at the last minute , the rapporteur introduced an amendment limiting the time of the regulation to 5 years , subject to further approval .
This was mainly in response to the pressure in Council against the entire exercise .
Because of that amendment being carried by 393 to 216 , Greens / EFA voted abstention on the final amended resolution .
However , Greens / EFA voted in favour of the legislative resolution .
In a big surprise , an EDF amendment asking to introduce semi-finished products in the requirement for origin-marking was carried by 328 to 219 .
On the negative side , some product groups were kicked out from the marking requirement , especially pharmaceuticals and glasses and lenses .
We are in favour of this report because we cannot conceive of not safeguarding European entrepreneurs who choose to continue to produce in the EU , thereby guaranteeing jobs and wellbeing .
The rules stipulating that the origin of a product must be indicated are completely in line with what the United States , Canada , Japan and India are already doing and with the full implementation of the rules on transparency and consumer protection , which are cited in many directives that have already been approved .
For example , for the purposes of the decision that we are about to take , I would cite the different but interesting case of the unfair competition of gold products that arrive from Japan : a 3.5 % customs duty is applied to them , and once they arrive in Europe and are simply finished off , they are sold under the European trademark .
However , gold products exported from the EU to China have a 30 % tax levied on them .
The problem with this text is that only a few categories of goods are provided for in the current proposal for a regulation .
Our group has tabled a series of amendments with a view to having other categories included immediately .
We Italian Members are working on a text that would go a long way towards making origin marking mandatory .
I voted in favour on the indication of the country of origin of certain products imported from third countries .
With this vote I wished to emphasise the European Parliament 's commitment to promoting European industry , the competitiveness of which must today be safeguarded and supported .
Furthermore , the right for European citizens to know the origin of the products they buy will be guaranteed .
However , I do not believe that excluding specialised and recognised production sectors with a long history and tradition , such as the optical industry , is in keeping with EU policy .
We have detailed legislation on the marking of goods produced in the European Union .
We give our consumers , both within the EU and outside it , information on the place of origin of these products .
I think we must introduce legislation as quickly as possible which will include an unconditional requirement for the same information to be given by third countries which market their goods in the EU .
This practice is already followed in many of the large third countries which are our largest trading partners .
In many large countries , such as the United States , Canada , Japan and Saudi Arabia , consumers are guaranteed protection by a legal requirement for the marking of goods brought into their territory .
It is important that the consumers and producers of our main trading partners be subject to the same legislation as our consumers and producers .
Then it will be possible to speak of fair rules of play .
Commercial policy can harmonise closely with development policy .
Product marking can contribute to a growth in exports from developing countries .
European consumers are sensitive to the need for aid to less industrialised countries , and their knowledge of the origin of a particular product can enable them to contribute to the development of poorer countries .
Marking makes choosing easier for consumers , who often associate the geographical origin of a particular product with its market value .
European standards are a guarantee of respect for the environment and the health and safety of consumers , and this affects the competitiveness of our products .
I voted for this report because , although national standards bodies provide the backbone of the European standardisation system , there are significant differences among them in terms of resources , technical expertise and stakeholder involvement .
These inequalities create a significant imbalance in their participation in the European standardisation system .
This report puts forward a number of proposals for improving the system within its current restrictions , based on its strong points .
The own-initiative report that we have voted on today is a fine summary of the various political points of view and contains a number of proposals for improving the standardisation system .
This is a very technical and complex subject matter , but standards play a part in our everyday lives .
Most of the objects that we use every day conform to very precise standards .
From an economic and political point of view , the association of European legislation and standardisation has proved decisive for the free movement of goods and has helped eliminate barriers to free trade within the European single market , through the harmonisation of technical standards .
The current system works quite well , but it is in need of some improvements , especially where governance is concerned .
I refer in particular to SMEs , which must be able to play an active part in the creation of standards without incurring excessive costs or suffering a lack of representation .
During the first half of next year , the European Commission will present the proposal to revise the system .
We will continue our work to improve the European technical standardisation process , for the sake of our markets , our businesses and European consumers .
in writing . - ( RO ) I think that a strategic approach needs to be developed to European standardisation and a review carried out of the current system so that it remains successful and meets the needs of the next decade , thereby allowing Europe to maintain a leading role in the global standardisation system .
The potential of the single market cannot be fully exploited without the support of a modern standardisation system .
Thus , completion of the European Standardisation System , which needs to be empowered , has been fundamental to establishing the single market , namely through its ability to respond to the growing need for standards that are capable of ensuring product safety for consumers , ease of access , protection of the environment , or innovation .
I believe that European standardisation is an important means of promoting innovation , research and development , thus contributing to the Union 's ability to compete .
European framework programmes that support innovation and research and development can be a valid input in the process of standardisation .
I also believe that European standardisation contributes to creating a level playing field for all market actors , especially for small and medium-sized enterprises and microenterprises , which are so important to the dynamics of the European economy .
I further believe that the Union and the Member States should give greater consideration to the interests of small and medium-sized enterprises when preparing standards , as their participation in the process of standardisation often does not match their weight and importance in the European economy .
Therefore , my vote is globally in favour of the proposals in this report .
When the Commission expresses its desire to review the European standardisation system , it is essential to acknowledge the contribution that it has made to protecting European consumers and the internal market .
Like the rapporteur , I believe that ' the review of the European standardisation system should build on the strengths of the existing system which constitute a solid base for improvement , refraining from any radical changes that would undermine its core values .
In this spirit , he presents a number of proposals with the view to improving the system within its current boundaries , and looks forward to further suggestions ' .
This will be a discussion to be followed with interest .
I gave my full support to the report on the future of European standardisation since I am aware of its importance in helping to create a level playing field for all market operators .
Mr Kožušník 's report is , in fact , intended to make a decisive contribution to the ongoing debate on the forthcoming review of the European standardisation system .
We are aware today that the full potential of the single market cannot be released without the support of a modern standardisation process .
It is precisely for this reason that we are today sending a message to the Commission that is not aimed at the complete overhaul of the system - it does not require radical changes - but that demonstrates our intention to see it maintain its numerous positive elements , with new ones alongside them , in order to strike the right balance between the European , national and international dimensions .
The report also advocates all interested parties , and in particular representatives of SMEs and all those who represent the public interest , including consumers , being encouraged to actually participate in the standardisation process .
To conclude , I believe that a first important step has been taken today to highlight the need for specific action to make European standardisation fulfil the economic needs of EU citizens .
in writing . - I welcome this report and the Commission 's intention to review the European standardisation system ; I hope they pave the way to a modern , integrated standardisation policy .
The current system has successful elements but it also contains flaws : surely it cannot be right that the outdated , 13-year-old European Standard EN1384 ( Helmets for Equestrian Activities ) is still in use today despite concerns before its publication and 2 subsequent upgrade mandates from the Commission .
Perhaps at last , with the adoption of this report , we can deliver a result for two-time petitioner , my constituent Peter Downes , whose son suffered fatal head injuries in a horse riding accident and has campaigned tirelessly ever since for an improvement in safety standards .
The European standardisation system has been fundamental in achieving a single market .
It has played a key role in responding to the growing need in European legislation and policy for standards that are capable of ensuring product safety , ease of access , innovation , interoperability , and environmental protection .
In order to address the future needs of companies and consumers and to yield all its potential benefits in favour of public and social objectives , European standardisation must adapt to the challenges posed by globalisation , climate change , the emergence of new economic powers and technological evolution .
It is therefore necessary to develop a strategic approach to European standardisation , and to review the current system so that it can continue to be successful and respond to the needs of the next decade , allowing Europe to maintain its leading role in the global standardisation system .
in writing . - ( DE ) It is true that the national standards organisations form the basis for the European standards system , but there are significant differences between them with regard to resources , technical expertise and commitment to shareholders , which reflect the differences between the states .
Therefore , the aim has been to harmonise and simplify the system .
Although small and medium-sized businesses are often referred to on paper as the economic backbone of the EU , they are over-burdened with red tape .
The processes described here do not take inequalities into account .
Once again they favour large corporations and multinationals which can afford expensive and time-consuming bureaucratic approval procedures .
For this reason , I have voted against the report .
in writing . - ( DE ) The aim of the report is the complete harmonisation of the internal market .
Although it is acknowledged that small and medium-sized enterprises are the backbone of the European economy , the measures provided for in the report will , however , create difficult conditions precisely for these small and medium-sized enterprises .
I therefore voted against the report .
I voted in favour of the Kožušník report .
The report contains many sound proposals and guidelines for the European Commission and provides a fine summary of the various points of view .
There is no need to radically change the current system , which works well , but some improvements could be made , especially where ' governance ' is concerned .
I believe that the standardisation system must remain private and voluntary and must be based on the principle of national-level management , but I also believe that the public interest must play a more active role in the process , through real , effective participation .
Furthermore , it is essential to guarantee proper representation for SMEs , especially in national technical committees , where they do not face linguistic or cost-related obstacles .
I voted in favour of the report on European standardisation , because it increases the environmental safety valves of the current system .
However , I share concerns that , in its text , the Commission has attached little importance to innovation as a catalyst in improving European standardisation standards .
It is paradoxical that research and innovation , which we so frequently cite as the driving force behind our economic growth and competitiveness , has only a minor role in what is a vital sector for promoting European trade .
The standardisation process plays an important role in ensuring the quality of public or private products and services , as well as in respect for safety , environmental and social-responsibility standards .
This report seeks to involve small and medium-sized enterprises and society 's various players in the standardisation process .
The report promotes the sharing of information about the new regulations and also encourages the dissemination of these processes on information websites that are clear , simple , easy to use and in all the official languages of the European Union .
Nevertheless , I still have some reservations about how well all of society 's players will be represented in the standardisation process and about the process of financing the European standardisation system .
I am voting in favour .
in writing . - The purpose of this report is to contribute to the ongoing debate on the review of the European standardisation system .
The European Commission is currently working on a ' Standardisation Package ' , which will include a legislative proposal aimed at revising the existing legal framework on European standardisation and an umbrella Communication which will set the standardisation policy for the next decade .
In preparation for its ' Standardisation Package ' , the Commission has asked key experts to make strategic recommendations .
These experts have been brought together in the Expert Panel for the Review of the European Standardisation System ( EXPRESS ) , which delivered its recommendations in February 2010 in the form of a report entitled ' Standardisation for a competitive and innovative Europe : a vision for 2020 ' .
The Commission has also undertaken a public consultation on the review of the European standardisation system ( held from 23 March to 21 May 2010 ) and commissioned an Impact Assessment Study ( 9 March 2010 ) .
The forthcoming ' Standardisation Package ' will also build on the White Paper of 3 July 2009 on Modernising ICT Standardisation in the EU - The Way Forward .
I am in favour of the report since it aims to review the European standardisation system in order to strike the right balance between the European and national dimensions .
The report lays down important guidelines for conforming to a standardisation system that supports innovation , stimulates the competitiveness of businesses and interoperability , guarantees product safety and environmental protection , and eliminates barriers to trade .
Furthermore , it is important to acknowledge the role played by national standards bodies within the standardisation system as a whole , in order to guarantee greater harmonisation of regulatory matters with the EU 's trade partners .
in writing . - ( LV ) The European Union must continue an active dialogue with Ukraine concerning its accession to our Union , although we appreciate that it will not become a Member State in the next few years .
It is in all our interests to see Ukraine as an economically developed and politically stable state , with its closest partners to be found in the West .
We understand that it will not be easy to achieve this , for that country must stabilise its financial situation and carry out numerous reforms .
However , this must be done and the EU should offer its support to this work .
The constructive work on the EU-Ukraine Association Agreement must continue and work on the extended Free Trade Agreement must be given a kick start .
Geographically , Ukraine is situated in a very important location , which is also important for gas supply to the EU .
That is why it is necessary to support the modernisation of Ukraine 's gas transit system , in order to reduce the risk of interruption to gas supplies to EU countries , as has happened recently .
At the same time , we must not turn a blind eye to violations of democracy , which have become more serious since Viktor Yanukovych took office as President .
It is our duty to point out these violations and take a strong stand on compliance with Western values in Ukraine , for our Union is founded on those values .
I voted for this motion for a resolution because I welcome the progress which the European Union has made during the last year in relation to the Republic of Moldova .
Romania has been committed , since the moment of its accession , to championing the Republic of Moldova 's cause within the EU .
I believe that concrete proof of this initial commitment is indicated by the number of Romanian MEPs from various political groups who signed the resolution .
The EUR 90 million granted to this country in macro-financial assistance was and still is the lifeline which Moldova and its citizens needed to make progress and , in particular , to meet the commitments it has made in the area of reforms , the rule of law and the fight against corruption .
The motion for a resolution on the reforms and progress in the Republic of Moldova provides a spur of encouragement at the right time to the political establishment and inhabitants on the other side of the River Prut , with the approaching ballot on 28 November .
The European Parliament encourages the country 's democratic forces and ethnic and cultural communities to avoid needless confrontation and cooperate to create a European future for this state , whose economy has been hit hard by the recession and which is facing a major gamble politically and in terms of democratic reforms .
It is the EU 's duty to help ensure that the parliamentary elections are conducted properly and to take firmer action so that the separatist authorities in Tiraspol are unable to prevent Moldovan citizens living in the Transnistria region from exercising their vote .
Indeed , the Transnistria problem is of paramount importance to the stability of the Republic of Moldova and the whole region , with the EU having a major role to play in implementing a negotiated , lasting solution .
Increasing macro-financial assistance for the Republic of Moldova , encouraging structural reforms and the fight against corruption , boosting the environment for investment , as well as moving as quickly as possible into the operational phase of the dialogue on visa liberalisation for Moldovan citizens : these are the key elements of the support being provided by Europe to a state whose place is in the European Union .
During the last year , the Republic of Moldova has demonstrated genuine political will as part of the process of rapprochement with the European Union .
However , the efforts to modernise this country must continue .
Indeed , the European Union must play an active role in supporting this dynamic development .
In this context , I voted for this motion for a resolution as I believe that it is important for the European Parliament and the European Union in general to send a message of confidence to the Republic of Moldova in the run-up to the parliamentary elections .
Moldova has been undertaking a positive convergence with European standards of freedom , democracy and good governance and is demonstrating desire to continue this effort , which I must welcome .
The upcoming elections will constitute an important test of the robustness of its institutions and its democratic culture .
Despite the positive indications , it must be remembered that many unanswered questions remain that are threatening its stability and progress , the most important of which is that of Transnistria .
I hope that the Union will be able to make a committed contribution to a lasting solution to this problem .
In view of the results of the European Neighbourhood Policy and the Eastern Partnership launched in May 2009 , which recognise the European aspirations of the Republic of Moldova and Moldova 's importance as a country with deep historical , cultural and economic ties to the Member States of the European Union , I am pleased with the progress made in the past year by the Republic of Moldova and I trust that the electoral process can further consolidate the democratic institutions and respect for the rule of law and for human rights in Moldova .
I hope that the Moldovan authorities will carry out the necessary reforms and fulfil their commitments to keep the Republic of Moldova on the path toward solid European integration .
I must also highlight the start of negotiations on the association agreement between the European Union and the Republic of Moldova on 12 January 2010 , and I underscore the good results the Commission is having with the Republic of Moldova in this process .
Once again , the majority in Parliament is attempting to interfere in a country 's internal affairs , openly siding with the forces in Moldova that are championing the interests of the EU 's economic groups , and attacking the country 's independence and sovereignty , as well as the will expressed by its people .
The insults begin immediately , when the text says that it ' welcomes the progress made during the last year by the Republic of Moldova ' , demanding that the country 's authorities ' pursue the reforms needed and fulfil their commitments to keep the Republic of Moldova on track for steady European integration ' .
What is not mentioned is that the government in Moldova is the result of a coalition formed following an outright coup that made use of a series of provocative and destabilising operations to overthrow the Communist Party government , which had won the elections .
Nor is it mentioned that this same coalition , once in power , launched a worrying anticommunist and antidemocratic offensive in a clear move to discredit the Communist Party .
The position of the majority in Parliament lays bare its profoundly anticommunist nature and its hypocrisy when it talks about the defence of democracy , the rule of law and human rights .
I voted for this joint resolution because , given that there are elections scheduled for 28 November 2010 and considering the sectarian attempts of the parties on the right to promote the banning of the names and symbols of their main rivals on the left , it is important to stress the need for the elections to go ahead and comply strictly with international standards , giving all political parties equal opportunities .
I also think it is important to reiterate support for the territorial integrity of the Republic of Moldova , and stress the role that the EU could and should play in helping to find a solution for the Transnistria problem .
The vote in favour of the motion for a resolution tabled by my colleagues from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) is essentially due to the prompt request for the Transnistrian issue to be resolved , since this is a crucial factor in promoting political stability and economic prosperity in the Republic of Moldova and the region .
The European Parliament strongly supports , as it ought , the territorial integrity of the Republic of Moldova and points out that a more robust EU role in finding a solution to the Transnistrian question is needed .
In general , the resolution correctly analyses the steps the Republic of Moldova must take to come closer to achieving in a more decisive and credible way the objectives set for any potential Member State by the European Union .
In recent years Moldova has been making efforts to increasingly align itself with European standards of freedom , democracy and good governance .
The efforts indicated here have been consistent and have shown that Moldova is intent on staying on its path towards possible EU enlargement .
Moldova will soon be holding elections , which will be a good test for measuring the degree of consolidation of its democratic culture , as well as its institutions .
Despite all the positive items mentioned , there are still some questions that need to see some positive development , especially the issue of Transnistria , which may cause some type of instability .
The EU must continue to make every effort so that the reforms being implemented in Moldova remain on track .
I fully agree with the motion for a resolution on Moldova .
However , the only thing that I found to be lacking in the resolution is a crystal-clear opinion on the Transnistria problem .
Moldova will not be able to become a full member of the EU if it cannot peacefully resolve the Transnistria conflict .
Division of the country into two parts is unacceptable .
If the Moldovan Government wants integration with the European Union , it must begin a dialogue with the Transnistrian Government , in order to prove to the international community that it has legitimacy over the whole territory of Moldova .
in writing . - ( DE ) The motion for a resolution on the reforms and developments in the Republic of Moldova makes close reference to the association agreement which is currently being negotiated between the EU and Moldova .
It is intended to bring about a significant improvement in the joint institutional framework of the EU and the Republic of Moldova , to allow closer relationships to develop in all areas and to strengthen the political association and the economic integration , while introducing mutual rights and duties .
Alongside some of the other reforms mentioned in the text , a great deal of attention is paid to visa liberalisation .
We need to put a system in place as quickly as possible .
If we look at the problems which the country is still trying to overcome , it is a reasonable assumption that they will result in massive immigration to the EU , which is why I have voted against the motion for a resolution .
in writing . - ( DE ) The aim of the motion for a resolution is visa liberalisation for the Republic of Moldova .
The consequences of this for the European Union would be an increase in migration and cross-border crime .
Such simplifications leave the door wide open to abuse , and a short-stay visa is only too often followed by permanent residence .
I therefore voted against this report .
in writing . - ( LT ) Moldova is one of those neighbours that is succeeding in drawing closer to the European Union .
The areas of justice and public administration are being reformed and the fight against corruption is being strengthened .
The issue of liberalising the visa regime with the EU is moving forward .
However , there remain many unsolved problems , among them the question of Transnistria .
The country is floundering in the economic crisis .
The citizens of Moldova are hoping for specific reforms that would improve their lives .
I voted for this motion for a resolution because it calls on the European Commission to continue to aim for full visa liberalisation with this country in order to encourage people-to-people contacts , and to continue to support Moldova and help this country strive for the objectives of European integration .
The parliamentary elections on 28 November will be a big test for Moldova .
It is an opportunity to show that its citizens have the same values as EU residents .
I call on the political forces within the country to guarantee political order and stability following the elections .


in writing . - With this resolution , the EP welcomes the progress made during the last year by the Republic of Moldova and hopes that the electoral process can further consolidate the democratic institutions and respect for the rule of law and for human rights in Moldova ; expects the Moldovan authorities to pursue the reforms needed and fulfil their commitments to keep the Republic of Moldova on track for steady European integration ; welcomes the start of negotiations on the Association Agreement between the European Union and the Republic of Moldova on 12 January 2010 and takes note with satisfaction of the very good results the Commission is obtaining from the Republic of Moldova in this process ; and calls on the Commission to present an evaluation of the visa facilitation agreement in place , to advance towards swift agreement on a formal road-map for visa liberalisation and to offer targeted support and assistance to the Moldovan authorities to meet the necessary benchmarks for full visa-free travel ; calls on the Council to invite the Commission to proceed to develop the road-map for visa liberalisation , thus entering into the fully operational phase of the visa dialogue based on the Republic of Moldova 's progress following exploratory talks on the four blocks of the visa dialogue .
I voted in favour of the report on integrated maritime policy ( IMP ) - progress made and new challenges , because I believe that the EU needs concrete measures to mobilise the economy of the sea , providing incentives and promoting the economic potential of maritime clusters , in particular in Member States and regions with large Exclusive Economic Zones , such as the case of Portugal and the Azores .
I believe that intelligent growth , as recommended in the Europe 2020 strategy , can only be achieved if the different capabilities inherent to European diversity are intelligently mobilised .
I believe , therefore , that reinforcement of integrated maritime policy is very important for promoting economic growth and the creation of new sustainable jobs in maritime regions , for protecting marine ecosystems and , especially , for encouraging the exchange of best practices .
It is important for the EU to ensure that its coasts are protected .
It is also necessary that the legislation in force strengthen the safety of oil exploration and extraction .
The European Maritime Safety Agency , located in Lisbon , provides support and technical assistance in developing and implementing Union legislation in matters of safety and maritime protection , as well as in the area of pollution caused by ships .
In June of this year I presented a written suggestion to Commissioners Oettinger , Kallas and Georgieva to expand the powers of the European Maritime Agency to create mechanisms to supervise the safety of European oil platforms located in the North Sea , the Black Sea and the Mediterranean , and for it to be responsible for preventing environmental disasters related to oil exploration .
This suggestion allows an economy of scale in financial , human and technical resources .
I welcome the response of the Commissioners , which showed that they are open to reviewing the regulation of the European Maritime Agency , expanding its powers in the area of intervening in maritime pollution incidents .
I again appeal to the European Commission to expand the powers of the European Maritime Safety Agency in order to ensure that our coasts are protected .
At a time when a third of EU citizens live in coastal regions , a trend which is on the rise , I believe that the challenges posed by climate change must be a major concern of Europe 's maritime policy .
In addition , the prevention and fight against the consequences of natural disasters must be supported by concern for protecting the sea and adjacent zones against possible industrial accidents , such as the recent oil disaster in the Gulf of Mexico . Consequently , I believe that we need to approach the management of the seas ' potential from a green and economically sustainable perspective .
in writing . - ( RO ) Counting the seven outermost regions which it has in the Indian and Atlantic Oceans , along with the Overseas Territories , the European Union occupies the largest maritime area in the world .
Furthermore , the EU has another asset - its well-established maritime tradition requiring a ' blue growth ' strategy to be devised , which must be implemented in close collaboration with the EU 2020 Strategy .
Such an economic strategy can continue to develop the potential of the various maritime sectors .
Indeed , local and regional authorities , coastal area communities etc. can and must play an important role within this strategy .
Similarly to other European policies , the integrated maritime policy can help achieve an important objective - creating a competitive , social and sustainable European Union with a high level of employment , which may make the maritime sector even more attractive to young people or other job-seekers .
At the same time , Europe must devise measures supporting intervention in the case of disasters , like the one in the Gulf of Mexico , and must submit a coordinated European action plan to prevent emergency situations and tackle disasters caused by drilling rigs , at global level , especially where cross-border pollution occurs .
I voted for the report on integrated maritime policy because I believe that greater consistency between the various political sectors should be advocated , enabling use of the potential of the sea and the maritime sector in a sustainable and efficient way , from an ecological and economic point of view .
in writing . - ( PT ) ' The EU has 320 000 km of sea coast ; a third of our citizens - and the trend is rising - live on the coast .
Our economic activities at sea and on the coast produce 40 % of EU GDP and all forecasts suggest that there is still a great deal of potential for growth .
Some 40 % of trade in goods within Europe and 95 % of exports outside Europe are carried out by sea . '
The rapporteur has summed up the sea 's importance to Europe in just one phrase .
As a Portuguese , I know it well .
It is also as a Portuguese - a people that has always returned to the sea and found prosperity and wealth there - I consider it crucial for Europe to have a maritime policy that enables it to make use of all the potential that the sea has as an economic and energy resource , as a creator of employment and wealth , and as an engine for competitiveness and innovation .
I am particularly pleased to pick out the concern about environmental disasters on the sea - I recall the case of the Prestige , which took place very close to the northern coast of Portugal - and the need for stronger rules to prevent them on the European seas .
The sea offers important trade routes , acts as a regulator of the climate , and represents a source of food , energy and resources .
Well into the 21st century , the sea is taking on a new identity , as well as geostrategic and geopolitical importance without equal in the history of humanity ; today more than ever , it puts Europe at the centre .
Europe must profit from its centrality .
Member States such as Portugal must take advantage of their relationship with the sea and the extent of their Exclusive Economic Zone ; in the Portuguese case , it is one of the largest in the world .
Almost 40 % of the European Union 's gross domestic product and 40 % of its population are concentrated in coastal regions .
It is estimated that the total turnover directly from maritime tourism in Europe was EUR 72 billion in 2004 .
Nearly 90 % of Europe 's foreign trade and almost 40 % of internal trade passes through its ports .
I therefore advocate an ambitious ' blue growth ' strategy .
To this end , the Commission should come up with an overarching , cross-sectoral strategy for sustainable growth in coastal regions and maritime sectors by 2012 , based on a broad investigation of potentials and policy options and on broad stakeholder consultation .
The report presents a general vision of an integrated maritime policy linked to the ' objectives of the EU 's external policy ' .
We disagree with this approach as well as several other aspects of the report , such as its insistence on the creation of a ' European Coastguard Service ' , following a federalist stance that does not respect the sovereignty and powers of Member States with regard to the management of their territorial waters and Exclusive Economic Zones .
We reject the proposal to ' introduce economic market based instruments ' such as emissions-trading schemes into the maritime sector : these mechanisms have already demonstrated their ineffectiveness at achieving the environmental goals that they claim to pursue , even without having been applied to the maritime sector .
However , we acknowledge the positive aspects that it includes , such as : the proposal that ' improvements in working conditions at sea , to safety and the environmental performance of vessels ' should be placed on the agenda of international forums and in international agreements ; the proposal to implement the ' ILO Maritime Labour Convention in Community law ' ; the recognition given to maritime freight transport ; the preservation of small and secondary ports ; the expansion of the ' short sea shipping network ' ; and the importance given to improving links with the outermost regions .
It also proposes making sea-related sciences a priority in the Eighth Framework Programme for Research .
As a Member for a port town in Normandy , and member of the Intergroup for Seas and Coastal Affairs , I have followed the report on the integrated maritime policy ( IMP ) closely .
On various occasions , I have emphasised the need for ensuring harmonious cohabitation between the different uses of the sea , one that promotes traditional activities ( such as fishing , and I asked for it to be placed top of the list of maritime activities included in the report , as a symbolic gesture ) , and one that also facilitates the development of new activities .
Thus I noted that the sector of renewable energies , including off-shore wind energy , should be supported in particular , because it is in line with European objectives around the diversification of sources of energy supply , and can , between now and 2020 , mean a gain of 410 000 jobs in Europe , according to a study by the Commission .
Finally , with the rapporteur , I amended the report to apprise the Commission of the need to fund the IMP .
The initial exchanges within the Committee on ' policy challenges and budgetary resources for after 2013 ' , of which I am a member , indeed raised doubts about the long-term funding of the regional cohesion policy , some of the programmes of which relate to the IMP .
Integrated maritime policy is a major challenge for the European Union .
The completion of this policy must allow for the enhancement of economic activities at sea and along the coasts , greater account to be taken of employment and also greater environmental protection as well as the development of research and innovation in the maritime sector .
In this respect , I voted for this report , which constitutes a significant advance , insofar as it emphasises all these elements through adopting an intersectoral approach and not a fragmented one , as could have been the case previously .
Integrated maritime policy is enormously important for the European Union economy , because it can significantly improve its competitiveness .
When establishing a framework for this , it is necessary to include strengthening economic development , increasing the level of employment in the sector and also protection of the environment .
An important element in the strategy should also be a consolidated approach to the question of strengthening the role of European states in the field of research on the maritime economy and the development of technology and maritime engineering as well as the development of maritime resources .
We should also remember to strive for the elimination of such dangers as piracy , illegal fishing and pollution of the environment .
Integrated maritime policy should , therefore , include not only consolidation of several areas of maritime activity and strategic maritime economy as well as maximum use of maritime potential , but should also call attention to improving the conditions of work at sea .
The European Union promoted and adopted the Maritime Package in the previous parliamentary term .
It was a package which covers all the basic areas of the maritime economy .
The Committee on Transport and Tourism realises that around 90 % of Union exports and imports are made by sea .
It is important to have an integrated maritime policy which includes transport , administration , environment protection , management of maritime resources and also maritime tourism .
These are important reasons which justify support for this report .
With this report we are expressing our support for the package on integrated maritime policy proposed in 2009 by the European Commission , because we believe it represents an ambitious cross-sectoral strategy for economic development , a high level of employment , and environmental protection in coastal regions and maritime sectors .
We therefore invite the Member States to extend the mandate of the European Maritime Safety Agency ( EMSA ) on safety inspections and to regulate offshore oil extraction in Europe , following the recent natural disaster in the waters of the Gulf of Mexico .
We support the approach that consists of coordination and cooperation with third countries in maritime surveillance matters , with the aim of creating a common information sharing environment and of integrating the various national coastguard services .
Furthermore , the European Parliament intends to intensify efforts in research and development in the use and application of renewable energy sources ; to improve the working conditions of seafarers ( the Maritime Erasmus programme ) ; and , lastly , to ensure better links between peripheral maritime regions .
We therefore welcome the creation of the Atlas of the Seas and of the Maritime Forum , and we propose the creation of a European marine research institute , to make the European Marine Observation and Data Network ( EMODNET ) operational .
An integrated maritime policy is essential if we are to make the best use of the immense wealth that the sea provides for us , as well as all of the economic potential that the sea has .
We cannot forget that our economic activities related to the sea and the coast produce 40 % of the EU 's gross domestic product and , according to numerous studies , there is still huge development potential to explore .
In fact , 40 % of trade within Europe and 95 % of exports outside Europe is carried out by sea .
Despite these figures and the enormous potential that still remains to be explored , there is no integrated European maritime policy that would enable us to stop giving separate treatment to our policies on maritime transport , the maritime economy , new technologies , coastal regions , off-shore energy , fishing , surveillance and policing of the seas , tourism , protection of the marine environment and marine research .
This motion for a resolution will help to change the current situation .
Maritime policy must encompass not only obligatory regulations on oil exploration and transportation , but must also offer twofold compensation for losses resulting from accidents .
We must also draw up additional safety regulations , efficient reaction regulations and disaster prevention measures .
In order to attain this objective , a fund must be formed to which all operators active in the maritime environment should contribute .
If all the nuances are taken into account , we shall be able to prohibit dangerous technologies applied in oil exploration and extraction .
This will also act as an incentive to the development of new safe and efficient technologies .
in writing . - ( DE ) If differing emission limits are to be introduced within EU waters , this will conflict with the integrated maritime policy , which , as announced , aims to take all factors into account .
We must not forget underwater nuclear testing in this respect .
In particular in environmentally sensitive regions , in addition to catch quotas , no-fishing zones and regulations for aquaculture , it will be important to consider solutions for sensitive coastal tourism , military exercises , shipping , oil and gas extraction , sand and gravel extraction and also measures to prevent environmental catastrophes , like the recent torrent of toxic sludge .
If a European coastal safety authority were to take precedence over national coastal authorities or navies , this would not be compatible with national sovereignty rights and would increase existing tendencies towards centralisation .
Overall , this strategy does not seem to have been very well thought out and , therefore , I have voted against it .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted for this document because I believe that an integrated maritime policy is necessary to ensure an appropriate level of environmental protection .
One of the most important principles is the coordination of various policies and the need to ensure the implementation of the ecosystem approach , which is laid down in the EU Marine Strategy Framework Directive .
In particular I agree with the tools mentioned in the document for the coordination of surveillance and policing of the seas , protection of the marine environment and scientific research .
As a representative of Lithuania , a country in the Baltic Sea region , I welcome the fact that this document draws attention to broader research aimed at determining and assessing the current condition of the seas .
The Baltic Sea is one of the seas worst damaged by economic activity and one of the most polluted seas in the world .
As the oil spill disaster in the Gulf of Mexico demonstrated , sensitive marine ecosystems can be damaged in an instant .
Therefore I particularly support the call on Member States , anchored in the report , to take more action to plan a wide-ranging strategy to protect the marine environment .
The Meissner report is a balanced text that incorporates a series of important factors and requests .
Maritime activities are one of the most important sources of European income .
To quote just a few figures , they generate 40 % of EU GDP and , at the same time , account for 40 % of trade in goods within Europe and 95 % of exports outside Europe .
The report focuses on a few key points : the establishment of appropriate maritime governance structures at national and regional levels ; coordinated and cross-border maritime spatial planning ; maritime surveillance to protect the Member States and the EU ; the protection of the marine environment ; the creation of a strategy for sustainable coastal and island tourism ; and the promotion of the European shipbuilding industry , which is already a flagship sector , and of maritime transport , in order to meet the ambitious objective of ' green shipping ' .
For the reasons stated above , I felt compelled to vote in favour .
We absolutely must ensure that the communication between and integration of the various sectors that come under maritime policy are a success for a whole host of reasons linked to efficiency , competitiveness , and respect for and protection of the marine environment .
in writing . - The EP agrees with the Commission that our ' strong maritime tradition ' is one of the strengths of Europe .
It calls therefore on the European Commission and the Member States to further develop the potential offered by the different maritime sectors by drawing up an ambitious ' blue growth ' strategy .
It considers that integrated maritime policy ( IMP ) should contribute to achieving a competitive , social and sustainable Union .
It takes the view in this regard that the development of IMP must harmoniously incorporate efforts to attain economic development , a high level of employment - particularly by making the sector more attractive for young people through training actions and the launch of a ' Maritime Erasmus ' - and environmental protection .
It states , therefore , that the IMP should be interconnected with the objectives and initiatives of the EU 2020 Strategy .
Moreover , the EP asks the Commission , therefore , to come up with an overarching , cross-sectoral strategy for sustainable growth in coastal regions and maritime sectors by 2013 , based on a broad investigation of potentials and policy options and on broad stakeholder consultation .
While on the one hand there is clearly a need to integrate maritime policy within the European Union , given that its associated activities produce 40 % of EU GDP , on the other it is right to regulate such activities taking non-EU competitors into account .
Too often , the rules on fishing , tourism , transport and environmental protection in the sector have been developed separately and with no regard for the risks associated with unfair competition from third countries .
For example , extending overly strict emissions targets to all the coastal regions in Europe may create distortions of competition .
Other texts on the issues faced have been debated and approved by Parliament and will doubtless need to be coordinated in an integrated manner .
One such issue is maritime surveillance , which is crucial for controlling illegal activities that are often carried out near the coasts of Europe and which range from the smuggling of counterfeit goods to the transport of banned substances and illegal fishing .
The maritime and coastal economic activity of the European Union currently generates 40 % of the Union 's GDP , and forecasts point to a high probability of future growth .
For this reason , maritime activity is , without doubt , a very important factor and is one of Europe 's strengths .
I think further development of the maritime economy is essential .
Existing Union maritime policy was created separately in such areas as : maritime transport , maritime economy , new technologies , coastal areas , maritime energy , fisheries , surveillance and policing of the seas , tourism , protection of the marine environment and marine research .
Often these separate activities are carried out in ways which conflict and which have a detrimental effect on maritime policy as a whole .
It is obvious that an integrated maritime policy will contribute to further sustainable economic development of the European Union .
This will make possible , among other things , ensuring greater cohesion between different policy areas , creation of better regulation and cross-sectoral instruments and use of maritime potential and the potential of the maritime sector in an economical and ecological fashion .
What is more , in my opinion it is essential to make this sector more attractive to young people by running training and activities intended to encourage young people to work in this sector .
The report on integrated maritime policy concerns an important sector of the European economy .
Maritime activities in fact represent an important source of income for the EU , both in terms of GDP and in terms of trade in goods within and outside Europe .
I believe that certain issues should be emphasised .
Firstly , the report states that future strategies in this sector will be tailored to the specificities of sea basins , but I believe it is very important to take account of specific regional circumstances , too .
The new maritime policy will also be focused on the development of safe ships and will offer great opportunities for the future of European shipbuilding .
Our seas should continue to be a driving force behind growth , hence why I believe it is essential for the development of integrated maritime policy to ensure greater coherence between the rules governing the various maritime sectors and , at the same time , to safeguard the marine environment .
Until now , policies in the fields of maritime transport , the maritime economy , new technologies , coastal regions , offshore energy , fishing , maritime surveillance , tourism , protection of the marine environment , and maritime research have developed separately from each other .
A fragmented approach repeatedly leads to conflicting measures , conflicts and inconsistencies .
An integrated approach is therefore desirable that includes , first , a framework for governance with all decision-making levels and , second , all sectors and cross-sectoral instruments .
In the context of the coordinated planning of activities , I support the call on the Commission to draw up strategies for the sea-basins that are able to take account of the specific features of the regions and play to their strengths .
That would be a good proposal for the outermost regions such as Madeira , as it would enable the region to make use of its sea-related activities and establish cooperation with the activities of the other regions in the sea-basin of which it is part .
As a matter of fact , thanks to their territorial waters the outermost regions give the EU the world 's largest Exclusive Economic Zone , immediately making maritime and sea-related activities very important in these regions .
I was pleased to hear the result of today 's vote .
Striving for sustainable exploitation and an integrated approach to the management of oceans , seas and coastal areas should be a priority for the European Union .
I am convinced that an integrated maritime policy will bring beneficial effects both in the short and in the long term .
The removal of policy barriers and the creation of synergy between different activities which have a direct effect on the European maritime space are objectives which we must not forget .
I think the European Parliament should require the introduction of a series of sectoral measures , particularly in the context of the detrimental social and economic consequences which often hit fishermen when action is taken to replenish fish stocks or protect ecosystems .
I voted for this report because the European Union has strengthened its economic and trade relations with Latin America , becoming its second most important trading partner and the leading trading partner for Mercosur and Chile .
The aim of closer integration of the European and Latin American economic spheres is to create a win-win situation for both sides .
Closer cooperation is required between EU and Latin American countries so as to push jointly for the swiftest possible conclusion of a fair , ambitious and comprehensive WTO Doha Agreement , in accordance with the commitments made in the Madrid Declaration .
I voted against my colleague 's report , despite the fact that we are from the same group and despite the fact that he managed to include several positive points in his report .
Unfortunately , however , the forces of the European right managed , through the amendments which they tabled , to alter the content and tenet which he was trying to give to his report .
I could not vote in favour of the report when , apart from anything else , it deplores as ' protectionist ' the measures taken by Argentina to deal with the financial crisis and , on that basis , indirectly asks the Commission to impose sanctions , calling on it to ' regularly address the issue of market access with countries in Latin America ' .
I could not overlook the supremacy of the ' rules of the market ' and of European interventionism in the internal affairs of other countries , especially against measures that support cohesion and protect the citizens in those countries .
Trade and relations between the EU and the countries of Latin America must be based on equality , solidarity and respect for workers ' rights and the environment and must not allow the interests of the strongest states and companies to prevail .
The European Union is founded on a system of values with regard to which the countries of Latin America have made significant progress in recent years .
Such progress should definitely be rewarded with further EU trade policy incentives .
If we add to this the linguistic and cultural links forged throughout history , we have an opportunity to contribute , as far as possible , to the economic and social development of those countries , however varied their situations .
It is also useful for both parties to understand what core elements are at the root of political developments in those countries and to intervene so as to prevent any abuses that might harm the countries and ourselves .
We can only welcome the strengthening of trade relations , provided that development policies are monitored so that they continue to act as an incentive for improvements .
In spite of the economic and social progress made in recent years , with Brazil being the most impressive example , 1 in 3 inhabitants of Latin America suffers from poverty .
Children and young people in Latin America are affected to a larger extent by this scourge , with more than half of them being deprived of sufficient material resources .
This situation is likely to affect their educational and career path , with a long-term impact on the societies in which they live .
At a time when the EU 's trade policies must play a significant role in meeting the Millennium Development Goals , I believe that we must focus more on supporting the countries of Central and South America in their fight against poverty , in increasing purchasing power and establishing sustainable development .
The amendment I tabled along with Mr Dess and 77 other MEPs demands full compliance by agricultural imports with European health , social , and consumer , environmental and animal protection standards .
It is , after all , extraordinary to demand that European farmers conform to the highest production standards in the world , while at the same time increasing the quantity of agricultural products that can enter Europe without meeting those same standards .
Consumers must be able to benefit from a single level of protection , no matter what they buy , and farmers must be rewarded for their tremendous efforts , not subjected to de facto unfair competition on the part of third countries .
That is my idea of a balanced food and agriculture policy , anyway .
This resolution sends a clear message to the Commission and to third countries , which is why I support it .
The report on trade relations between the EU and Latin America adopted by Parliament could well make case law .
The trade agreements with Latin America contain an extremely sensitive section on agriculture .
That is why Parliament requested that ' only those agricultural imports that comply with European consumer protection , animal welfare and environmental protection standards and minimum social standards should be admitted to the European Union ' .
From now on it is up to the Commission to take account of this policy requirement of Parliament in future negotiations .
Within these negotiations , Parliament sought for particular attention to be paid to the outermost regions , due to competition from the Latin American continent in certain products , in particular bananas .
That is why Parliament asked for the strategic and traditional sectors of the Outermost Regions ( OR ) to be protected and receive adequate compensation in compliance with the commitments made by the EU to these regions in 2009 .
I voted for the report on the European Union 's trade relations with Latin America , because these should be a priority for the EU .
The EU is currently Latin America 's second most important trading partner and the leading trading partner for Mercosur and Chile .
European trade policy should play an important role in achieving the Millennium Development Goals and fulfilling international commitments to human rights , food security and environmental sustainability .
The Treaty of Lisbon defines the EU 's trade policy as an integral part of the Union 's general external action .
In recent times there has been a decline in trade between the European Union and the Latin American and Caribbean region ( LAC ) by virtue of the growing participation of Asian countries in LAC external trade , despite the fact that the EU remains Latin America 's second-largest trading partner .
While the association agreements between the European Union and Mexico and Chile have caused a substantial increase in the trade volume , trade between Mexico and Europe is still modest when compared with Mexico 's trade with the United States .
I therefore highlight the need for both parties to develop a broader range of trade-related economic activities .
The bulk ( over 85 % ) of LAC imports from the EU today are industrial products .
In turn , more than 40 % of exports from the region to the EU are basic products .
It is therefore necessary to mobilise resources and technical assistance to identify and finance programmes that provide production opportunities at local and regional levels , and sustainable access to global markets for excluded communities and for small and medium-sized enterprises .
We did not vote for this report because of its contradictions .
Although it is true that it has some positive aspects relating to the new realities of Latin America , several of its paragraphs are unacceptable .
Positive aspects that we would stress , for example , include the acknowledgement that all countries have the right to establish the mechanisms necessary to defend their food security and ensure the survival and development of small and medium-sized producers .
However , at other points it says exactly the opposite when it ' deplores the protectionist measures taken during the financial crisis by some Latin American countries , especially Argentina ; urges the Commission regularly to address the issue of market access with countries in Latin America ' ; or also when it claims to be ' deeply concerned about the restrictive measures recently adopted by the Argentinian authorities on foodstuffs imported from third countries , including the European Union ' .
The support for the liberalisation of international trade that stands out from some of its proposals is equally unacceptable , although there are other , different positions in other points later on .
in writing . - ( DE ) The European Union maintains good economic relations with countries in Latin America at WTO level , but also at bilateral and multilateral levels .
These trade and economic relations must continue to be developed in light of the sensitive economic sectors of the EU .
I therefore expressly support the amendment to paragraph 30 that has been tabled , which calls for ' agricultural imports to be allowed into the EU only if they have been produced in a manner consistent with European consumer protection , animal welfare and environmental protection standards and minimum social standards ' .
Our European citizens must comply with high production standards and should not be put at a disadvantage as a result of unfair competition .
In order to be able to ensure that costs are covered , it is necessary to have planning and income security .
These things also need to be taken into consideration in connection with free trade agreements .
With the exception of Amendment 32 , for which the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) has requested a separate vote and which we shall vote against , the report as a whole should be approved because it provides a useful overview of the situation as regards our relationship with Latin America .
The European Union-Latin America Summit , held on 18 May in Madrid , gave a strong boost to the development of relations between the two parties : relations that become stronger from one year to the next .
Neither of the two parties can exclude a trade relationship with the other , even though , of course , that relationship has to produce concrete results and lead to an improvement in our populations ' living conditions .
in writing . - Despite agreeing with many elements of this report , I voted against in the final vote .
The report explicitly supports the reopening of trade talks with the Mercosur countries .
While I support calls to ensure that imports from third countries are produced in a manner consistent with EU standards , an EU-Mercosur Association Agreement will have negative consequences for agriculture in Europe , particularly our livestock sector .
The Commission has failed to carry out an impact assessment of an agreement on agriculture in the EU since it relaunched talks with the trade bloc earlier this year .
As the EU is Latin America 's principal investor and second-largest trading partner , and as it also provides the most development aid , we believe that this information is sufficient to develop a clear and well-defined strategy regarding the trading relationship between the EU and Latin America .
We support the definition of clear guidelines regarding the best way to collaborate to promote political stability , to fight climate change , to manage migratory flows and to prevent natural disasters .
A good way of providing the aid that Latin America needs is by strengthening the trading relationship between the two blocs , which , upon completion , will be one of the largest in the world .
It is necessary , however , not to forget the outermost regions of Europe that may be affected by the importing of certain agricultural products , particularly the Portuguese region of Madeira with respect to banana imports .
We will have to find a balanced agreement that allows Latin American countries to develop , while simultaneously not damaging the various economic sectors of some Member States , mainly in the agricultural sector .
in writing . - ( DE ) In the last few years , Latin America has become an emerging economic region .
Trade agreements with South American states represent a very positive development .
As the European Union has already carried out very important development work , it should now further strengthen its position as the region 's second largest trading partner , just as Russia is already doing .
However , the EU should also consider carefully which states it trades with , as the exploitation of workers is still the norm in many South American countries .
I have voted against the report because it pays too little attention to the sometimes very poor working conditions in Latin America and offers too few proposals for improving them .
in writing . - ( DE ) The rapporteur advocates the complete opening up of the trading markets between the EU and Latin America .
Moreover , the problems relating to the EU-Mercosur Association Agreement are not adequately resolved in the report .
I therefore voted against this report .
I voted in favour of this report because I believe it is important to send a message to the Commission that this Parliament is determined to establish even closer links with Latin America .
South America , for a whole host of historical , social and economic reasons , has many things in common with Europe .
Our trade relations have always been excellent , but they must be strengthened and supported , including in the light of the new requirements of both continents .
We must not , in fact , forget the importance of some countries which may in the past have been regarded as developing countries , but which are now true global economic powers .
In view of all these points , I believe that Europe must continue to play its role as a preferential trade partner , guide and special point of reference for all the countries in the region .
I voted in favour of the Scholz report , because increased support for trade relations between the European Union and the countries of Latin America is the result of major democratic reforms in this particular region and improvements to the framework for protecting human rights .
However , we must ensure that future trade relations between the two regions will not hamper this progress and that products imported into the EU meet European standards in terms of quality , consumer safety and environmental protection .
I also share the view that the Commission should show greater concern when executing or extending trade agreements with countries which continue to infringe fundamental human rights .
I voted in favour of the resolution of the European Parliament of 21 October 2010 on the European Union 's trade relations with Latin America , as I believe that the free market stimulates the global economy and may be an important factor in the development of Latin American countries .
I consider , however , that the mandate that the European Commission received to conduct the negotiating process should be reassessed , as it is too old and no longer adequate for the current circumstances in which the negotiations will take place .
In this reassessment there would certainly be a chance to insist on the need to conduct studies , prior to entering into agreements , about their impact on the fabric of European production and specifically on agriculture .
A strong stance should also be taken against continuing to allow agricultural products to serve as a ' transaction currency ' for commercial advantages at other levels .
in writing . - The reason we finally voted against the text was that the more specific proposals to shelter Latin America from speculative attacks and climate change phenomena , discourage aggressive export orientation , avoid environmental dumping and hedge the liberalisation of financial services , got diluted in the process of building compromises , as counterweights to stop even more grotesque Spanish wordings .
The appeal to forget the unfortunate Doha Development Agenda ( DDA ) at the WTO and focus future work towards trade regulation on new challenges was inversed and transformed into a thousand-times-repeated call for a swift conclusion of a fair , ambitious and comprehensive DDA .
The concept of food sovereignty was lost , too .
Instead of calling a spade a spade , the report only ' stresses the importance of ... ' , after the rejection of any concrete figures , benchmarks and deadlines .
This leaves the report without added value , compared to existing documents .
On specific demands , it falls behind them .
This report has our support because it emphasises the strengthening of relations between the EU and the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean .
The European Union 's specific task is to act as an economic and commercial player on the international stage , overcoming competition from its partners , the United States and China , which have a foothold in the Latin American market .
Few sectors benefit from these trade relations .
Eighty-five per cent of the imports into the countries of Latin American and the Caribbean ( LAC ) are industrial products , whereas 40 % of exports to the EU are commodities .
In the medium to long term , trade relations should be intensified in accordance with clear and transparent rules .
The European Union is , first and foremost , an advocate of respect for human rights .
This is why I believe that we must focus very closely on respect for human rights in Colombia before liberalising trade with this country .
On the other hand , on the subject of food imports from Latin America , we must ensure that these countries comply with the same standards in terms of quality and animal protection which our own producers also comply with .
European common trade policy is an integral and important part of the Union 's general external action .
It could play a very positive role in wealth-creation goals , and in economic and political relationships between the people and countries of Europe and Latin America .
I have no doubt that closer integration of the economic spheres could be a win-win situation for both parties , notably in terms of creating more and better jobs .
However , I know the effects that the bilateral trade agreements signed between the European Union and the countries of Latin America could have on the economies of the outermost regions .
In the region that I am from , Madeira , the consequences are particularly visible as regards banana production .
I therefore argue that this productive sector and the other strategic and traditional sectors of the outermost regions should be preserved .
To this end , and in accordance with the commitment made by the European Union to them , the outermost regions must be compensated adequately , with particular attention paid to their vulnerable economies .
There is provision in this report for such safeguards for these regions , so I voted for it .
God bless your children .
With this blessing , I suspend the sitting .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 13.05 and resumed at 15.00 )
( FR ) I should just like to communicate some information I received a moment ago to the House .
For some weeks now , a new and unprecedented phenomenon has been occurring around certain large occupied towns in Western Sahara , that is to say , more than 12 000 Saharawi men , women and children are , as we speak , deserting their towns and moving into tents in the vicinity of Laayoune , Smara and Boujdour .
The movements , which are steadily increasing , appear to be a new way of protesting against the unbearable political and socioeconomic situation of the indigenous inhabitants of these territories .
I am saying this today and right now because the problem posed by the many violent interventions by the Moroccan regime could worryingly become worse this weekend .
That is why I call on Parliament to be ready to react depending on how the situation unfolds .
I will take it into account .
It was of course a point of order and the situation in Western Sahara and the situation in Morocco are not what we are supposed to be talking about this afternoon .
I will , however , take note of what you said .
Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting
1 .
Forced evictions in Zimbabwe
author . - Mr President , we are once again discussing the difficult situation in Zimbabwe .
Today , there is high inflation reaching hundreds of million per cent and an unemployment rate that has denied over 90 million people in the country a livelihood .
There are also very many human rights violations .
Parliament asks what should be done .
We have said many times that we do not accept human rights violations .
We have been dictating to African countries , but nothing has happened .
I think that when we give humanitarian aid to African countries in the future we must make it conditional on the observance of human rights .
We have not been tough enough in some cases and in other cases we have only dictated what to do .
Maybe we should have closer cooperation with all African countries and with the African Union and try and get them to understand the situation so that the European Union does not continue to give money if human rights violations continue .
author . - Mr President , the first indent of our resolution says it all : ' Having regard to its numerous previous resolutions on Zimbabwe , most recently that of 8 July this year ' .
We were speaking then about human rights violations in the diamond fields of Zimbabwe , and we are speaking now about eviction around Harare .
People are being evicted who were already evicted in 2005 in Operation Murambatsvina , which incidentally means ' clean out the trash ' .
The same people who were cleaned out as trash last time are being evicted now .
Last time it was Mugabe 's Government fighting its fight against the MDC .
This time it is the Unity Government of Zanu and MDC .
I must say that I am deeply disappointed that , within this Unity Government , this sort of human rights violation still continues .
I do not think this will be our last resolution on Zimbabwe .
I will be here next time and I will make the point again .
Mr President , this urgent humanitarian resolution must be viewed against a backdrop of political disagreement between Robert Mugabe and Morgan Tsvangirai , and this disagreement is the focus of the request for the European Union not to accept the new ambassadors unilaterally appointed by Mr Mugabe .
However , this urgent humanitarian resolution can be linked to the elections and to the political gains that may be had in driving populations out of the townships in which they are staying .
Let us cast our minds back to June 2005 and Operation Murambatsvina , mentioned just now : a township was exposed to the forceful and purely politically motivated intervention of Robert Mugabe 's bulldozers , and 700 000 people lost their homes .

The same thing is happening today : 20 000 of the poorest people in Zimbabwe , housed in the Hatcliffe Extension townships , not very far from Harare , are being threatened with eviction just because they cannot afford the exorbitant rents they are being charged ; it is a rather extensive operation .
Let us also remember that the humanitarian and economic situation is becoming ever worse for millions of Zimbabweans , that the AIDS prevalence rate in Zimbabwe is the fourth highest in the world , and that children are dying there all the time .
There are so many reasons right now for this urgent resolution and for a strong appeal to the entire international community in order to ensure that this reconciliation - I will not say this pseudo-reconciliation within Zimbabwe 's coalition government , but this reconciliation , anyway - is not destroyed today amid these aggressive preparations on the eve of the elections .
Mr President , I tend to think that the human rights situation in Zimbabwe is unfortunately not what we would normally call an emergency in this Chamber .
Human rights are in fact repeatedly violated in that country , as the numerous resolutions voted on in this Chamber show .
In the most recent one , as has been said , we denounced the arrest , on 22 July , of Mr Farai Muguwu , the founder and director of the Centre for Research and Development , whose crime was to report the atrocities committed in the diamond fields by , among others , the military authorities .
Today , we are addressing the issue of forced evictions .
This issue is not new .
Indeed , as Mrs De Keyser said , an operation of this kind was launched by the Zimbabwean authorities in 2005 .
It was called Operation ' Murambatsvina ' , which means to restore order .
It was quite some programme , I am sure you would agree , and it clearly shows what the Zimbabwean authorities mean by the word order .
Seven hundred thousand people were affected at that time .
The international community unanimously denounced the methods used .
What is the situation like today ?
The majority of the people affected are still living in tents .
Worse still , in August , armed police officers - I did indeed say police officers - came and set fire to the shelters of some 250 displaced persons who had set up home on the outskirts of Harare .
Twenty thousand people - this point has also been made - are today threatened with the same fate because they have not paid their residence tax , which they really cannot afford .
These men , women and children are in fact some of the country 's poorest people .
Are we going to let this go on without saying anything ?
Are we going to remind the Zimbabwean authorities once again of their international commitments , as Baroness Ashton did during the recent EU-Zimbabwe summit in July ?
We are well aware that there is friction between President Mugabe and the Prime Minister following the global political agreement signed on 15 September 2008 and the appointment , on 13 February , of the government of national unity .
Recently , President Mugabe threatened to dissolve the government almost there and then because it had dared to remind him of his constitutional obligations .
It is time to react in Zimbabwe and in many other countries throughout the world in order to stop the dialogue with dictators who hold on to power through the use of force and fraud , and whose sole aim is to pillage their country 's resources for personal gain .
author . - Mr President , time and time again this House has passed resolutions condemning the tragedy that is Zimbabwe .
Time and time again , Mr Mugabe has ignored us and carried on as if we do not exist and our opinions do not matter .
There is something we can do immediately to tell Mr Mugabe that our opinions do matter .
That is , we should not accept the credentials of Mrs Margaret Muchada , who has been nominated unilaterally by Mr Mugabe , in direct violation of the Zimbabwean Constitution , as the Zimbabwean Ambassador to the EU .
My colleague , Geoffrey Van Orden , has written to Mr Barroso and Mr Van Rompuy about this matter .

If we have any teeth , we should show Mr Mugabe , who he has ridden roughshod over us , that we do matter and require this lady , his Ambassador , to go back .
The evictions in Zimbabwe represent an outrageous disregard for internationally recognised human rights .
The forced evictions , without provision of compensation or alternative accommodation , are completely contrary to international law .
The Government of Zimbabwe is committing egregious violations of the civil , political , economic and social rights guaranteed by the African Charter on Human and Peoples ' Rights .
Continuation of the evictions is exposing increasing numbers of new people to indignity and homelessness .
We call on the Government of Zimbabwe to cease these practices and to stop the forced evictions .
People who have already been evicted should be given legal protection , as should their property , the victims should be given compensation and redress , and first and foremost all people should be guaranteed shelter and access to food and water .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( PL ) We need only make a list of the newspaper headlines about Zimbabwe from the last five years to have a picture of what conditions are like in a country which has been ruled for three decades by President Robert Mugabe .
Headlines such as : ' Zimbabwe - police beat up opposition ' or ' Mugabe has destroyed Africa ' are among the mildest expressions , and the authorities of the African regime find themselves under the constant pressure of international public opinion .
Extreme poverty and lack of access to basic medical services , gigantic unemployment levels which reach 90 % and the short average life span , which is today only 44 years , are the true face of Zimbabwe .
In these circumstances it is difficult to understand why the government considers it a priority to evict 20 000 citizens from the suburbs of the capital Harare , forcing them to leave behind their humble belongings .
I join the appeal of international organisations such as Amnesty International for the Government of Zimbabwe to cease the repression of its own citizens and concentrate on giving them real help in schools , hospitals and the labour market .
Zimbabwe , which is a poor country , cannot afford to waste time and money by investing in other areas .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , at the EU-Africa Summit in Libya next November there should be talks on how Mugabe and his close supporters remain a continuing stumbling block in the process of political and economic reconstruction and reconciliation in Zimbabwe .
They are plundering its economic resources for their own benefit and they are not granting their citizens fundamental rights .
Around 20 000 people living in the outskirts of Harare have been threatened with forced eviction .
The Government is demanding a renewal lease fee of up to USD 140 , but in a country where per capita income is less than USD 100 this is effectively impossible and this demand is a de facto licence for abuse .
In 2005 , 70 000 people were evicted and these people still live in dire circumstances .
In general , the humanitarian , political and economic situation in Zimbabwe continues to deteriorate and millions of people continue to be at risk of starvation .
The country has the world 's fourth-highest rate of HIV and high child mortality .
People do not have many chances to grow up in health and prosperity , and if they do they lack fundamental freedoms such as freedom of expression .
Zimbabwe ranks 123rd in terms of freedom of the press .
The return of independent dailies is a step forward for public access to information , but the situation is still very fragile .
I want to draw specific attention to the situation of LGBTI people in Zimbabwe .
People need unrestricted access to be granted relief , humanitarian access and aid so that the attempts by Zimbabwe to achieve the Millennium Development Goals can get under way .
This is very necessary .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , the woeful situation in Zimbabwe , the dictatorship which has prevailed there for more than 30 years , is a disgrace both for the international community and for Zimbabwe itself .
A dictatorship of the sort that oppresses its own people is completely unacceptable .
Mugabe 's cohorts there gorge themselves , live a life of luxury and are rolling in money , and at the same time others live in the streets or in hovels , from which they are now still being evicted .
It has to be said that somewhere there is a limit to what the international community and the European Union can tolerate .
This is an utterly shameful situation , and the international community should support a full boycott of the country .
There should be no more money for it .
It is time to expel this dictator , who oppresses his own people , once and for all .
That is because every day this gang remains in power is a reflection of our powerlessness and of the fact that the international community does not have the muscle to keep this oppressor in check .
Apart from anything else , he is also systematically persecuting various minorities : racial minorities , sexual minorities , and all other minorities , in their own land .
This is simply intolerable , and I fully support the notion that this dictator should be ousted .
For this reason , we must adopt the very tough EU stand that we now quite rightly intend to .
( RO ) Echoing what has been said by my fellow Members who have spoken so far , we are facing a very tough situation because the 20 000 inhabitants of Hatcliffe Extension are threatened with eviction .
As you are aware , they belong to the most vulnerable section of the population in Zimbabwe , a country going through major political problems , on top of the extremely dire economic situation .
Since its creation in February 2009 , Zimbabwe 's Unity Government has done very little to improve people 's situation , especially of those evicted in 2005 .
I think that our response or reaction to this situation is very clear .
The Government of Zimbabwe must take action in keeping with its international obligations .
This means halting and / or preventing forced evictions .
On the other hand , we definitely all want democracy to be restored in Zimbabwe .
What we have there at the moment could not be further from this .
( RO ) As has already been stated in this House , Zimbabwe is one of the countries where hunger is reaching catastrophic proportions , according to the report from the International Food Policy Research Institute published last week .
The rate of undernutrition among the population , the prevalence of underweight children and the infant mortality rate are the three indicators which dramatically highlight the chronic situation in terms of food shortages , affecting millions of people .
At the same time , hundreds of thousands of the poorest people in Zimbabwe have been evicted from their homes as part of a barbaric eviction operation whose brutal name is translated as ' Drive Out Rubbish ' .
These people have not only lost their homes , but also their jobs , thereby increasing the unemployment rate to 90 % of the country 's population .
This is happening while the dictator Mugabe declared that the people were extremely happy .
This was the view cynically expressed by the man who will remain in history the creator of the cruellest , long-standing dictatorship in the world .
I believe that it is absolutely imperative for us to request the regime in Zimbabwe to halt the forced evictions as a matter of urgency , put an end to the serious human rights violations and persecution of activists from civil society , and to refrain from any acts of violence , which are increasing at an alarming rate .
( SK ) Zimbabwe is a country whose powerful leaders have long held the people of their land in contempt , and they are making this abundantly clear
Of course , we may protest , arguing that helpless people cannot be treated like cattle , that they cannot be driven out of their homes with no rhyme or reason , and be left without any help .
Forced evictions of the poor in Harare are but a tiny example of the rule of Robert Mugabe and his accomplices who are sitting on the mineral riches of their country like frogs on a spring , exploiting and enriching themselves with these resources while letting the people of their country die from hunger .
I believe it may be naive to expect that we may achieve a change through persuasion and criticism .
Our measures should be more vigorous ; people like Mugabe only listen to financial consequences or brute force .
I think we have some financial measures at our disposal .
We need to reconsider the provision of financial and material aid to regimes that act like Mugabe 's regime , and simply seek other ways , including sanctions which might force these dictators to respect fundamental , and I stress , fundamental human rights .
( FI ) Mr President , it is no wonder that our fellow Members here are so infuriated by Mugabe .
He has made his country , Africa 's fertile granary , a conveyor belt of bad news .
The substitute accommodation that the government has provided has proven to be totally inadequate and has led to a worsening of living conditions , which were already wretched .
One of the official reasons given for the entire operation was that they were trying to prevent the spread of disease , but the fact that there was no treatment available after the evictions casts doubt on the government 's motives .
Everyone knows about the situation in Zimbabwe .
The corrupt nature of the government and the general mess in both the economy and in society are generally leading to a situation where the basics for existence are just not there .
Because of this , we must expect Zimbabwe to give a clear indication of its ability and willingness to safeguard the standard of living of its nationals .
Even if there are good reasons why a large number of people have to make way for major projects , a crucial starting point must also always be the welfare of the displaced population .
This is something that Zimbabwe has unquestionably neglected , regardless of whether the reasons that they have given are acceptable or not .
Mr President , the current situation in Zimbabwe is appalling and unacceptable .
Nearly 700 people were victims of the 2005 Operation Murambatsvina forced evictions .
Now 20 000 citizens face forced evictions from the Hatcliffe Extension near Harare .
The government has imposed unaffordable lease renewal fees on the people who were evicted , and has failed to consult with citizens or to inform them of the upcoming regulations .
Operation Garikai intended to assist those who were affected by the 2005 evictions is merely a continuation of the same human rights abuses .
I join in insisting that Zimbabwe halt these evictions of citizens in the Harare region .
I urge the government of Zimbabwe to immediately amend Operation Garikai to comply with all obligations under international and human rights law .
I ask the Commission to raise this issue as a matter of urgency with the government of Zimbabwe .
Mr President , I was not going to speak but unfortunately my colleague , Geoffrey Van Orden , cannot be with us this week .
He has a long history of criticising the odious and brutal regime of President Robert Mugabe .
I think , sadly , the only way we will see the end to the Zanu-PF Mugabe dictatorship is when he is actually taken out in a coffin .
I had hoped that there would have been a chance of reconciliation and peace and a transition towards true democracy a few years ago when Morgan Tsvangirai became Prime Minister in a power-sharing brokered deal , but it would appear that Mugabe has been able to reassert his absolute grip on power and revert to the kind of behaviour for which he is only too well known - namely violence , eviction and repression .
Ultimately it is the poor Zimbabweans who suffer in that now almost broken economy .
If it were not for the lifeline extended to Zimbabwe as a result of governments like the People 's Republic of China giving them handouts , and money coming from Libya and others , it would not survive .
Recently I have to say I was disappointed by the visit of President Zuma , who came to this Parliament .
He came here asking the European Union to lift their sanctions on Zimbabwe because of the refugees flowing into South Africa .
I am afraid we must tell Mr Zuma that is just not possible .
We have to send a strong signal of disapproval about the way in which Mugabe treats his own people .
I would like to endorse the comments made by my colleague , Nirj Deva , before me that one gesture would be to refuse the accreditation of the newly-appointed Ambassador of Zimbabwe to the European Union .
Mr President and honourable Members , I am extremely grateful to the Members who participated in this debate .
The European Union is following this matter very closely , especially in view of the 2005 ' Operation Clean-up ' which had disastrous effects on the living conditions of 700 000 Zimbabweans .
In 2005 , the EU office for humanitarian aid ECHO provided EUR 3.25 million in support of food security and agricultural activities and the distribution of food rations to vulnerable persons .
This current situation is not a repeat of the events that took place in Zimbabwe in 2005 .
The Commission takes note of this Parliament resolution and its recommendations .
To date , we have not received a clear indication from our partners that would confirm a repeat of the 2005 events .
We are closely monitoring the situation through our EU delegation office and through our local ECHO office .
We are in constant contact with the International Office for Migration and local human rights organisations involved in this issue .
This time , a lease renewal notice that is valid for five years has been sent to the population .
Tenants unable to raise the necessary funds were asked to present their cases to the Ministry of Local Government and received support from a local NGO working with homeless people .
Thanks to the support of a local human rights NGO , namely the Zimbabwe Lawyers for Human Rights , their cases will be heard by the court this week .
The EU is already supporting the work of this human rights NGO which represents the interests of the poorest who are unable to pay the requested fees and could thus lose their land .
However , I can reassure you that the EU will continue to closely monitor the situation and mobilise assistance if and when necessary .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debate .
2 .
Cambodia , in particular the case of Sam Rainsy
The next item is Cambodia , specifically the case of Sam Rainsy .
author . - Mr President , Sam Rainsy is a colleague of ours , a member of the parliament in Cambodia .
That mere fact has led to assassination attempts and a number of political and legal attacks by the ruling party , including a 12-year prison sentence .
The ruling party apparently does not like the fact that Sam Rainsy denounces corruption and human rights abuses .
I would like to remind this ruling party that the EU is the single largest donor institution to Cambodia and that this aid is conditional on respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms .
In 2006 Sam Rainsy received the Prize for Freedom from Liberal International .
He received this prize for the defence of freedoms we share across this Parliament .
We therefore call on the Cambodian authorities to implement the recommendations of the UN Special Rapporteur for Human Rights in Cambodia .
author . - Mr President , as has already been said , the European Union is the single largest donor institution to Cambodia and it is more than legitimate for us to call on the Cambodian authorities not only to engage in political and institutional reforms to build a democratic state , governed by the rule of law and founded on the respect of fundamental freedoms and rights , but also to demonstrate the will to combat effectively the endemic scourge of corruption , massive deforestation resulting in the displacement of people , land grabbing and the sex tourism industry , to refuse the current culture of impunity and to bring to justice all those involved in such activities .
The guarantee of free and fair political expression without intimidation or harassment is also a necessity .
More specifically , we should state that we are alarmed at the prosecution and sentencing to a total of 12 years in prison of the opposition leader , Sam Rainsy , on account of a gesture which it considers to be of a symbolic and clearly political nature .
It is particularly alarming that , if upheld , this verdict would bar Sam Rainsy from standing in the 2013 parliamentary elections and have consequences far beyond Rainsy 's case , as it is bound to affect the opposition as such .
Mr President , this is an urgent resolution that is dominated by Sam Rainsy , an occasionally controversial figure , but that must not make us forget the true democratic issue hiding behind this case .
So , Sam Rainsy , as has been said , is a liberal figure and opponent of the leader , Hun Sen. Mr Rainsy had already been sentenced to 18 months ' imprisonment , only to be granted a pardon in 2006 .
Indeed , he accused Hun Sen of being behind the 1997 grenade attack .
Today , he has been convicted of the crime - a symbolic one , as has been said - of moving the markings of the disputed border between Vietnam and Cambodia and of distributing so-called fake maps .
Twelve years in absentia is a lot , but it is in fact clear what this is all about .
The sole aim is to prevent him from standing in the next elections , in 2013 , and he is the leader of the country 's second political opposition party .
Thus , the political climate in Cambodia is tense , elections are approaching and vote-winning tactics are being employed , but there is also a drift towards authoritarianism , and I would like to mention , aside from the Rainsy case , that of NGO representatives who have been prosecuted : the politician Mu Sochua , found guilty of defaming the Prime Minister , the journalist Hang Chakra , imprisoned for having denounced the corruption within the Deputy Prime Minister Sok An 's entourage , and so on .
I would therefore just like to point out , as others have done , that we are donors , that we have a cooperation agreement that stipulates that fundamental freedoms must be respected .
I also call for an emergency humanitarian plan for the people , the populations affected by the construction and textile crises .
That is also important .
author . - Mr President , although Cambodia is on paper a pluralist democracy , the respected NGO Human Rights Watch states that politicians and journalists critical of the government face violence and intimidation .
In addition , the judiciary remains weak and subject to political influence .
Furthermore the government continues to turn a blind eye to fraudulent confiscation of farmers ' land , illegal logging and widespread plundering of the country 's natural resources .
Sam Rainsy , the Opposition leader currently exiled to France , has been jailed in absentia for ten years .
His so-called crime was to seek to highlight the confiscation of peasant farmers ' land by the government following border talks with neighbouring Vietnam , in the course of which he was charged with digging up the border posts .
This resolution today serves as a timely reminder to the Cambodian Government that if it seeks closer ties with the EU it should guarantee and uphold basic freedoms and fundamental rights .
Otherwise , Cambodia risks being bracketed with the pariah state Burma in the eyes of the international community .
author . - Mr President , Mr Rainsy , an opposition leader , has been sentenced in absentia to 12 years in prison .
His trial did not comply with international standards for a fair and impartial judiciary , and his conviction was politically motivated .
Similar convictions of members of the opposition party are fairly common , and show that there is no impartial judiciary in Cambodia .
These court decisions hinder basic human rights , including the freedom of expression and the right to a fair trial .
I strongly oppose the conviction of Sam Rainsy and those like him who exercise their freedom of expression , and call on the Cambodian Government to stop its current path of tyranny .
At international level , we must remind Cambodia to strive towards democracy and not use the selective enforcement of laws against individual rights .
In particular , I call on the Commission to remind Cambodia not to use new NGO regulations to restrict the opposition and civil society .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , Sam Rainsy 's treatment is just the tip of the iceberg with respect to the authoritarian control which the ruling party in Cambodia exercises to wield political power over a court in order to silence criticism of the government .
This government , of course , has as its main objective the suppression of civil society and the promotion of a oneparty system .
This is also reflected in Rainsy 's sentence , an attempt to prevent him from standing in the elections in 2013 .
As has already been mentioned here , the EU is the single largest donor institution to Cambodia , and for that reason it is important that in this resolution we do not just content ourselves with condemning the numerous breaches of human rights in the country , the lack of any proper viable judicial system , and the politicisation of the armed forces .
We must in no uncertain terms also remind them of the cooperation agreement that exists between the EU and Cambodia and of its Article 1 , which calls for a respect for human rights .
There must be consequences if civil freedoms continue to be flouted , and the EU must make a clear improvement to the human rights situation a condition of continued aid .
The 12-year prison sentence handed down to Cambodian opposition leader Sam Rainsy is actually a serious human rights violation and a blatant indication of the authoritarianism which dominates political life in Cambodia .
Following his expulsion from the National Assembly and the withdrawal of his parliamentary immunity three times so far , along with numerous assassination attempts and the murder of dozens of his supporters , Sam Rainsy has now been convicted in absentia for his protests with strong political overtones .
Basically , the ultimate aim of the sentence handed down in September is to prevent the leader of the opposition from being a candidate in the elections due to be held in more than two years ' time , which compromises Cambodia 's chances of achieving democracy once and for all .
In addition to the requests submitted via this resolution to the Cambodian Government , asking for an end to political persecutions , I would also like to add a request to the European Union 's High Representative for Foreign Affairs to bring the necessary pressure to bear on the authorities for them to resume the political and institutional reforms required to establish genuine democracy .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Cambodia is a very beautiful country with a great history , but there are dark sides to both the country and its history .
The latest problems include people disappearing , people being imprisoned without trial , high levels of corruption , illegal land-grabbing and illegal logging .
The thing which should most concern us as Members of the European Parliament is that the people who criticise and denounce these practices are dragged off the street , face sham trials and are then put in prison .
Sam Rainsy , the opposition leader in Cambodia , has been subjected to serious persecution .
He has already been elected , but was thrown out of the parliament in 1995 .
However , he managed to return .
There were a number of attacks on him during election rallies , one of which left 80 people dead .
I have had the privilege of visiting him in Cambodia .
I found him to be a very peaceful person and a committed supporter of democracy and human rights .
Now he has been sentenced to 12 years in prison for a symbolic act on the basis of flimsy arguments .
Anyone who locks up the leader of the opposition party also locks up a large proportion of the people of the country who are represented by this person .
Anyone who locks up the leader of the opposition party and prevents him from taking part in the next elections is blocking the democratic process and violating civil and human rights .
I believe that we should not accept this and I call on the Commission to demand that , in particular , the terms of article 1 of the cooperation agreement with Cambodia are fulfilled .
This refers to respect for human rights in Cambodia being a precondition for the provision of aid by the European Union .
I have twice had the opportunity to visit Cambodia .
The first time was two years ago , with the observation delegation of the European Parliament during the parliamentary elections , and the second time was six months ago .
I must say that Cambodia is a country which has developed very rapidly in recent years - I am talking about economic development - as , indeed , have other countries in that part of the world .
Unfortunately , the rapid economic development in Cambodia has not been accompanied by a process of democratisation .
For there is no true democracy without strong media which keep checks on the ruling party , without a strong opposition or without a strong non-governmental organisation sector .
The sentence imposed on Sam Rainsy , which is by no means the first , is another blow to the opposition .
If this sentence is upheld , Sam Rainsy will not be able to stand in the next parliamentary elections , although he enjoys fairly high popularity in his country .
The sentence is puzzling in that over 30 years after the fall of the Khmer Rouge regime , very many of the leaders of the regime in Cambodia still have not been tried .
Questioning the Vietnamese-Cambodian border certainly does not help stabilisation in the region , nevertheless this matter should be resolved by political means and not by a judicial sentence .
( RO ) It is deplorable that Cambodian courts are still resorting to arrest as a means of intimidating political opponents and dissidents .
The most common targets for this action are journalists , human rights activists and other critics speaking out in favour of freedom of speech .
The charges brought against Sam Rainsy are obviously more of a political than criminal nature .
He has been sentenced to 12 years in prison following a symbolic gesture of protest which he made against the way in which the border with Vietnam has been marked .
However , the real reason for his conviction seems to be to remove the opposition from the parliamentary election contest to be held in 2013 .
I would like to take this opportunity to appeal to the Cambodian Government to abide by its commitments towards consolidating the state of democracy .
Sam Rainsy , as the main opposition leader , must be allowed to resume his duties in the Cambodian Parliament as soon as possible .
This would help stop the move towards the single-party system , which poses a threat to the respect for human rights .
( FI ) Mr President , the decision of the Cambodian court to sentence opposition leader Sam Rainsy to 10 years in prison in charges relating to the spread of disinformation and falsification of official documents , and other cases like it have led to justified concern in the West regarding the impartiality and independence of the country 's legal system .
There has been a systematic attempt there superficially to interpret the clauses in the law on the spread of false information and slander and libel in such a way that it tends to hamper the work of the opposition and NGOs .
The clauses in question have actually been used to restrict freedom of opinion and expression .
Although I acknowledge the significant development that Cambodia has gone through since the Pol Pot regime , I would regard it as vexing if the Cambodian Government were to decide to leave the process of building a democratic system halffinished , which , unfortunately , has been the case in a large number of countries .
Cambodia has signed up to several international agreements , including its cooperation agreement with the European Union , to safeguard the fundamental rights of its people and the implementation of democratic principles within its territory .
The European Union must in no uncertain terms call on the Cambodian Government to respect its commitments .
( RO ) As has already been mentioned , Sam Rainsy has been given two prison sentences .
The 10-year sentence he has now received for allegedly spreading disinformation and falsifying public documents has been added to the earlier one for two years .
As my fellow Members have also stated , this is an obvious attempt to block his participation in the future elections .
There is an issue with the procedure followed in this whole story , which is that Sam Rainsy was convicted in absentia as part of proceedings which were held behind closed doors and which , according to reports , were highlighted by numerous irregularities .
This is actually not an isolated case .
Many more critics of the Cambodian Government have endured similar treatment involving criminal prosecutions .
As has already been mentioned , I believe that , based on the Cooperation Agreement signed with the European Union , the Cambodian authorities have to abide by their clear commitments linked to human rights .
( SK ) In Cambodia , as in many other countries , the struggle for political power is descending into a real fight ; a life-and-death struggle , as the saying goes .
In such situations , power structures destroy , persecute and imprison their political opposition .
This seems to be the case of Sam Rainsy whom the current leaders naturally intend to dispose of because he represents competition , and embodies for them the risk of future political change .
As in other cases , we could certainly intervene and ask the Cambodian Government to stop abusing its political opponent and allow him room to join the others on equal terms in order to be able to compete in the political struggle .
I think that as a result of our improved relations with Cambodia , we might be more successful in this matter than in the case of Harare .
Therefore , I believe it would be worth our while putting the Cambodian Government under political pressure to make it reconsider the manner in which it is proceeding and its treatment of political opponents , and generate conditions for free and correct political competition .
Mr President , firstly I want to thank the Members who participated in the debate .
I would like to thank those MEPs who have submitted resolutions on Cambodia for this urgency debate .
The situation there is indeed a matter of concern .
We have had frank exchanges with our Cambodian interlocutors , most recently at the Joint Committee in Brussels on 8 October , about the state of the country 's democratic institutions and , in particular , the treatment of the opposition in Parliament .
The fact that the opposition leader , Sam Rainsy , has had to seek refuge in France is symptomatic of a deteriorating trend .
The same can be said of the judiciary 's involvement in politics and the prosecution of members of the opposition , including those who should be able to benefit from parliamentary immunity .
There is a danger that the National Assembly will no longer be able to function as a forum for the free exchange of views .
The media , too , are under pressure .
There are some bright spots .
Cambodia has accepted all the recommendations of the United Nations Human Rights Council in the Universal Periodic Review .
We also note that a new penal code and an anti-corruption law have been enacted .
Clearly we will need to follow how these are implemented in practice .
We shall continue to remind Cambodia of the recommendations put forward by our Election Observation Missions in the past .
Establishment of an effective Human Rights Committee is an important objective .
We welcome the Government 's intention to proceed with this and its initiative in setting up a joint forum with civil society organisations .
Cambodia remains a very poor country .
There is a lot that can be done to keep up the momentum of recent economic growth without , at the same time , increasing disparities in society .
This should include reform of the rules on land ownership and an end to unsustainable practices in land and forest management , including the exploitation of natural resources .
Sanctioning the government or reducing the level of our contacts would do nothing for the poorest and most vulnerable and would only embolden those who pay lip service to democracy .
Therefore , I cannot agree that suspending our bilateral agreement would be helpful .
There is no substitute for patient dialogue .
If we are not seen as a major player in the country 's development , we shall lose an opportunity to influence events .
Yet there is much we can do in Cambodia at all levels , from the Prime Minister 's office to civil society .
We shall continue to encourage positive initiatives that Cambodia is taking in favour of human rights , development and gender equality , while continuing to make the case for a truly pluralistic parliamentary democracy , a freer press and a more independent judiciary .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place shortly .
Written Statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - The human rights situation in Cambodia is an ever growing concern .
We are faced with the problem of blatant human rights violations by the Authoritarian Government that is chewing away at the fabric of democracy .
As Cambodia 's largest donor the EU needs to take swift action in protecting the citizens of Cambodia and reassure them that the democratic process will not faultier .
I would like to take this opportunity to address the Government of Cambodia and request their compliance with the U.N. Special Rapporteur 's report in a swift and timely manner .
The case of Sam Rainsy brings to light the injustices occurring in Cambodia , where Mr. Rainsy , as the leader of the opposition party and Parliament member , has been confronted with what can only be viewed as a deliberate effort to curtail any opposition to the established Authoritarian Government .
The practises of charging and detaining any persons viewed as a threat to the Government must end .
Furthermore , the citizens still have no guarantee of independence and impartiality from the judiciary .
These issues must be confronted and addressed immediately by this Parliament to assure the citizens of Cambodia that this Parliament continues to support and defend their right to Democracy .
3 .
North Caucasus , in particular the case of Oleg Orlov
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions on North Caucasus , in particular the case of Oleg Orlov .
author . - Mr President , I would like to say that this resolution on the situation in the North Caucasus , and in particular on the case of Oleg Orlov , is one of the most deserving resolutions this House has adopted for a long time .
The tragedy reigning in the North Caucasus has only deepened in recent years with pervasive human rights violations still affecting the daily lives of the communities in Chechnya , in Ossetia , Dagestan , North Ossetia and Kabardino-Balkaria .
The violence is far from over .
Only last Tuesday , at least six people were killed in an attack on Chechnya 's Parliament building in Grozny .
At least 17 people were injured , most of them civilians .
On 9 September , 17 people were killed and many others wounded in a bombing in Vladikavkaz , the capital of North Ossetia .
The tragedies of the past are not accounted for either .
The families of victims in Beslan still do not know what exactly happened to their children and loved ones , how they died or where their bodies are .
Not only has the vicious circle of violence and impunity left these communities distraught and paralysed , the failure to tackle the situation has led the violence to spread beyond the borders of the North Caucasian republics .
While Muscovites have felt the trauma of terrorism , Chechen refugees in Europe fear persecution , even murder .
People disappear even in the capital city , Moscow , or in St Petersburg , as has happened during the past year .
So there comes a point when this must stop .
The winner of the 2009 Sakharov Prize , Mr Orlov , being placed under criminal charges could be the point at which Europe finally says enough is enough .
The EU should seek now to cooperate with the Council of Europe on the excellent report produced by Dick Marty on legal remedies for human rights violations in the North Caucasus .
author . - Mr President , today President Buzek announced the winner of this year 's Sakharov Prize .
This prize embodies freedom of thought , an essential European freedom and right we stand for on behalf of our citizens and across the world .
In response to the Nobel Peace Prize award , President Buzek called firmly on China to release Liu Xiao Bo and said : ' Freedom is not a threat , but the threats to freedom can be many ' .
This also goes for the people who defend human rights in the Northern Caucasus .
Last year 's Sakharov Prize awardees Oleg Orlov , Sergei Kovalev and Lyudmila Alexeyeva , of Memorial , have not been able to pick up their award personally as their freedom is threatened .
The EU invests tremendously in EU-Russia relations , and we are joined through the Council of Europe and the OSCE .
Russia has thus committed itself to protecting and promoting human rights and the rule of law , but what a long way we are from that situation .
Intimidation of journalists and civil society activists prevails , disappearances of human rights defenders happen systematically and there is no freedom of expression , including on the Internet .
The absence of the rule of law has led to 20 000 cases pending at the European Court of Human Rights from the Russian Federation .
Russia has the right to fight terrorism in the Northern Caucasus , but if the rule of law is not upheld this has a counter-productive effect on stability .
There really is no excuse for Russia not to comply with its own commitment to human rights .
We look forward and will see to it that the representatives of Memorial have the freedom to come to this Parliament , thereby symbolising the freedoms and rights that all citizens in the Northern Caucasus enjoy .
author . - ( FI ) Mr President , I am very concerned about the growing climate of fear that surrounds human rights defenders in Russia .
We owe our support to Oleg Orlov , to whom we awarded the Saharov Prize last year .
His sole crime is to have spoken about human rights in Russia .
Fundamental rights are also being breached within the EU , but what has happened in Russia is something else entirely .
We must struggle against all kinds of terrorism and radical extremism using all the legal means available to us , but also availing ourselves of the remedies offered by civil society .
There is no longer any need for oppression in the North Caucasus : there needs to be dialogue instead .
There must be no more crime , but more respect for the law and human rights .
Justice is always carried out objectively and subjectively .
In the North Caucasus this means that criminals should be convicted and the needs of the victims of crime taken into account .
Adopting this statement is a clear and consistent show of support for Orlov , as it is too for all the others who struggle in the name of human rights .
We must bear this case in mind when we discuss new relations between the EU and Russia .
Russia must respect human rights to be able to play a genuine role in Europe and accept the European ethos : Europe is on the side of people , not against them .
author . - ( PL ) In Communist times , when the Solidarity movement in Poland was fighting for human rights and democracy , a slogan was widely used which said : ' there is no freedom without Solidarity ' .
Today , in the context of what is happening in the North Caucasus , although not only there , but also in many other parts of Russia , it can be said that there is no stabilisation without the rule of law .
It is very important to talk about these two phenomena together .
We cannot talk about economic and political relations with Russia while ignoring human rights there .
It is , in fact , a system of interconnected vessels , they are not two separate subjects .
Elementary honesty demands that we not only talk about improving relations with Russia - with that great country - but also that we require of Moscow that it respect human rights , including in the case of someone who has been awarded the Sakharov Prize .
This is a singular slap in the face for the European Parliament and the European Union .
Mr President , I should like to take advantage of this speech to ask for us together to think about what purpose the Sakharov Prize serves .
I should like to begin by thanking my colleagues , and Mrs Hautala in particular , for having responded to my request concerning the situation of Mr Orlov .
Indeed , Mr Orlov is one of the three people in charge of Memorial , the association to which we awarded the Sakharov Prize last year .
By handing over this prize , we rewarded the commitment of those who still dare to denounce the situation in Chechnya .
It was symbolic because it came a few months after the murder of Natalia Estemirova , a murder that Mr Orlov strongly condemned .
We knew that the Chechen President was suing Mr Orlov for his hatred , that he had pressed charges against him .
In January 2010 Mr Orlov and Memorial were found guilty , and we did not say a thing .
On 6 July Mr Orlov was charged once again , and he is now facing a three-year prison term .
When we award the Sakharov Prize , we aim to raise the profile of the work of men and women who fight for democracy and human rights and , in awarding them the prize , we place them under our protection .
However , what have we done for Mr Orlov and for all those who defend human rights in Russia and in Chechnya ?
In what way have we developed the EU 's dialogue to ensure that human rights are at last respected in the North Caucasus ?
Can we tolerate , without saying anything , the fact that no legal action has been taken more than a year after Mrs Estemirova 's murder ?
Can we tolerate human rights defenders being kidnapped , mistreated and disappearing without any reaction by the courts ?
I almost feel like saying , what purpose do we serve if , part-session after part-session , we denounce a number of human rights violations without it stopping the Commission from pursuing its supposedly constructive dialogues and from telling us that progress is being made , but just not in the fields of human rights and justice ?
When will we stop renouncing these supposedly fundamental values for the benefit of the economic and political interests of certain Member States ?
We might be more credible , ladies and gentlemen , if our sittings were not pushed back to last thing on Thursday afternoon , and if there were a few more of us here to follow these debates .
Mr President , the North Caucasus was a victim of tsarist colonial policy and of attempts at genocide by the Stalinist regime .
However , unfortunately it was also involved in two brutal wars after the collapse of the Soviet Union which went as far genocide against smaller ethnic groups , such as the Chechens .
Today it is still a region where small , evil satellite regimes , like that of Mr Kadyrov , commit horrific violations of human rights .
We condemn all forms of terrorism on all sides , but this regime has nothing to do with democracy and the rule of law .
In order to resolve this situation , we need a three-pronged approach , involving close cooperation between the Council of Europe , together with the European Court of Human Rights , the European Parliament as the driving force behind the European Union and the human rights organisations in the region , which are attempting to protect it from the might of Russia .
The human rights organisation Memorial plays a central role in this respect .
Therefore , we are calling not only for Mr Oleg Orlov to be left in peace immediately , but also for him to be given support for his commendable work on behalf of human rights .
We owe that to him and his fellow combatants , to the people of the North Caucasus and also to our murdered friend and comrade Natalia Estemirova , whom many of us knew personally and whose murder must finally be resolved .
We are under an obligation to her to ensure that human rights and the rule of law are introduced into the North Caucasus .
Some time ago , Oleg Orlov said the greatest problem for the North Caucasus was the rejection by those in power of the most important issue - that of human rights .
The violations of human rights are destabilising the situation in the North Caucasus , are prolonging the conflict , are reducing the chances for its resolution and are , in fact , creating support for underground terrorist activity .
Human rights organisations such as Memorial should be supported because they are essential for the creation of a stable and free society , as also they are needed for the establishment of a stability which is real and lasting .
These organisations should be supported , therefore , and it is also necessary to condemn the reprehensible deeds which are being perpetrated in the North Caucasus , to speak out for the growing number of people who have disappeared and to remember the suffering of those who have been displaced .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( LV ) Thank you , Mr President .
I fully support the part of the resolution which addresses the need for human rights in North Caucasus to be observed .
I am very familiar with the situation in the Caucasus , as I have been there more than once .
At the same time , I should like to remark that the title of ' human rights defender ' does not give Mr Orlov the right to accuse the President of the Republic of Chechnya of murder .
If Mr Orlov believes that the Sakharov prize is a mandate for injudicious assertions , he is mistaken .
The European Parliament does not have to act as Orlov 's lawyer .
Let Orlov prove his case in court .
If not in a Russian court , then in the European Court .
We do not have the right to take sides in this dispute .
We must give the courts the opportunity to do their work .
However , I should like to give Orlov some advice - think before you speak .
Defamation is an offence . Thank you .
It is a paradox that on the day when we have announced our decision to award the 2010 Sakharov Prize , we are talking about the persecution of one of the winners of last year 's prize .
As you know , Oleg Orlov , together with other members of the organisation Memorial , was awarded the prize last year for his uncompromising and courageous fight for the truth about Russian crimes committed in the Chechen Republic .
We are talking , today , about the continued persecution to which Oleg Orlov is being subjected because he is courageously demanding explanations for all the circumstances of the death of Natalia Estemirova , who was the head of Memorial in Chechnya .
It should be remembered that the steps taken on the part of ' President ' Ramzan Kadyrov against Mr Orlov would not have been possible without the support of the Kremlin .
Therefore , I appeal to all the authorities of the European Union , including the Commission and the Council , to put pressure on President Medvedev to curb this kind of persecution in Chechnya .
( RO ) Acts of violence or terrorism are almost an everyday occurrence in the republics in the North Caucasus .
The attack carried out last week in the Chechen Parliament highlights that Islamist insurgency is jeopardising the entire region 's stability .
Fifteen years after the outbreak of the wars in Chechnya , there are still 80 000 displaced persons in the region .
The situation for human rights activists is also alarming , with reports of numerous random abductions and convictions .
The case of Oleg Orlov is one of a series of trials initiated without any sound legal basis .
He could face three years in prison after he accused the president of Chechnya of involvement in the murder of Natalia Estemirova in 2009 .
I wish to point out that the investigations launched after this woman 's death have not made any progress so far .
For these reasons , I believe that the Federal authorities need to take additional measures to ensure that investigations are conducted properly , including when members of the organisation Memorial are involved .
( FI ) Mr President , the best known and most violent conflict in the North Caucasus region was that which began with the First Chechen War .
It still continues , although it has spread , in particular to Dagestan and Ingushetia .
Without adopting a position on to what extent it is about a war of liberation , a war against terrorism or something else , we cannot deny the fact that there are almost 100 000 internal refugees in the region and a very poor situation with respect to human rights .
The human rights activists to whom we awarded the Sakharov Prize last year are a force to be reckoned with in Memorial , which has a significant role in the North Caucasus .
When he collected the prize last December , Oleg Orlov answered a question on the dangers of his work , saying that the biggest problem was that the threat came from representatives of the state .
Few would doubt these words of his .
Anna Politkovskaya was especially known as someone who spoke up for the human rights of Chechens .
The Russian agent Alexander Litvinenko , who was poisoned in London , had criticised Russian actions in Chechnya .
Natalya Estemirova , who was murdered last year , revealed the fact that the security services had been involved in acts of violence and executions , in Chechnya too .
The list of similar unsolved murders could go on .
That is why it is vital that the European Union should continue to raise these issues .
( PL ) I would like to begin by correcting something which was said by a fellow Member .
We were informed that representatives of Memorial were not able to come to Parliament to receive the Sakharov Prize last year .
In fact , they were here .
It is the ' Ladies in White ' who cannot collect the prize , because they are not being allowed to leave Havana .
The report prepared in June 2010 by the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe publishes information about further cases of human rights violations in the North Caucasus .
The Russian authorities maintain they are making efforts at stabilisation , but the impunity associated with human rights violations and the absence of the rule of law continue to be the main obstacles to real and lasting stability in the region .
Civilians are still living under the threat of violence .
Torture and ill-treatment are commonplace , as are forced disappearances , arbitrary murders and arbitrary arrests .
Investigations into human rights violations are ineffective and defective .
Their only result is often the failure to punish the perpetrators , which increases the mistrust of government institutions and the entire justice system .
It is our duty to take all possible steps , not only to enable permanent monitoring of the situation in the North Caucasus , but also to take action intended to guarantee the rule of law and support for civil and democratic initiatives and to bring an end to the lawlessness in the region .

( SK ) I believe that the main problem in the North Caucasus is disregard for the most important thing of all , namely respect for individual human rights Such human rights violations destabilise the situation in the region , prolong and deepen conflict , decrease the chances for its resolution , and help generate the basis for reactionary terrorist groups .
Ramzan Kadyrov , who has assumed power in Chechnya , does not contribute to stability .
He has become the absolute ruler of this republic , defying the law or misinterpreting it so that he may act in contradiction of fundamental human rights .
Moreover , abuses directed against certain individuals may neither be publicised nor discussed .
Oleg Orlov , a member of the Memorial group , is a sorry example of the persecution of those who defend human rights .
The situation seems to be tragically without a solution , and that is why it is the moral obligation of the European Parliament to painstakingly monitor events in the region , and regularly insist on respect for rights which the citizens and human rights organisations in the Russian Federation still cannot enjoy on a day-to-day basis despite official rhetoric .
( RO ) I too feel obliged to speak out in solidarity with Oleg Orlov and the Human Rights Centre Memorial , which he heads .
They were awarded the Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought last year by the European Parliament .
The conviction for slandering the Chechen President and the trial initiated against Oleg Orlov , who could now face years in prison , mark the horrible culmination of a depressing series of acts of persecution against human rights activists , including the most terrible one involving the abduction and murder of Natalia Estemirova , Memorial 's coordinator in Chechnya .
I feel obliged to protest against these brutal , repeated violations against human rights , justified by the need to combat terrorism , against the impunity of those guilty of serious crimes and abuses , as well as against the Russian authorities tolerating this situation , which is affecting the credibility of their commitment to democracy .
( CS ) I would like to think here about how it is possible that we are still only discussing the human rights of a relatively small group of people and are completely missing the main issue .
The bottom line in the North Caucasus is the strong external interference of Wahhabis who are trained , who are armed and who are moving in with clear objectives .
If you do not know where the Wahhabis come from and who finances them - well , it is the same sources that are being talked about with regard to other terrorist organisations .
Unfortunately , in this resolution , the main issue - that is , why there are flagrant violations of human rights in various parts of the North Caucasus - is completely missing .
Of course , it is necessary to respect human rights , but it is necessary to create the conditions for complying with them .
If terrorist organisations are being financed from abroad - and this is certainly the case - then it is difficult for us to provide these conditions .
Unfortunately , the resolution does not take account of that .
Mr President , I give my full backing to this resolution , which is supported by my political group and calls for action in support of Sakharov awardee Oleg Orlov and what he stands for - namely opposition to the human rights violations that go on in the Northern Caucasus .
Let me say in this respect that I do not see myself and my Group reflected in the words of Mr Mirsky , who spoke earlier and criticised Oleg Orlov , saying that he should not use his status as a human rights defender to speak up against Mr Kadyrov .
Any self-respecting democrat knows that you do not need a title , you do not need to be a human rights defender , and you do not need to be a member of Memorial or a Sakharov awardee to have the democratic right to criticise any head of State or Government .
I should also like to use this opportunity to endorse what our colleague Raül Romeva i Rueda said earlier .
He called the attention of this Parliament - and also of the Commission and the Council and , in particular , Mrs Ashton - to the dangerous situation that is now developing in Western Sahara .
I should like to request her to intervene so that the Moroccan authorities do not arrest the people of Western Sahara who are fighting against illegal occupation .
( The President cut off the speaker . )
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank you for raising the human rights situation in the North Caucasus .
While the anti-terrorist operation in Chechnya was officially declared over last year , violence and the climate of impunity continue there , but even more so in neighbouring Dagestan and also in Ingushetia .
The armed attack that took place on Tuesday of this week on the Parliament in Gro