Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 17 January 2002 .
Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting
The Minutes of the previous sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , I should like to ask you to add my name to the attendance register .
Not only did I vote , I even took the floor during that session ; yet I am not included on the list .
I hope that this can be rectified .
Yes , indeed , Mr Pronk .
( The Minutes of the previous sitting were approved )
Announcement by the President
I should like to inform the House that I received , shortly after my arrival in office , advice from the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , inviting the President to submit to the European Court of Justice for review the question of the legal base with regard to the European Company Statute .
The deadline for implementing that request was today .
I consulted widely , both inside and outside the House on this issue and had the opportunity to hear opinions of the Conference of Presidents .
I have made a decision , while respecting the weight of the argument - which is a substantial legal argument - not to make a reference to the European Court of Justice .
Essentially I have made this decision , prior to the forthcoming convention and having regard to the Laeken Declaration which expressly mentions Articles 95 and 308 - the articles in dispute in this case - so we can make an act of political faith between ourselves and the other institutions as we prepare for that convention .
I have since spoken to the President of the European Commission and to the President of the Council , Mr Aznar López .
I am assured in both cases that they understand the political act of faith which has been made .
I believe that they will want , in the coming weeks , to try to find between our institutions a way to recognise the substance of these issues , which is about our role as a Parliament in representing citizens of the Union and their concerns in the law-making process .
I hope that in the end this act of political faith in the primacy of politics will be repaid , understood and not misunderstood .
It is important - this side of the Barcelona Summit , with an issue that has been with us for three decades and perhaps has no parallel in the issues before us - to appreciate that it was not an easy decision to arrive at .
I hope , in the end - both for those in the House who were inclined to agree with my view last week and for the many who were inclined at that time to disagree - that they will appreciate that the judgment is one made in good faith .
I believe we can build on it .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , most of you will be aware that I have taken a different line from our President .
However , I respect this decision , and if you have succeeded in bringing forth from this result an attitude of goodwill that will later actually be reflected in amendments to the Treaties or in some other acknowledgement of our rights , that would be a success that would not have been possible without the joint action of the Legal Affairs Committee and our President .
Mr President , I totally agree with your decision .
I believe that what we are dealing with here is an act of political faith , in view of the fact that we are attempting to defend the existence of the European Company Statute , without prejudice to the fundamental issues arising from the legal base .
Mr President , as you know , my position was quite the opposite and I am still convinced that it is a mistake not to refer the matter to the Court of Justice .
I simply wanted to say this in plenary as well , because if we accept that the Council can pass an act under the co-decision procedure , taking away the power of co-decision from Parliament , we are playing into the Council ' s hands .
Unfortunately , I do not think that the Council will look upon this in a positive light , but rather as something that it can do again .
I just wanted to say , therefore , that I think it is a mistake not to refer the matter to the Court of Justice .
Mr President , I wish to congratulate you on your decision not to make a reference to the European Court of Justice , as the creation of the European Company was one of the objectives for this parliamentary session , and is one of the five decisions for which the economy has been waiting .
For thirty years , this decision has been awaited ; for thirty years , negotiations have been in progress .
To go to the Court of Justice now would mean this business being dragged out for another five or six years ; for I am convinced that no firm would avail itself of this important new form under such uncertain conditions .
So I believe it wise in this case to refrain from making a reference to the European Court of Justice .
Mr President , on a point of order : it will hardly surprise the House if , on behalf of my Group , I support the position you have taken .
But I would nonetheless urge you in your intervention at the European Council in Barcelona to make the point very strongly that we as a House are not happy with the procedure that has been taken and that we hope in the future to see a much more constructive and collaborative approach to us from the other institutions .
Mr President , as you know , the Group of the Party of European Socialists supports your decision .
From a legal point of view , whether or not we have lost influence in the co-decision procedure is debatable .
My group - as Mr Medina Ortega has already stated - thinks not and that also , from a political point of view , the decision we have taken is the right one .
As we approach the Barcelona Summit , I would ask you to not only defend our position with regard to the implications of this decision for the European business world , but also , given its importance , from the point of view of consolidating economic democracy and workers ' rights .
Mr President , I had not actually intended to speak , but I do of course have something to say whenever the others have something to say .
I would like first to say a few words of thanks to you for the way you dealt with this issue .
As Mr Lehne said , a majority of our group was in favour of legal proceedings , but there were other opinions , such as that of the esteemed Mr Karl von Wogau .
I liked , however , the way you dealt with the issue politically , telephoning the President-in-Office of the Council , the Spanish Prime Minister José María Aznar , and , of course , keeping in touch with the President of the Commission , Romano Prodi .
We , of course , have confidence in the Spanish Prime Minister ; not only in that role do we trust that he will keep his word and that words will be matched by deeds , but also in his role as President-in-Office of the Council .
I also have something to say to the Commission . So , Commissioner , please tell the President of the Commission , Romano Prodi , that , tomorrow , when we deal with Mr von Wogau 's report , with financial services and with everything we associate with ' Lamfalussy ' , we expect the Commission to take up a position in defence of Parliament 's rights vis-à-vis the Council of Ministers .
That is what we expect tomorrow .
If such a statement is not forthcoming , it will have serious consequences for our relations with the Commission , and so , Mr President , your action will no doubt help the President with his statement tomorrow .
Again , let me extend my express thanks to you for the way you have handled this matter politically .
( Applause )
Mr President , as former Chairman of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , and as it was under my chairmanship that this very issue was debated , I asked if I could be the last to speak on this subject .
I would like to make it quite clear that , from the very outset , the Committee on Legal Affairs considered this matter to be a legal issue of enormous political significance , since it dealt with Parliament ' s prerogatives and the inter-institutional balance .
Having said this , from the very beginning , the Committee on Legal Affairs was extremely aware that the priority in this case was not to hinder the entry into force of this directive , which had been under discussion for thirty years and , in fact , the decision made by this Committee specifically requests that , in the event of a decision being taken to refer the matter to the European Court of Justice , the outcome of this would be upheld , even if our decision were overruled .
In saying this , Mr President , I am expressing my respect and understanding for the fact that the decision that has been taken at this time - which appears to reflect the majority opinion in this House - responds to the concerns of the Committee on Legal Affairs .
I would even go further than the comments made by some of my fellow Members .
In this case , if the European Parliament does not refer the matter to the European Court of Justice , it will be showing a greater degree of political responsibility .
Because although it is not giving up the defence of its prerogatives , it understands that there is an immediate greater value in postponing the referral of this matter to the Court .
I believe that the European Council declarations will strengthen our position , and not only the Barcelona Council but also the Intergovernmental Conference , and it is to be hoped that we can put an end to the imbalance in legal bases which has arisen as a result of this situation .
I thank all those colleagues who have made brief contributions to what is , in effect , a mini-debate on the matter , including those colleagues who disagree with the choice that was made .
For as long as I have the privilege to lead the House I will always do my very best as regards my own judgment - and with consultation - to represent our interests and the interests of our citizens .
We talked a great deal in the course of the weeks before we elected a president about making our House more political .
I hope that this act of political faith will say that we bring primacy of politics to what we do for the next stretch .
We will see whether that can create a supportive and creative environment between ourselves and the other institutional players in our work for Europe at the forthcoming convention .
Procedural remarks
Mr President , on a point of order : I would like to request the assistance of my colleagues in Parliament , and indeed of the Commission , following the disaster that struck Dublin in particular last week when it was inundated with serious floods , rendering homeless many frightened people , some elderly .
The scenes in Dublin were more reminiscent of other countries , where there are greater extremes of climate .
When I returned from Parliament I found my neighbours - I shall declare an interest , I live in that part of the city - were bobbing around in boats , carrying their pets .
That is something I never expected to see in my country .
I know some of your constituents , Mr President , suffered the same experience .
I would like to express my admiration for those who responded to the tragedy but also , if possible , to request some help with re-housing many of those who lost their homes in this tragedy .
Mr President , I just want to say how much I appreciate the fact that this matter has been raised .
It affects both Mrs Banotti 's constituency and my own , and I want to be associated with her remarks .
She lives in that area , which my son represents in the City Council .
I have to say that the response , not only from the government , but also from the people , was heroic .
On this question I will communicate with the relevant Irish authorities and will raise the matter with the European Commission .
Mr President , the President of the United States and other senior officials recently announced that they intend to continue and extend their attacks on other countries on the pretext of combating terrorism or preventing these countries from developing weapons of mass destruction .
Mr Bush talks of an axis of evil between Iran , Iraq and North Korea and has said that he is keeping open all his options for making the USA and its allies safe .
Other senior officials have spoken along the same lines , causing a great deal of concern ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr Korakas , on the issue of substance which you raise we have a debate tomorrow afternoon with Mr Solana .
It seems to me that the perfectly intelligent point you wish to make should be made during that debate .
Mr President , I should like to ask the European Parliament to oppose this policy and to put a stop , at long last , to situations which put us in danger of another world war .
Mr President , I would like to draw attention to the seriousness of the situation around Calais following the second refusal by French courts last Friday to close the Sangatte refugee transit centre .
In particular , I want to highlight the damage being done to the British rail freight industry by the policy of the French authorities effectively to close the tunnel to freight trains for 18 hours a day .
Eight thousand British jobs are being put at risk as a result of this state of affairs , including in my own area of the east of England .
Apart from the other very serious implications , the situation makes a mockery of the idea of the free movement of goods across the European Union .
I hope the Commission will institute urgent proceedings against the French authorities in order to rectify this situation .
On Thursday there will be a joint debate which will include a reference to this matter .
Those colleagues who are interested should take note of that debate .
Mr President , I am speaking in my capacity as MEP for northern France , following Mr Van Orden , whose comments regarding the Sangatte Centre rather surprised me .
What surprised me , first and foremost , is that he is questioning a court ruling .
I did not think that it was customary in the United Kingdom for a political assembly to criticise a decision taken by the courts .
What also surprised me is that he is not concerned about the reasons why so many refugees try to enter Great Britain .
Lastly , I would like to point out to him , as I know the centre well having visited it many times , that the intention is to humanely manage a situation which , in itself , is not humane and which has arisen due to a lack of harmonised rules on non-European citizens entering and circulating within the European Union .
Rather than criticising a decision of a court or a country , I would hope that we will all do what is necessary so that common rules can , at long last , be established in the European Union .
Let me remind colleagues again that , whatever their point of view on this matter , it is on the agenda for Thursday and that is the appropriate place to debate it .
Mr President , the nineteenth Winter Olympics start in Salt Lake City in the USA on Friday 8 February .
As you know , the aim of the Olympic Games is to promote world peace , friendship , understanding , solidarity , dialogue and the peaceful coexistence of nations and cultures through the common endeavour of athletes from all over the world .
This is the spirit in which the Olympic truce , the fundamental principle behind the Olympic Games , was born in the eighth century .
Weapons were laid down and all hostilities ceased while the Games were on .
As the idea of this truce , of global conciliation , echoes ideas and values repeatedly proclaimed in this Chamber , I should like to ask you to write to the President of the Olympic Committee , Mr Rogge , and to the Secretary-General of the UN , Mr Kofi Annan , confirming that the European Parliament supports the idea of a truce and calling on everyone involved in armed conflict to lay down their weapons and use the coming weeks , while the Olympic Games are under way , to resolve their differences peaceably .

We shall communicate that as you request .
Mr President , I should like to know whether you share my concern at the mawkish exhibition held in Parliament 's building in Brussels last week entitled " We on death row " .
This exhibition set out to glamorise convicted felons who have committed heinous crimes .
Surely our constituents would prefer us to save our sympathy for the victims of these crimes and for the families of the victims who are condemned to a life sentence of grief ?
Colleagues may also like to recall that public opinion in a number of Member States is still resolutely supportive of the death penalty .
Can we please avoid such distasteful displays in the future , or at least see that the interests of victims and their families are given due respect ?
Mr Helmer , I should like to point out to you that the Treaty of Amsterdam includes among its terms a prohibition on the use of the death penalty .
This applies not only in Member States ...
... but also is a requirement for entry for candidate states .
At the risk of creating further offence to you , I have to admit that I attended the opening of the exhibition and was proud to do so .
Mr President , as Quaestor in charge of exhibitions , I sometimes have to refuse exhibitions but , given the proud history of this Parliament in relation to the death sentence , I was proud to authorise that exhibition .
Mr President , I should like to ask you to consider writing a letter to the President of Nigeria offering the condolences of the Members of this House on the horrendous explosions that took place in Lagos .
Over 1 000 people were killed and there are now over 4 000 orphans there .
I am sure everyone in this House would wish them to know our feelings .
Mr Corrie , I shall be pleased to do so .
Drug trafficking
Mr President , I shall try to make myself understood , despite the noise .
The present report deals with a Commission proposal with a view to the adoption of a Council framework decision .
It aims to help create an area of freedom , security and justice , as provided for by the Treaties , particularly since Amsterdam , and for which , subsequently too , a programme had been expressly scheduled during summit meetings .
However , the proposal in question is not terribly far-reaching .
More specifically , it is about the common fight against cross-border crime , particularly in terms of making arrangements regarding minimum maximum penalties to be included in the legislation of the Member States .
In fact , the entire document has been written in such a way as to maximise its chances of being adopted by the Council , which means that it merely codifies the lowest common denominator emerging from what is to be included in the legislation of the Member States .
As such , it has , in fact , become a fairly modest document which we in the Committee thought required some more reinforcement in places . The reinforcement should be sufficiently constructive to ensure that the improvements remain within the realms of what is possible .
We have therefore not held an explicit debate on drugs policy .
Neither in the framework decision , nor in the proposal did we want to include a decision on whether certain drugs should be legalised or not , and neither did we want to draw a distinction between certain soft and hard drugs .
These issues are all far too ambitious .
Our goal is , in fact , far more modest .
I therefore hope that , during the vote , we will reject the amendments which do implicitly deal with these issues , so that we can present to the Council a viable proposal which is in line with the opinions that are , democratically speaking , held by the majority of the European population .
We have tried - and we have , in my opinion , reached consensus about this in the Committee - to tighten up the proposal in terms of penalties , for example by not seeking to replace custodial sentences by alternative penalties where serious offenders are concerned .
For them , spending twenty-four hours helping out in an old people ' s home does not really constitute a suitable , alternative punitive measure .
Furthermore , we have already suggested that the Commission and the Council should perhaps consider the options of civil law penalties which particularly affect offenders in terms of what is most dear to them , namely their possessions .
Thirdly , we agree that we would prefer not to develop a shadow bureaucracy under the authority of the Council ' s Secretary-General .
If the Treaty of Amsterdam already mentions a transfer of elements from the third pillar to the first pillar , this must be implemented , and we should refrain from leaping forward to an entirely different policy by instituting a shadow bureaucracy under the Secretary-General .
Even within the Dutch political spectrum , I am not one of the extremists , but rather a moderate , on this score .
I am therefore of the opinion that this legal approach with regard to penalties etc. forms a kind of tailpiece and is not the most important component of our drugs policy as a whole .
What matters most are the preventive and therapeutic measures , and the policy developed in these sectors .
However , we should not neglect the legal approach because , to a large extent , it has a lot to do with keeping the peace .
This is therefore very much a tailpiece that should have its place .
For the rest , and on behalf of all of us , I believe that Community cooperation should be imposed in a more stringent manner at times , whilst maintaining respect for the national courts ' own boundaries , maybe even somewhat more respect than has already been shown in the Commission proposal .
I would now like to turn to the amendments .
Following the vote , thirteen amendments have been tabled in the Committee , something which I am not terribly happy about .
Or rather , I would like to advise against nearly all of them .
In Amendment No 37 , the idea that we will not focus on the prosecution of addicts is broadened to also include users .
In my view , it is not for the report to comment on this but , rather , up to the Member States to decide on the policy they generally wish to enforce , or resume enforcing , where users are concerned .
In any case , it is clear that our position in terms of not wishing to prosecute addicts is based on our preference for a therapeutic emphasis in our policy .
Furthermore , I have noticed that the words ' large-scale ' , ' international ' , ' cross-border ' and ' organised ' appear liberally in these thirteen other amendments .
This is rather forced in my opinion .
They are already used a few times in the text itself , and it seems as if the people who tabled these amendments are , in fact , on a mission to restrict the scope of the proposal .
The text even states that action is to be taken specifically if the trade is from one EU country to another EU country .
Adding the words I have just mentioned seems downright ridiculous .
For what arrives directly from Columbia , Surinam and the Dutch Antilles would not fall within the scope of this framework decision .
I would really advise against adopting these amendments in the strongest terms .
Incitement and complicity too are exempted from the scope of this proposal in one of the amendments .
I would say that there are some that are more liberal in their inclinations than the rapporteur .
Since he himself is not one of the strictest people , I would therefore , in fact , like to reject all amendments which I consider to be unduly liberal .
Mr President , since this is the first opportunity I have had to speak since your election , I should like to wish you the greatest happiness in your Presidency of the European Parliament .
I should also like to congratulate Mr Oostlander on the quality of this report , into which he has put a great deal of hard work , and to which the Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats gives its unreserved support .
The issue of drugs is a central concern of Europe ' s citizens . For years , the European Parliament has demonstrated its commitment to the fight against drugs .
And today , the European dimension of this fight is clear to see in actions that range from the adoption of legal instruments to combat the manufacture of drugs , the trafficking of drugs and money-laundering to cooperation with producer countries and promoting the prevention of drug addiction and the fight against it , involving treatment , rehabilitation and even the development of information and coordination networks between Member States .
We should bear in mind that , since the end of the ' cold war ' , there has been an unprecedented increase in drug trafficking as a source of funding for the activities of criminal and terrorist organisations .
It is currently estimated that drug-related crime and drug trafficking itself could represent approximately eight per cent of world trade .
Putting an end to this trafficking would , therefore , mean shutting down the largest sources of funding for these criminal and terrorist organisations .
This proposal for a framework decision , however , as Mr Oostlander quite rightly pointed out , proposes nothing new and nor does it strengthen the mechanisms for combating international drug trafficking .
The proposal is a necessary step , and we know that it is intended to respond to the needs identified both in the Vienna action plan and in the Tampere conclusions , as well as in the European Union 2000-2004 Drugs Strategy .
This is , indeed , a necessary step , but an inadequate one : it is limited to establishing the lowest common denominator of the national provisions in force in each Member State for offences in the field of drug trafficking .
Consequently the Member States must adopt the necessary measures to ensure that these offences are punishable by effective , proportionate and dissuasive penalties , including custodial sentences with a maximum term of imprisonment of no less than five years in serious cases .
Now , in my opinion , this is a very low limit , especially given that the legislation in force in the Member States already imposes heavy penalties for drug trafficking , in particular when the scale and the seriousness of the case can be considered to be aggravating circumstances .
For example , in my country , Portugal , this limit is twelve years , and can be increased by one-third .
Lastly , I wish to mention an aspect which is of the greatest importance , and that is the confiscation of all illicit proceeds acquired directly or indirectly from the crime of trafficking or from being a member of a criminal organisation or of a plot to traffic drugs .
I feel that this will satisfy the wishes of many of the organisations that have made a remarkable effort in the fight against drugs , that some of the proceeds obtained through the confiscation of these goods can be put to use in the policy of prevention .
Mr President , drugs policy has often led to heated debates in the European Parliament .
Elaborate expositions used to turn everything upside down and used to touch on family , belief and authority .
Today , the waters are somewhat calmer .
Since the European Commission proposal is confined to the legal aspects , level-headedness is what is called for .
As the Commission rightly underlines in its proposal , the responsibility for combating illegal drug trafficking lies first and foremost with the Member States .
However , since it is often a case of organised trafficking which encompasses various countries , a framework decision which tackles this cross-border trafficking can be a useful addition to national policy .
However , what is missing from the proposal submitted by the Commission is a differentiation between the different kinds of drugs and , consequently , a differentiated penalisation of illegal drug trafficking .
An increasing number of countries in Europe distinguish soft and hard drugs on the basis of the health risks to which they give rise , and there is also increasingly more political support for a policy based on straightforward information campaigns and on the prevention of health risks .
On this basis , a few Member States are adopting a tolerant policy with regard to soft drugs .
It is not the intention that the present framework decision should scrap this policy .
As far as penalisation is concerned , all kinds of factors need to be taken into consideration in order to establish effective and proportionate punishment .
Unfortunately , the criteria for determining the seriousness of the crime , such as the extent of trafficking and the nature and availability of the products involved , have not been included in the proposal .
This is why my group , together with three other groups , has tabled an amendment in order to have such criteria included .
Cultural differences and the different prosecution policies of the Member States , combined with the principle of subsidiarity , provide good reason for restricting this proposal to organised and cross-border illegal drug trafficking .
Only with this restriction does the large majority of my group deem that this framework decision represents added value .
Mr President , Commissioner , I have to admit that I am speaking on behalf of a significant minority within our group .
The drugs situation in Europe is becoming worse and worse .
The fact that our borders are becoming ever more open is basically something to be welcomed , of course , but the downside of this is that smuggling , including drug smuggling , is on the increase .
I am concerned that it looks as if more and more countries are abandoning clear and explicit restrictive attitudes to drug abuse .
Our objective must be nothing other than a drugs-free Europe .
Giving up that objective would be tantamount to leaving thousands of young people in the lurch .
Mr President , I am well aware of Mr Oostlander ' s problems in arriving at a balanced view .
In general , I think he has succeeded .
I welcome the more restrictive tone he has adopted here today , but there are wordings I do not agree with .
What is absolutely clear is that the amendments are along completely the wrong lines .
To embrace a permissive attitude towards so-called soft drugs would be devastating .
We know that these are the gateway to heavy drug abuse .
We Swedish Liberals , and a large proportion of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party in general , will vote against all attempts to relax the strict and clear policy on drugs .
We reject Amendments Nos 25 , 26 , 27 , 28 , 29 , 30 , 31 , 33 , 34 , 35 and 37 .
We are able to accept Amendments Nos 32 and 36 .
Mr President , the rapporteur asked us a moment ago to refrain from making any references to the legalisation or otherwise of drugs or to whether or not a policy of tolerance is to be adopted , because this is not what is at issue here .
However , I am not so certain .
To me , illegal drug trafficking is simply too broad a term .
Mr Oostlander is opposed to the Dutch practice of tolerance , and that is fine .
I am myself of the opinion that it is only a half-baked compromise .
I would prefer to see soft drugs legalised , which are , after all , less harmful than the alcohol which flows abundantly in this establishment too .
It is not only in the Netherlands that soft drugs are tolerated .
For reasons of public health , this policy is also being replicated in other countries at local , regional and sometimes even national level .
We may be making bold statements now , but matters will prove different in practice .
Let us therefore confine our efforts to a policy which we can implement , which is also a European task according to the principle of subsidiarity and on which there is broad parliamentary and social consensus , namely a policy to tackle lucrative , organised , cross-border drug trafficking .
Mr Oostlander is entitled to thrash out the rest at national level .
After all , the elections are in the offing .
Mr President , with acute drug-related deaths standing at 7,000 to 8,000 a year , my Group will be supporting very strongly the report by Mr Oostlander and the fight against illicit drug trafficking .
We can be assured that any report by Mr Oostlander is backed by a great sense of purpose and integrity .
I have known him for a long time and I am absolutely certain that he means what he says in this particular report .
With 3,000 miles of coastline around Ireland , the possibility of illicit drug smuggling is always present .
Cooperation at European level is therefore not only to be welcomed but is also essential .
I look forward to more concrete proposals at EU level as to how the EU can further help us keep drugs not only out of Ireland but also out of the rest of Europe .
What sort of a message do Members want to send from this Parliament ?
Drugs like heroin and crack cocaine are okay ?
I do not accept that .
The decision has to be up to the Members of this House .
But the choice is clear : either you support Mr Oostlander or you send out the dangerous message that heroin and synthetic drugs for personal use and distribution are acceptable .
Amendment No 28 by the PSE Group , the Verts / ALE Group and the GUE / NGL Group and others cannot be misinterpreted : " ... users who produce , acquire and / or possess drugs for personal use and users who supply drugs to others without the intention of making a profit are excluded from the scope of this framework decision . "
Therefore , it is all right to supply heroin to children or to adults , as long as you do not want to make a profit from it .
Who in fact makes the profit ?
It is the great drug barons whom we seem to tolerate .
We seem to be able to pursue the terrorists responsible for the horrific events of 11 September , but it seems to be beyond us to tackle international drug terrorists .
We must know who they are .
In fact the murder of the journalist Veronica Guerin in my country galvanised politicians and police into action which smashed a savage gangster culture in Ireland .
Unfortunately , those gangsters have been replaced by other younger and even more vicious criminals .
During the past week , on business in the inner city in my constituency , I witnessed whole complexes riven by drugs .
They must be tackled .
The people who are producing this cocaine and heroin , and causing such havoc in our cities and towns and the countryside , must be stopped .
Mr Oostlander 's report is a small but very important step in that direction .
This report has all the integrity that is expected of this Parliament .
I thank him for his efforts in this respect .
Mr President , Mr Oostlander notes with regret that this Commission proposal does not amount to much .
It merely codifies the lowest common denominator to emerge from the legislation in the Member States .
In all honesty , I happen to be pleased with this cautious approach by the Commission .
Criminal law is an area which is strongly influenced by national culture and history .
In my view , restraint is still essential when competences are transferred to European level .
Only where clear-cut , cross-border issues arise can European legislation offer added value .
This opinion seems to be shared by few in Parliament .
Imagine my surprise when , this time , I was overtaken on the right by my fellow MEPs from the socialist and green groups .
With their amendments , they set great store by the concepts of the subsidiarity principle , cultural differences and national legislation , while the issue in question , namely illegal drug trafficking , is clearly a cross-border problem which requires European legislation .
My fellow MEPs want to add the words ' cross-border ' and ' organised ' to the definition .
To me , these concepts appear to be inherent to drug trafficking and need not be added .
At best , they will complicate implementation of the decision .
Finally , the rapporteur struggled with this simple codification of the lowest common denominator to emerge from Member States ' legislation .
Those who tabled the amendments seem to be wrestling with the lowest common denominator itself .
This does demonstrate that the subsidiarity principle is nothing more than an argument that is dusted down for the occasion in order to protect a Dutch drugs policy that is out of step internationally .
I support the proposal which makes a responsible start on combating illegal drug trafficking , a cross-border problem which directly affects the security of European citizens .
In my view , the fact that the Netherlands can get into difficulty because legislation there is not applied as it should be seems to be a result of inconsistent policy . Policy needs to be aligned to European and international legislation , and not the other way round .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on Saturday evening , in Italy , Alessandro Macioci , a young , eighteen-year-old man died .
He committed suicide by inhaling the exhaust fumes of his car , because he had been accused , Mr Oostlander , of drug trafficking after the police found 2.5g of hashish on his person .
These are the facts , Mr Oostlander , this is not something out of a novel .
This is the way in which the police forces of various European Union Member States are interpreting the policy that you are proposing to us to combat serious crime and this is the way that the harmonisation that you are proposing is interpreted .
Against all logic , this harmonisation is interfering in the affairs of the Member States of the European Union ; it boils down to absurd policies - in a country such as France , for example - and restrictions for the States which are finally beginning to understand .
I am thinking here of the State to which you belong , namely the Netherlands , where you have not approved the policy , but I now also have in mind Belgium , Portugal and Spain , where Members of the Partido Popular Español are conducting some very worthwhile experiments in Madrid into risk reduction .
This is a policy that we obviously cannot harmonise .
What we must harmonise is always the worst - it is a very libertine approach to law , Mr Oostlander , because you are proposing laws which cannot be applied .
The Liberals and the ' libertarians ' want laws that can be applied ; but you adopt a libertine approach to the law .
And for 30 years , your policy has , day in , day out , produced laws that have never been applied .
Your policy is also destroying entire countries , such as Colombia , Bolivia , Peru , Laos and Burma .
These countries are literally being destroyed by your prohibitionist drugs policy .
I think that , in addition to the many friendly pats on the back that I get from numerous fellow Members , even from the centre right , Mr Oostlander , these Members realise that this prohibitionist policy is a criminal policy that encourages crime ; they realise that we must adopt a very different approach .
Even if you try to limit the scope of your report , as you tried to do in your opening remarks , it is going in completely the opposite direction .
The Commission should not be getting involved in this .
The Commission was not capable of saying no to Mr Arlacchi and to his criminal form of management that lasted five years , which consisted of recycled KGB officers and Russian generals who were involved in drug trafficking .
We all know this - these are the facts that we read every day in the newspapers .
Let the Commission deal with things that it knows how to deal with !
The Commission should take a look at the UNDCP reports , but should stop bothering us with absolutely absurd proposals such as this .
I think that it is high time that Parliament had the courage to be slightly less hypocritical , and for it to do what our fellow Members Chris Davies and Marco Cappato recently did in Great Britain ; as MEPs , we must finally demonstrate the absurdity of these laws .
Mr President , as one of the previous speakers said , the Commission proposal laying down minimum provisions on the constituent elements of criminal acts and penalties in the field of illicit drug trafficking is a tiny , timid step towards resolving the massive problem of the illicit trade in psychotropic substances .
Unfortunately , the main proposal , on penalties , is geared to an upper limit of no less than five years , meaning that judges are free to decide between no penalty at all and several years .
This , of course , does little for harmonisation because almost all national laws allow for severer penalties .
However , I should point out that with the proposed amendments , most of which I trust will be adopted , we have managed to extract some secondary benefit from this decision .
First , they state quite clearly that addicts should be treated as patients rather than criminals and that drug abuse should not be a criminal offence .
Secondly , it is proposed that revenue from property confiscated from drug barons should be used for prevention and therapy programmes .
Finally , I hope that future Commission proposals will be more ambitious and will set clear , harmonised minimum rather than maximum limits on penalties for the worst drug traffickers so that we can secure an area of security and justice within the European Union .
Mr President , I , too , should like to congratulate Mr Oostlander on the fact that he has made a number of valuable suggestions to improve the Commission proposal : firstly , strengthening the mechanisms for confiscating the profits of criminals who traffic in drugs .
If we hit these people where it really hurts , namely in their wallets , this will be far more effective than stiff custodial sentences .
Neither should we focus on the prosecution of addicts , but rather pour all our energy into prevention .
This is a sound message which , with limited resources , Europe must take as a guiding principle .
However , this is where our paths diverge .
I am delighted that , following a European trend to adopt a more realistic drugs policy , a majority of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party will be supporting all the amendments aimed at distinguishing between hard drugs and soft drugs and at the non-prosecution of users , as well as the amendments which will restrict this proposal to cross-border , criminal drug trafficking .
Let us concentrate our limited resources on the big criminals rather than the small users .
I , for my part , should like to warn fellow MEPs from the Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats against engaging in token politics when they talk of dangerous signals which Parliament would in this way be sending out .
In the final analysis , we do not yet have any say in this area .
My group also places question marks alongside two specific Commission proposals .
It would be unwise not simply to limit the minimum maximum penalty of five years to certain crimes but to arrange for it to be applied to all drugs-related crimes .
We will accordingly be backing the amendment for a restriction .
Finally , in our view , the arrangement through which informers would receive a penalty reduction in exchange for information about drugs gangs is going too far .
This is a very sensitive matter in which different Member States uphold different traditions .
To make an arrangement in this way , so suddenly , would be taking things too far in our view .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I wish to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Oostlander , on the excellent report that he has tabled , and state that this framework decision submitted by the Commission is part of a global strategy to combat drugs based on a balanced approach of measures to reduce supply and demand and to act against illicit trafficking .
This proposal is not the entire European policy on drugs : this proposal deals with only one specific component , which is the fight against drug trafficking .
But our approach to the issue of drugs in the European Union is part of the Action Plan for 2000-2004 , which will be assessed at its halfway point , some time this year .
In Laeken , the Heads of State and Government asked us to approve the framework decision on the harmonisation of penalties at European level for drug trafficking by the end of May of this year .
That is the sole purpose of this proposal .
The Commission is of the view that , in the fight against drug trafficking , there must be close cooperation between the various judicial , police and customs authorities of the Member States to deal with the challenge of transnational drug trafficking .
If such cooperation is going to be effective , it must be underpinned by a common approach at Union level , specifically in the approximation of definitions of the charges and penalties that apply to trafficking , which must be effective , proportionate and dissuasive .
We welcome the objectives set out in Mr Oostlander ' s report .
Measures to clamp down on traffickers must clearly be supplemented and backed with a policy of prevention and the social rehabilitation of drug addicts .
The instrument that is envisaged is only intended to cover the penal aspects of the drugs phenomenon .
The Commission worked on this criminal law initiative , you might say , in full awareness of the facts , for we had carried out major preparatory work , in particular studying the definitions in each Member State , the penalties that can be applied under the law and - of no less importance - the specific ways in which penalties for drug trafficking are applied in each of the 15 Member States .
This study , which was made public , consequently enabled us to make a comparative analysis of the legislation of all the Member States in the field of drug trafficking .
Hence the first important point to make is that our objective is to harmonise penalties for drug trafficking .
This proposal should not be considered to be limited to transnational or cross-border trafficking because the two issues amount to the same thing : in most drugs cases , the trafficking starts outside Europe and is , therefore , always transnational .
I therefore fail to see how we can envisage punishing cross-border trafficking more severely than the serious trafficking we are seeing within every Member State .
The States cannot have two penal codes , one to be applied to drug trafficking that takes place exclusively within their borders and another for drug trafficking that has a cross-border dimension .
Let us move on to the second issue : the definition of drug trafficking .
The Commission has already been criticised for lacking ambition where this matter is concerned .
What have we done wrong ?
We have limited ourselves to taking up the key elements of the United Nations ' 1988 Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic and Psychotropic Substances , and we have combined this definition with national provisions on the definition of offences related to drug trafficking . We have , therefore , simply attempted to produce a synthesis of definitions of drug trafficking .
However , here - and this is my third important observation - we have respected the principle of subsidiarity .
This is why the individual consumption of drugs is not included in this definition and nor is the not-for-profit sale of drugs for personal consumption .
These are left to the exclusive jurisdiction of each Member State , because , as this debate has demonstrated , in this field the solutions put forward by the fifteen Member States differ widely .
The Commission ' s proposal will not , therefore , change these differences in national legislation in the areas in which drug trafficking for the purposes of personal consumption is considered not to incur punishment .
But when the trafficking is of such a scale and seriousness that it has to incur penalties , the Commission proposes that these should be effective , proportionate and dissuasive .
The minimum penalty of a maximum sentence of five years is a sanction which provides not only considerable room for manoeuvre for judges to apply the law according to the circumstances of each case of trafficking , but it is also a proposal that seeks to convey an idea of the harshness with which we wish to punish the cases of drug trafficking to which this penalty applies .
I know that in some countries - and Mr Coelho mentioned the case of Portugal - the minimum penalty of the maximum sentence is heavier than this .
I must say that in other countries , the penalty is lighter , and we feel that this sentence of five years represents a minimum standard for harmonisation , giving , of course , each Member State the option of establishing other , harsher standards in its legislation for the minimum maximum penalty than can be applied .
However , this is an issue that is being discussed at Council level .
I feel , therefore , that this proposal , which I hope Parliament will approve , is an initial step in a fight in which all Member States participate against drug trafficking , which threatens the health , the security and the quality of life of our citizens , and which , as Mr Oostlander has pointed out , is one of the sources of funding for countless other criminal activities , including terrorism itself .
In this context , I hope that Parliament will support the report and will enable the Council to adopt this framework decision by the end of May this year .
Third-country nationals
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
Report ( A5-0436 / 2001 ) by Baroness Ludford on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs on the proposal for a Council Directive ( COM ( 2001 ) 127 - C5-0250 / 2001 - 2001 / 0074 ( CNS ) ) concerning the status of third-country nationals who are long-term residents ;
Report ( A5-0455 / 2001 ) by Mrs Kessler on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs on the proposal for a Council Directive ( COM ( 2001 ) 388 - C5-0350 / 2001 - 2001 / 0155 ( CNS ) ) on the conditions in which third-country nationals shall have the freedom to travel in the territory of the Member States for periods not exceeding three months , introducing a specific travel authorisation and determining the conditions of entry and movement for periods not exceeding six months .
Mr President , this proposal implements one of the most important commitments of the October 1999 Tampere Summit on justice and home affairs .
This called for the legal status of long-term legally resident third-country nationals to be approximated to that of Member State nationals , so that they have a set of uniform rights as near as possible to those enjoyed by EU citizens .
Thus its objective is that immigrants or refugees who have been legally resident for at least five years should be given EU long-term residence status .
This proposal self-evidently does not cover people who are illegally present in the European Union .
Nor does it apply to persons who are temporarily resident , such as students or those granted temporary protection .
In view of the hesitations in some quarters , not least in some parts of the Council , it is important to stress that the EU is merely drawing out the logic of Member States having given some immigrants a legal right to stay long term .
It is only adding an EU dimension .
This EU dimension consists of social and legal justice inspired by the fundamental provisions of the EU Treaties , and hard-headed self-interest for the European economy and society .
There are estimated to be up to 20 million people living legally in the European Union who have not taken , or who have not been permitted to take , citizenship of the Member State in which they live .
One thinks of Turkish citizens in Germany , North Africans in France as two major communities .
But there are eligible communities of a myriad of nationalities in all Member States .
In my own , the United Kingdom , the Economist last week estimated that half of the 2 million Muslims living there are foreign nationals .
Most of these would have been Commonwealth immigrants arriving in the 1950s and 1960s .
I will return to the UK position later .
My wish to be rapporteur for this report stems partly from my commitment to combating racism .
The fair treatment and active integration of third-country nationals , accompanied by measures to prevent discrimination , will assist in the fight against racism and xenophobia .
This becomes all the time more , not less , important .
It is strongly in the social and economic interests of the EU to integrate such people , and hypocritical , in the light of other EU policies , for us not to do so .
There is great concern about the alienation of some immigrant communities and their social and economic disadvantage .
There are also worrying reports of increased incidents of racially motivated harassment and hostility , especially since 11 September .
The best means to counter all these factors is to ensure that the immense contribution of immigrants is facilitated , recognised and insisted upon .
Rights equal to those of EU citizens in areas such as employment , education and social protection will enhance their economic contribution .
Other measures would in addition enhance social integration .
I draw attention to Amendments Nos 33 to 35 , which I authored , on equal access to legal proceedings , participation in local life and voting rights , but I should immediately state that the new ELDR Amendment No 56 is intended to replace Amendment No 34 , in order to clarify that it means participation in local community life , for instance in neighbourhood forums , and that Amendment No 35 is only aspirational in encouraging Member States to give local and European voting rights .
The Green Group has re-tabled several of my original amendments that got voted down in committee .
To be consistent , the ELDR will vote for them .
Let me come to the delicate task of trying to get a balance in the vote on amendments so that all parts of this House can support this report .
I should like to appeal to the Right to accept that a reasonable outcome would consist in taking some of their points , but not all of them .
Thus a reference to the Council anti-terrorism measures in assessing threats to security is acceptable , but some of those go too far .
In practical terms Amendment No 82 is acceptable , but not Amendment No 9 .
While it is acceptable to mention acquisition of knowledge of the host language as being fundamental to social integration , it goes too far to insist that this is a criterion for granting of EC residence status .
I appeal to the Left not to let objections on points of detail obscure the big picture , so that we fulfil Parliament 's long-held commitment to legal rights for third-country nationals .
It is regrettable that the UK is opting out of this measure .
Not only will this be socially unjust to UK residents , but it will also make the UK less attractive to talented professionals , a point made by business interests .
I urge Parliament to rally to a consensus on this balanced and reasonable proposal .
I also urge the Spanish Presidency to reach agreement in the Council as a demonstration of the seriousness of its commitment to social integration , and also to labour mobility , as will be called for again in the Barcelona Summit .
We have 20 million residents who , by definition , are mobile .
It would be hypocritical of us to deny them the right to move around the European Union .
Mr President , common regulation of the conditions under which third-country nationals shall have the freedom to travel in the territory of the Member States , is much to be welcomed .
During the Committee 's deliberations , the fragmentary attempts at regulation , based on French and Portuguese initiatives , were repeatedly subjected to criticism .
There was a demand for a more global approach to mobility in the Schengen area , a demand which has been met by this Commission proposal for a directive .
On the one hand , the conditions under which third-country nationals have the freedom to travel for a maximum of three months are to be regulated and harmonised , thus complying with the obligation laid on the Council by the Treaty of Amsterdam to lay down these conditions within five years of the Treaty entering into force .
On the other hand , a quite new instrument - that of the specific travel authorisation - is to be introduced , permitting the extension of freedom to travel to six months under certain special conditions .
Let me say at the outset that I do not understand why a directive was chosen in preference to a regulation as the legal instrument in this instance .
The text is framed in sufficiently definite terms .
Since a directive needs to be transposed at national level , the application of the instrument is delayed for an unspecified period of time .
This instrument , moreover , replaces , among others , Regulation 1091 / 2001 , which has already entered into force . This , then , is another reason why a regulation would be the more appropriate legal instrument .
There has been no essential change to the freedom to travel enjoyed by third-country nationals who are not required to have a visa and by holders of a longer-term residence permit .
There is , though , a new regulation for those holders of the national visa issued by the Member States for longer-term residence who are not yet in possession of the residence permit .
Contrary to the Commission 's proposal , such third-country nationals should , in my judgment , continue to be permitted to travel on Member States ' territory even before they apply for the residence permit .
It would represent a retrograde step back to the legal situation under the Schengen Convention if freedom to travel were to be granted only once that application were made , and would be comprehensible to none of the parties affected .
Moreover , there is no evident reason why this category of persons should be treated differently to , and worse than , other third-country nationals covered by the directive when it comes to the date on which their freedom to travel begins .
Third-country nationals travelling with a national visa would , in any case , then have to fulfil the same conditions as those travelling with a standard Schengen visa .
This is a result of putting the visas on an equal footing as regards unrestricted travel .
It means that the consultation procedures between the Member States on the confidential lists 5A and 5B in the Consular Instructions must also apply to national visas .
Those Member States with reservations about nationals of certain third countries would otherwise have no possibility of taking cognisance of them and monitoring them if national visas were issued by other Member States , resulting in a security loophole that the events of 11 September have made quite unacceptable .
Although there was lively discussion on this point in Committee , an overwhelming majority of its members supported my proposal .
This result confirms the Committee 's strength , which lies in its ability to reach , in response to changed conditions , a new decision on a matter on which there has already been a vote .
, draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market .
( ES ) Mr President , I would like once again to congratulate the Commission on having presented us with a raft of proposals intended to facilitate the adaptation of the European Union to the realities of the new European society .
Europe , once a continent of emigrants , has now become a continent of immigrants . The proposals put forward by the Commission aim to facilitate the integration of these immigrant populations into our respective societies .
In the debate that took place in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market on this issue , several amendments were tabled : some were serious , others less so .
In the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , the committee responsible , Baroness Ludford made a sterling effort to attempt to refine and perfect the legal concepts , but I am left with the impression that , just because of the odd majority , the text of the directive would be ruined if we were to adopt most of the amendments approved by this Committee .
Baroness Ludford , herself , has tabled some proposals in this regard , which appear to us to be correct , and I believe that , in short , the most important thing that this House could do now is to try to steer the text of the Commission proposal back to a form more along those lines .
In short , this means achieving the highest degree of equality and comparable conditions between long-term residents from third countries and Community citizens , whilst respecting , naturally , national laws and their constitutional principles , without establishing artificial requirements that would hinder the integration of these people who have already been living in our countries for a long time .
To sum up , I believe that what we can hope to achieve as a result of the final proposals presented to us by Baroness Ludford and the debate that took place in the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs is that , as far as possible , the House should change the text back to the original Commission proposal and reject many of the amendments that have been adopted , as I have already said , by a chance majority in the Committee on Citizens ' Rights .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank not only the Commission and you , Commissioner Vitorino , for the even-handed presentation on long-term residence by third-country nationals , but also Baroness Ludford , the rapporteur , for the close cooperation .
What is important to me is the amendments to this directive making it possible for the Member States to carry out security checks .
Not only the host country , but the whole European Union , benefits from this , as Schengen makes it possible to cross the internal frontiers at any time , and so the other Member States must be able to rely on the first host country to receive third-country nationals in a responsible manner .
Checks of this kind take account of the security needs of the host population , and also the needs of the third-country nationals living in our Member States .
They are , on the one hand , protected against acts of terrorism , whilst , on the other hand , the state in question is making it clear that the third-country nationals living among us do not represent any danger to internal security .
By this means we can give a clear rebuff to those forces that are endeavouring to make xenophobic capital out of acts of terrorism .
Something that is also important is the possibility of making integration a criterion for the grant of a residence permit .
As a rule , third-country nationals with long-term rights of abode want to be naturalised , to become part of society , and to be able to make themselves understood .
For communication leads to understanding , and those who understand each other grow closer together .
We must , then , put down markers .
We must require language learning and promote it , for deficient knowledge of the language means a lack of communication and virtually inevitable exclusion from many areas of life .
If our immigrants are not to remain set apart from society , we must promote language learning , or else the new citizen is on a foreordained path to low-paid work .
To require it is primarily to give an opportunity and not to set up an obstacle ; no doubt we all agree that we want to give a fair chance to the people who come to make their home among us .
Mr President , at the Tampere Summit , the European Council declared that the legal status of third-country nationals should be approximated to that of Member State nationals so that they have a uniform set of rights as close as possible to those enjoyed by EU citizens .
The Commission ' s proposal set out , in a very clear and balanced fashion , the conditions that must be fulfilled in order to acquire long-term resident status .
This is a balanced proposal .
The criteria are , amongst others , the length of legal residence and adequate resources .
Furthermore , the individual must not constitute a threat to public order or domestic security .
I must say , however , that some amendments cause me great concern as they run counter to the Tampere objectives .
Article 7 of the Commission ' s proposal on the threat to public order is clear and I think it is worrying and counter-productive to draw a parallel between immigration and terrorism .
On the other hand , we share the view that the level of language knowledge assists in an individual ' s integration but it should not , under any circumstances , be considered a condition for obtaining resident status .
Why is this ?
Well , quite simply because it is not an objective and precise criterion . There is no cause and effect link between a specific level of language knowledge - what level do we mean ? - and integration itself .
I myself know people who have been living in my country for ten years , and everyone says that they are perfectly integrated , despite the fact that they still have some difficulties with French .
Lastly , I think it is unfair to introduce the requirement for suitable housing as an additional condition to avoid granting status to third-country nationals legally residing in the European Union .
Many nationals do not have suitable housing , unfortunately , and they are not second class citizens because of this .
Everyone would like to have suitable housing .
It is fundamental that we create a welcoming society and acknowledge that integration is a two-way process requiring adaptation by the immigrant as well as the host society .
Mr President , Commissioner , it is certainly odd that , in 2002 , we have specially to state that those who reside long-term in our Member States without being EU citizens are to be treated on something like the same terms as those of us who have happened to become EU citizens through birth .
I find it strange that this has to be stated as something out of the ordinary .
It stands to reason that it should be completely obvious .
I believe that our fellow MEP , Baroness Ludford has carried out a very good piece of work .
It is a balanced approach .
When she points out that , by means of more common rules , we shall also prevent racism and xenophobia , I believe that she is touching upon something very important .
We do not want citizens to be divided into an A team and a B team .
This is a momentous issue for Europe .
A Europe which , as we always say , is based upon humanistic values concerning the equal worth of human beings must stand up for those values .
In that respect , I believe this to be a major and important step forward in Europe .
Mr President , I should like to thank both rapporteurs , and I welcome these initiatives .
I also echo Baroness Ludford 's comments on the British government 's lack of enthusiasm .
It is a pity that her more progressive ideas narrowly missed endorsement in the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs and we now have before us a more begrudging approach to long-term residents from third countries , with an overemphasis on terrorism , language acquisition and sufficient resources , especially in the area of pensions .
Again , I agree with Baroness Ludford 's comments on the first two of those .
The Commission 's proposals were certainly better than what is now proposed in those areas .
This says to me that the image of third-country nationals in the minds of some in this House represents only a very narrow part of the reality - in terms of a specific geography perhaps , a social class or political views .
This image certainly does not include the overwhelming majority of third-country nationals , who contribute enormously to the economy and society of the European Union and have proved this over a number of years .
Why else would so many of our governments be increasingly seeking to recruit from third countries at all skill levels if this were not the case ?
Why should such people choose to come here and settle for a number of years if they are to be seen as suspect or second-class , here on sufferance only and viewed as another dimension of a disposable society ?
As others have said , we should be looking at equal rights for people who make such contributions to our societies .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am now speaking on the Ludford report , the primary purpose of which is to create better conditions for people legally resident here , over a long period of time , through according them more rights .
That , for a start , is the right approach .
The problem , though , is that the third-country nationals within the EU constitute a sort of third class of citizens , ranking below the citizens of the country they live in and then after the citizens of the other EU countries , who are in second place .
The report enshrines this distinction in law and thus justifies the fact that discrimination will never be permanently absent .
For those who really want to ensure equal rights for all , must also assimilate these differences .
There is , though , a second point which I see as even more important , and , again , it is about enhancing the rights of long-term residents in the EU .
Only a specific element among them is addressed here , namely those with legal resident status .
It thus excludes all those living here illegally .
One could say , ' OK , the illegals just do not feature in the report and so we are not going to say anything about them today ' , but that is precisely the problem : we are always dealing exclusively with people with legal resident status , and almost all the other projected legislation - even own-initiative reports - has seen the failure , over and over again , of amendments intended precisely to enhance the rights of the illegals .
The inevitable conclusion is that the illegals are simply the logical consequence of the ' fortress EU ' policy , and that is why I entertain no high hopes of major changes on this point from within Parliament , the Commission or the Council in the immediate future .
Let us then be honest enough to say that we are interested only in those who have the great good fortune to be able to enter the EU at all - under very degrading conditions and often illegally - who then play the joker and get asylum from whatever EU country it happens to be , or who simply happen to be people the capitalist system can make use of .
There is to be no improvement in the law for all the people who fall through this particular grating .
In my view , both these proposals contain a series of regulations which , on their own terms , are reasonable and humane .
Baroness Ludford ' s report , in particular , tries to comply with congenial demands for fair treatment and active integration . It would be a poor do if it did not .
I have a couple of comments , however .
We are now ensconced in Fortress Europe , and the political attitude that dominates the area in which EU legislation prevails is defined by conditions of access that are so strict as almost to make the proverbial eye of the needle look like an open barn door .
Secondly , I have to state that the proposals before us show my own country ' s government up in a disgraceful light .
As newly appointed minister for ' Integration and Deportation ' , our former fellow MEP Mr Haarder , a Liberal , has been pursuing a policy that must cause former colleagues in his political group to wonder .
The rules now being negotiated are significantly less xenophobic than Mr Haarder ' s proposals .
Thirdly , the fact that the Danish people have acquired a xenophobic government that is further to the right than the EU rules are does not cause the People ' s Movement , which I represent , to change its view of Schengen and Title IV of the Treaty on European Union from which Denmark , as is well known , is exempt .
This technique of integration , used in certain quarters of the EU system , presents a deadly danger to democracy .
It is not the EU that should get rid of a government for us .
It is not the EU that should implement a humane foreign policy . It is the Danes themselves - we , the people .
Mr President , we believe that the two draft directives presented by the Commission on the conditions of residence and movement of third-country nationals within the European Union are , to put it mildly , lagging far behind our current requirements .
These conditions arise from a state of mind that we thought had become obsolete following the attacks of 11 September and which sought , in particular , to put unrestricted openness and movement before the security of our fellow citizens .
Unfortunately , we must point out that this dangerous state of mind is still very much alive .
As far as the conditions of movement of third-country nationals are concerned , for example , the draft directive abolishes the current obligation to declare themselves , under Article 22 of the Schengen Convention , when they move between EU countries .
Each Member State retains the option of maintaining this obligation , but in a watered down form and with a longer time limit for the declaration .
In our opinion , this is exactly the opposite of what should have been done .
We should have examined how to make this declaration of presence more operational and more effective .
Everyone here is aware that following 11 September , Europe has been accused of being too easy for terrorists to use as a base , because its internal borders are too porous .
Yet , we are quite obviously considering a proposal that would increase this porosity .
Similarly , we are opposed to introducing a specific six-month travel authorisation which is not provided for under the Treaty and which would distort its spirit , as the Treaty ' s common visa policy only relates to visas valid for less than three months .
Lastly , with regard to the second draft directive relating to third-country nationals who are long-term residents , we believe that the Community has no jurisdiction to introduce , even by unanimity , a common status comprising uniform principles .
Article 63 of the TEU specifies only that the Council can take ' measures ' relating to immigration policy in the area of entry and residence conditions , but that it cannot and must not be a question of a full status which would impose a centralised , uniform and rigid solution for all Member States .
In particular , we do not believe it is appropriate to grant third-country nationals who benefit from this so-called status rights that remove differences between them and national citizens and grant them a virtually automatic right of stay in the other Member States .
Those of our fellow Members who believe that we are here , first and foremost , to protect the interests of our respective peoples will vote against these two draft directives .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I can only welcome the Commission ' s initiative on the freedom of circulation of third-country nationals within the Schengen area , since this is something that I , myself , specifically wanted when we discussed the two previous reports .
In fact , the instrument proposed certainly meets the requirements for a more global and integrated approach , which is what we had asked for .
Congratulations , then , to the Commission for its initiative .
Let me now turn to Mrs Kessler ' s report , and say that , overall , my group supports its direction and its amendments .
Like Mrs Kessler , we also believe that the regulation is , as it stands , a more adequate legal instrument than the directive .
We agree with the clarifications that she has made regarding the definition of the length of time that the travel authorisation is valid .
There is , however , one point in Mrs Kessler ' s report which surprised me , speaking from a personal point of view , namely , the virtually unrelenting effort she has made to combat the Commission ' s proposal , under which the holders of a long-stay visa who do not yet possess a permanent residence permit can only move around freely if they have submitted an official application for a residence permit in the Member State that issued their visa .
In her report , Mrs Kessler writes - and I quote - ' There are no obvious grounds - what a lovely way of putting it , Mrs Kessler ! - why the rules on the point at which the period of freedom to travel begins for these particular third-country nationals should be any different from those concerning the other third-country nationals covered by the same legislation . '
You have written ' there are no grounds for this ' in your report !
Well , in fact , Mrs Kessler , there are grounds for this .
What the Commission is proposing in this case is exactly what the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs voted for unanimously and what this entire House approved when it voted in favour of my report on the French initiative .
The truth , Mrs Kessler , is that we are in line with the Council ' s position that Parliament rejected whilst approving the report that I have just mentioned .
There are therefore grounds for this , Mrs Kessler , both institutions share the same view , how on earth can you not recognise that ?
Mr President , I would like to refer to Baroness Ludford ' s report .
Before we deal with other aspects of immigration policy , a common status is needed for third-country nationals who are long-term residents in strict compliance with the Tampere Agreements , the aim of which was to give these third-country nationals a set of uniform rights comparable with those enjoyed by EU citizens .
We need to resolve situations such as those that , in theory , hinder the free movement of third-country nationals within the EU today .
For this reason my group hopes that this House will send a strong message , directed mainly at the Council , supporting the European Commission proposal .
In this regard , I would personally like to thank Baroness Ludford for her work .
We cannot accept some of the amendments that have been adopted in Committee or that have been submitted once again to this House .
As Mrs Roure mentioned , we cannot allow subjective issues to obstruct the authority to grant this long-term resident status and , even less so , dangerous propaganda exercises that draw parallels , not between border controls and terrorism , as used to be said , but between long-term residents and terrorists , or , at the very least , terrorism .
Once again we are going to defend the right for third-country nationals who are long-term residents to vote in local and European elections .
I can only hope that , despite the numerous empty places on the Council benches , this message will leave Parliament and be heard .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in actual fact , we are discussing two subjects which are quite distinct although closely connected .
Indeed , a joint debate on immigration is taking place on two fronts : the first concerns the recognition of the status of long-term legally resident third-country nationals ; the second concerns the regulation of the stay in a Member State and the freedom to travel for fixed periods and for specific reasons .
Certainly , the first proposal would appear to be more important in that it seeks to establish the conditions under which citizens of third countries who are long-term residents in a Member State , within the meaning of the directive , can also travel to a different Member State of the Union from that in which they have been granted residence .
The debate on the directive within the Council is encountering obvious difficulties because the matter is so broad and sensitive .
Many States are still striving to define a clear position on the various provisions of the directive , taking into account the different situations and dispositions too .
Moreover , the extent to which States are affected varies as well : for example , in certain geographical areas , such as Italy , the problem of immigration is clearly more acute , and it is more severe and more urgent than in others .
It must be pointed out once again that there are other factors related to the main issue , including , for example , family reunion projects and other asylum projects , not to mention the complex issue of refugees .
In general , we would advocate the approach of those governments which are attempting to establish a direct link - a dialogue , we might say - between the directive and national legislation .
This is what we are doing in Italy : striving , as I said , to move ahead with this proposal .
However , once we have laid down certain minimum criteria , it is still necessary to leave each Member State to decide how best to implement its own legislation .
Mr President , I should like to say a few words on the Ludford report on the rights of long-term residents .
My apologies for missing the first few minutes of this debate but , amongst a number of problems today , I was held up in the passport queue at the airport .
Ahead of me were two UK passport holders but , being of Asian origin , they were being subjected to what I consider to be quite unacceptable levels of interrogation .
Colleagues around the House will know that is all too typical at customs points all around Europe .
My apologies also to Baroness Ludford .
Mr Medina said earlier that some of the amendments that went through committee weakened the Commission 's original proposal .
It was due , in part , to the lack of numbers on my own side that these amendments went through in committee , so I apologise for that .
We should strive as far as possible to give all long-term residents the same rights as EU citizens .
We should reject the PPE-DE amendments which seek to classify long-term residents as somehow second-class citizens .
As Mrs Roure said , we should encourage people to integrate and I support their efforts to learn languages .
But using an individual 's progress in language as a criterion as to whether to grant long-term status is discriminatory .
If the ability to speak your home nation 's language properly was generally used as a measure of the right of residency , I can think of a lot of people back home who would not have the right to live there !
Other parts of this report , which state that proof of adequate retirement cover is a prerequisite for third-country nationals obtaining some rights or the same rights , are equally subjective .
We cannot invite people to the European Union only to say " pay your taxes here , but do not expect any social services or social benefits in return " .
That is perpetuating a second-class citizen status .
Two hundred years ago our ancestors charged around the world , colonising and abusing distant countries .
We have a right and a duty now to set society straight and to put our own house in order .
We must urge all Member States to educate our own citizens much more fully as to the benefits and positive advantages of having an integrated society .
In a few years there will come a time when new EU Member States will be crying out for third-country nationals to come to help them with their economies and to fill employment vacancies .
We must have things sorted out by then .
Mr President , Commissioner , the report - by which I mean not the draft report , but the report that has emerged from the Committee into the plenary session - shows real evidence of a firm grip on reality .
It takes into account the lessons we have to learn from 11 September , and also the guidelines on immigrant workers that we passed on a very broad basis in plenary session .
I therefore also welcome the conclusion that it comes to , namely the checks before long-term resident status is granted , such as the requirement for legal residence over a period of five years and checks being made as to whether the person in question has sufficient funds available for himself and for the family that can expect him to provide for them , or the requirement that he has a job and has social and retirement insurance .
I also , in view of what happened on 11 September , welcome the introduction of security checks .
We have no need of criminals , or of people who represent a danger to the European Union 's public safety and order .
I also appreciate the fact that the Member States will be enabled to introduce checks on other criteria such as language skills , housing accommodation and more along similar lines .
Again , in relation to criminal offences , the increased scope for deportation is also a positive sign .
I welcome these regulations because they are in step with the granting of an ordered sequence of privileges along the lines of : access to employment , education , social security and integration , and this is also to be embraced .
We in the European People 's Party declare our support for the controlled acceptance of third-country nationals , so that integration may actually be facilitated and the EU 's security and stability may continue to be guaranteed .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Commission I should like to thank the rapporteurs , Baroness Ludford and Mrs Kessler , for the detailed work that they have presented to the European Parliament today .
In our view , the status of third-country nationals who are long-term residents in the territory of a Member State is a fundamental aspect of drawing up a common immigration policy .
The status of long-term residents puts admission policies in a long-term perspective , providing third-country nationals who wish to do so the guarantee of being able to reside for a long time in their State of reception .
This status , as the Commission proposes it , would give these people the legal security necessary to be able to integrate successfully into European societies .
The objective that was declared in Tampere and reiterated in Laeken is to guarantee legal immigrants equal treatment and ensure that they have comparable rights and obligations to those of the European Union ' s own citizens .
The Commission proposal set the objective of approximating the rights of long-term residents with those of citizens of the Union .
We defined the precise and objective conditions to which the access of third-country nationals to the status of long-term resident is subject .
The conditions that we proposed were worded in such a way as to assess whether the third-country national has , in fact , established his or her long-term residence in the Member State in question and whether he or she intends to integrate into that country .
This person must have lived in this Member State for a sufficiently long period ( five years ) and have proved that he or she has integrated economically by demonstrating an income and sickness insurance . Furthermore , the person in question must not represent a threat to public order .
The report that you are now discussing also suggests a further condition that will improve the person ' s status : a mastery of the language of the country of residence .
The Commission considers that language is a criterion for integration and , therefore , language learning must be at the heart of the new integration policies . The Commission is carrying out a study on these policies , in line with its communication of November 2000 , and intends to present an initiative on the subject to Parliament and the Council in 2003 .
Hence my willingness to consider the language issue , which is proposed in an amendment tabled by Mrs Klamt , particularly in its objective dimension and , specifically , when the State of reception provides immigrants with proper conditions for learning .
With regard to adding a new requirement for old age pensions or retirement pensions , I do not feel it would be useful to increase the conditions to be fulfilled in order for the status of long-term resident to be granted .
The legislation of most Member States already grants this status automatically , without checking whether the condition of old age pensions has been fulfilled .
This matter must be seen as part of a broader and more complex issue that involves the relationship between migrant workers and social security systems in general .
And , therefore , the Commission is working on extending the benefits of Regulation No 1408 / 71 , on the coordination of social security systems , to third-country nationals .
We also feel that this is the context in which this matter should be addressed .
With regard to some of the proposals for amendments that have been tabled , the Commission takes the view that only when the status of long-term resident is granted will the beneficiary be able to enjoy equal treatment in comparison with the nationals of Member States in practically all areas of socio-economic life .
Nevertheless , we are sensitive to the proposals for amendments that have been tabled to enshrine , even before this status is granted , equal treatment in the field of legal proceedings and access to legal remedy as stated in the amendments tabled by Baroness Ludford , and we shall , therefore , incorporate them into the text .
With regard to participation in political life , the Commission is not stating an opinion , because it takes the view that there is no legal basis in the Treaties for us to address this issue .
Some of the amendments that have been proposed reflect particular concern about the issue of public order , a concern that is totally understandable following the events of 11 September .
I share the opinion that has been expressed here in the course of the debate , according to which we must avoid making the mistake of creating a dangerous link between immigration and terrorism , which would lead to a type of generalised suspicion towards all third-country nationals .
The Commission drafted a working paper on the relationship between safeguarding domestic security and respecting our obligations and international instruments in the field of protection .
In light of this document , we have checked all of the clauses on the protection of public order contained in our proposals .
The aim of this work was to ensure that the Member States were in a position to effectively protect public order in the face of the threat posed by terrorism .
This study led the Commission to review some of its proposals , including this proposal , specifically with regard to two points : we removed the requirement for the threat to be effective before residency status is granted , thereby providing for cases of potential risk as they can already be interpreted in light of the current wording of the Geneva Convention of 1951 ; we also removed the ban on implementing emergency expulsion measures as long as certain requirements are met .
I would say that these two amendments involve the concerns of guaranteeing domestic security and the fight against the terrorism , and that , for this reason , the amendments proposed should not be considered .
Finally , the innovation and the considerable added value of this proposal lie in the right granted to holders of long-term resident status to move to another Member State .
In this case , integration works already not only at national level , but also at European level .
And those individuals who have resided in a Member State for a certain amount of time will be in an advantageous position in comparison with those who come directly from their country of origin , should they wish to move to another Member State .
I think that this is a very important aspect , and should , therefore , not be ignored .
With regard to the proposal on the free movement and the freedom to travel of third-country nationals , for which Mrs Kessler is rapporteur , I should like , first of all , to point out that the proposal contains important aspects in terms of the creation of an area of freedom , security and justice .
The fact is that the Schengen acquis already contains rules on the movement of third-country nationals .
Nevertheless , the conditions for the exercise of this freedom to travel are not always transparent and are spread out across various instruments .
The Commission shares the European Parliament ' s opinion that we must pool together in a single legal instrument all the fragmented elements that define this freedom to travel .
The proposal , therefore , lays down the conditions that enable third-country nationals to move around freely whether or not they are subject to visa requirements , whether they have residency papers or have a long-term visa , whilst they are waiting for residency papers to be issued .
Furthermore , this proposal is also intended to regulate the travel of various categories of people that have a legitimate interest in remaining for a period of between three and six months within the border-free area without their situation being equated with immigration in the true sense of the word .
Examples of these are tourists , investigators , musicians on tour , individuals on family visits , and those undergoing hospitalisation and convalescence .
The introduction of a specific travel permit that allows travel for a maximum period of six months , whilst not spending more than three months in the territory of the same Member State is planned for these categories of people , which complies fully with the letter of the Treaty .
Most of the proposals for amendments featured in Mrs Kessler ' s report are designed to explain and clarify the content of our proposal .
With regard to the issue of the legal instrument , the choice proposed is for a regulation rather than a directive .
Where all these proposals are concerned , the Commission supports any solution that ensures a positive response from the Council .
The only point on which we do not agree with the proposal by Mrs Kessler concerns Amendment No 5 on movement within border-free areas with a long-stay visa , which , as Mr Deprez has already emphasised , must be carefully studied .
We ask Parliament not to approve it .
A long-stay visa is a national visa , which will be issued in accordance with national rules and not in accordance with the rules of Chapter 3 , Section 1 of the Schengen Implementing Convention .
From this point of view , I think it would be difficult , where the long-stay visa is concerned , to impose the rules that have been planned for short-stay visas , in other words , by prior consultation .
Parliament has already rejected this type of proposal , during the debate on the French initiative on the long-stay visa , and contested the legal basis specifically and the fragmented approach overall .
From this very angle , which Parliament had already approved , the Commission also contested the legal basis and declared that it would , in any event , submit a proposal that will also include holders of a long-stay visa and that it would once again pursue the objective of the French initiative , making it part of a broader framework .
I share the concern underlying Amendment No 5 , which envisages the possibility of a third-country national travelling immediately within the border-free area . This possibility , however , already exists today because a third-country national can always request a uniform visa , the so-called ' C ' visa , and move around freely on that basis .
To close , I should like to congratulate the rapporteurs . I hope that the proposals tabled by the Commission receive the across-the-board support of Parliament .
Thank you , Commissioner Vitorino .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Relief , rehabilitation and development
The next item is the report ( A5-0464 / 2001 ) by Mr van den Berg on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation on the Commission communication to the Council and the European Parliament on Linking relief , rehabilitation and development - an assessment . ( COM ( 2001 ) 153 - C5-0395 / 2001 - 2001 / 2153 ( COS ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioners , the European Union is the world ' s largest donor in terms of relief .
Thanks to European funding , people who are hit by war or natural disasters in Bangladesh , Afghanistan , Somalia and the Balkans are helped to get back on their feet .
However , things too often go wrong when direct relief is discontinued and a switch is made to aid for the reconstruction and development of the affected area .
This problem is referred to in specialist literature as the grey zone .
Allow me to illustrate this with a textbook example . After Hurricane Mitch left a trail of destruction in Central America in 1998 , the Union responded quickly with relief .
As from 1999 , the Commission subsequently worked on an action programme for reconstruction in Central America , and ECHO was set to leave the area from March 2001 onwards .
The action programme contained some sound elements , such as local participation , coordination with the Member States and other donors , and decentralisation of powers to the delegation in Managua .
In practice , however , the programme moved far too slowly .
Two years after the disaster , only a few projects had been rubberstamped .
This example unfortunately illustrates the rule and not the exception , and this is of course unacceptable , both from a political and humanitarian perspective .
Who would like to explain soon to the people in Afghanistan that we are unable to keep our pledge of aid due to our own inability to respond promptly and with due flexibility following the relief phase ?
The question arises as to what measures the Commission is taking to prevent the problem of the grey zone from occurring during the reconstruction of Afghanistan .
During the preparation of this report , the Commission and the organisations involved in the field were consulted extensively .
The Commission recognises the problem of the grey zone but , at the same time , its evaluation , which we are discussing today , remains too vague and too theoretical .
That is why a number of specific proposals are being submitted to the Commission in my report , partly on the basis of the conference with the NGOs involved and intensive talks with your official services .
The Commission recognises that inflexible and bureaucratic procedures form one of the key problems .
By way of solution , the Commission would like to draw up appendices to the Country Strategy Papers as a result of which a rapid and flexible reaction in a crisis situation must become possible .
I support this proposal , but only if those appendices are approved within a two-month period .
Can the Commission give an indication as to whether it has already drafted new , simplified , rapid and flexible procedures for the approval and adjustment of the appendices ?
For otherwise , the proposal for these crisis papers will simply remain a hollow exercise .
In addition , in my capacity as rapporteur , I would refer to the enormous importance of coordination and cooperation , not only between the Commission services but also with the Member States , international donors , local partners and NGOs .
From my talks with the Commission , it transpired that there is a clear need for a flexible instrument for construction and rehabilitation , so that this grey zone can be dealt with .
The existing rehabilitation regulation is too restricted .
Projects in the field of security and good governance , for example , fall outside the scope of the Regulation , and resources are limited .
It is evident that the total amount of , for example , some EUR 50 million for Asia lags far behind the level of need in Afghanistan .
That is why I suggest reviewing the existing rehabilitation regulation , so that , in the post-crisis stage , the real needs of the people in an affected area can be accommodated in a flexible manner .
In order to guarantee sufficient funding , it is important that , as soon as a crisis breaks out , resources are freed up quickly via a trigger mechanism from the existing non-used budget and reserves .
In what way does the Commission want to act upon my plan in terms of concrete proposals ?
The problem of the grey zone between relief and rehabilitation is well-known .
It is no longer acceptable for people who are directly faced with the effects of war or natural disasters on a daily basis to be left out in the cold due to our inability to react to the local situation in a rapid , flexible and coordinated manner .
Since Europe , being the world ' s largest relief donor , plays a fantastic role , we must , as Europe , close this gap by means of sustainable development in crisis areas .
That would truly constitute an enormous contribution to security and stability in conflict regions in Asia , Latin America and Africa .
This might well be a wiser investment than committing substantial sums for defence materiel , such as F16s , at this stage , although I know that the Commission is not concerned with these matters .
As your rapporteur , I will therefore closely follow how the Commission and the Member States tackle this problem in the near future .
I expect a great deal from the pledge made thus far , but I am anxious to know what the Commission ' s actual response will be .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of Mr Mantovani , who is prevented from being with us today by air traffic problems , I would like to make a few observations on the Commission communication with regard to the difficult concept of the linkage between relief , rehabilitation and development .
I would like to thank Mr van den Berg for his excellent work , on which a broad consensus was achieved at the vote in committee .
First of all , I feel that it is vital to improve complementarity , coherence and the cost-benefit ratio , for these are necessary to bridge the gap between the various stages of international assistance , the famous grey zone , and , more generally , for the effectiveness of the Union ' s development and cooperation policy overall .
Indeed , the multilateral financial institutions such as the World Bank , the International Monetary Fund , the various UN agencies and the Paris Club need to be more involved in this process .
Moreover , it would seem appropriate to distinguish between internal and external coordination action in order to establish who does what at both European and international level and also at the level of the individual Member States ; this would make it easier to plan and therefore make us more effective in implementing rehabilitation and development initiatives .

The contribution of our group , the Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , focuses precisely on the need for greater complementarity , particularly as per Amendments Nos 15 and 16 tabled by Mr Mantovani , and for better coordination of the different actions , in order to obtain greater effectiveness and improved results in the action linking and coordinating relief , rehabilitation and development ; in particular , there is a call for appropriate coordination and ex post evaluation methods , budgetary control and less bureaucratic interference , to provide a greater guarantee of Union development aid reaching the countries in crisis , and therefore precisely the people who genuinely need it , effectively and without time wasting or needless duplication or overlapping of effort or financial resources invested .
Mr President , like Max van den Berg in his report , we are in favour of the Commission ' s communication on the links between the European Union ' s actions in emergency situations in the countries of the South and the Community ' s development cooperation policy .
In committee , there was some agreement with the communication we are assessing here , but there are also shortcomings which the proposals contained in the resolution we will vote on later are aimed at resolving .
This resolution includes a series of concerns and recommendations aimed at improving , in practice , the European Union ' s action in the field under discussion , which we hope will be accepted .
The whole of this debate demonstrates that there is a dialectical relationship between humanitarian aid , which the European Union mobilises in order to deal with emergency situations resulting from all types of disaster , and the aid which is regularly granted with a view to promoting the development of a particular region or country .
That is to say that programmes aimed at rehabilitation or development must include within them elements aimed to preventing conflicts and preventing , where possible , so-called ' natural ' disasters and their worst consequences .
Furthermore , actions in cases of emergency must contribute , where possible , to the eventual rehabilitation and development of the region in question .
Today we are recognising that there are considerable dysfunctions within the European Union ' s actions in terms of the transition from one area to another .
The majority are due to the distribution between administrative bodies and the distribution of competences as well as deficient coordination between the services which are involved in programming and the implementation of those actions .
Another obstacle is the bureaucratic complexity of many mechanisms employed for this purpose .
What seems more serious to us is that there are countries with which the European Union still has no cooperation agreement , such as Cuba , which prevent us from acting in situations of emergency or prevent humanitarian aid from having the desired continuity in the field of development cooperation .
The Commission is good at carrying out analyses but often lacks the clout to actually implement policy conclusions .
The internal organisation is still too hierarchical , bureaucratic and centralised , and the Member States give the Commission too few resources and too little policy leeway for it to be able to take decisive action .
These structural shortcomings therefore stand in the way of solving the problem of the grey zone .
The transition from relief to reconstruction and development requires flexibility in the decision-making process .
Sluggishness and too much interference can affect the intended results even more adversely than the technical risks , which can be accompanied by speedy procedures .
Needless to say , what we need first of all is the best possible prevention policy with regard to natural disasters and violent conflicts .
Everything possible must be done before a crisis breaks out .
The state of readiness must be at its best , plans must be ready , cooperatives must be arranged and the implementation partners must be identified as far as possible .
Detailed and flexible disaster plans must form part of the Country Strategy Papers .
ECHO must focus on relief , but it seems very desirable that it also employ staff with expertise in the field of reconstruction in order to make the transition smoother .
The monitoring procedure regarding implementation must shift from ex ante to ex post .
Internal coordination can only be effective if a multidisciplinary team is deployed at an early stage .
When can we expect specific Commission proposals for simplified policy procedures ?
The report by Mr Van den Berg makes excellent suggestions .
The entire donor community is responsible for improvement .
The grey zone problem is an additional reason for speeding up the Commission ' s internal reorganisation .
It is high time splendid analyses were translated into still more splendid policy action .
Mr President , I wish to begin by thanking the rapporteur for his excellent report on linking relief , rehabilitation and development .
It is an enormously important subject , fraught with problems .
There is no doubt at all that there is an increase in disasters worldwide , both man-made , as in Afghanistan , and natural , such as in Goma , DRC .
It needs the full cooperation of all parties to have most effect : the donors , the beneficiaries , implementing parties like governments and NGOs , and bilateral aid .
In Afghanistan we have seen the bombing and destruction that has taken place .
That will mean urgent and instant relief , the rehabilitation of millions of refugees and development aid .
It was horrifying to see in today 's paper that a poor family has sold its twelve-year-old daughter into marriage just to get enough food to feed the rest of the family .
This is tragic .
So getting aid to those most in need is absolutely vital and that requires local knowledge and the right kind of aid .
Two weeks ago ECHO informed the Committee on Development and Cooperation that the situation in Goma was totally under control and that everything that was required was there .
That very night we heard NGOs stating on the television that 90,000 were starving and that babies were already dying .
Is this opportunism , accurate evidence or over-reacting ?
It is almost impossible to plan for natural disasters .
It is better to have a centralised European depot that can react quickly in an appropriate way .
Linkage is all about cooperation and one body being responsible for decisions .
Mr President , I wish to begin by thanking you for giving me the floor on this important subject .
If I may now change to the language which Mr van den Berg and I have in common , I should like to say the following .
, Commission . ( NL ) In the first instance , I should like to congratulate Mr Van den Berg on the exceptional quality of his report on what is , in fact , a relatively complex subject .
Crisis situations are always complex , and we must reach consensus on the way in which the reaction of the Union as a whole can be improved on .
The Commission communication , the Council ' s conclusions and the parliamentary report contribute to establishing this consensus .
Mr President , as you know , the European Union is one of the key players in the world ' s relief circuit .
The European Community and its Member States together account for half of the international aid programmes funded by the developed countries .
Via its Bureau for humanitarian aid , better known under the name of ECHO , the European Commission is actively involved in providing humanitarian aid to the most vulnerable and worst afflicted people in the world .
The figures speak for themselves .
Last year alone , ECHO made more than EUR 500 million available for humanitarian projects in some 80 countries which reached some 18 million people .
ECHO 's task remains that of funding the coordinated provision of humanitarian aid and that of providing protection via humanitarian partner organisations with a view to saving and protecting lives , alleviating suffering and safeguarding the integrity and dignity of the peoples of third countries in humanitarian crises .
Although ECHO 's key task is to grant humanitarian relief , the Bureau is also involved in short-term rehabilitation in the immediate post-crisis phase .
I think we can all be agreed that improvements need to be made in the grey zone between relief and development .
The speakers this evening also referred to this .
We have all identified the same difficulties , such as the unduly slow decision-making processes , problems related to the scope of financing instruments and the need to find the right implementing partners .
We make progress by tackling these issues more systematically , but we must realise that we are not able to solve all the problems connected with the complex nature of these situations , and we must remain realistic in our approach .
The Commission has set up a series of actions for implementing policy in directions that reflect the link between relief , rehabilitation and development .
For example , ECHO is currently putting the finishing touches to guidelines for its exit strategies .
This document will become the basis for consultation with other services of the Commission , describing the circumstances under which ECHO can withdraw from granting relief .
The services of the Commission are also working on an agreement to guarantee effective coordination and appropriate procedures in the framework of the implementation of the Cotonou Agreement with the countries in Africa , the Caribbean region and the Pacific .
The principles stated in the communication and concerning the link between relief , rehabilitation and development should be applied .
Europ I is actively working on an agenda to improve its working methods and so increase its capacity for rapid interventions .
From a budgetary point of view , the Commission realises that its operational resources and instruments must be reviewed .
We are of the opinion that the number of budget lines must be reduced .
On the other hand , it must be ensured that broader regulations are still able to cover all existing types of activities , that the speed of decision-making is stepped up , that there is flexibility in the choice of implementing partners and that , if necessary , decisions can be taken without the approval of the government in question .
On the basis of experience , we believe that further integration of our interventions using the existing regional instruments is the right way forward and that this must lead to greater policy coherence and a higher level of complementarity between the different types of intervention within one and the same country .
In response to different questions raised this evening , I should once again like to emphasise that the complementarity of the different instruments in the reconstruction process in Afghanistan illustrates the approach pursued by the Commission .
Finally , I should like to stress one important aspect .
We must be fully aware of the fact that intervening in the immediate post-crisis phase means that we have to accept higher political and technical risks .
I should like to point this out with due emphasis .
For that reason , the debate which we held with the Council last year , together with your report of today , are welcomed by the Commission as contributions towards a more effective response to crises and the achievement of greater coherence between relief and development .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at noon .
Workers ' rights
The next item is the joint debate on :
Report ( A5-0013 / 2002 ) by Hughes , on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council directive on the organisation of the working time of persons whose occupation is the performance of mobile road-transport activities ( PE-CONS 3676 / 2001 - C5-0688 / 2001 - 1998 / 0319 ( COD ) ) ;
Report ( A5-0026 / 2002 ) by Ghilardotti , on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council directive establishing a general framework for improving information and consultation rights of employees in the European Community ( PE-CONS 3677 / 2001 - C5-0687 / 2001 - 1998 / 0315 ( COD ) ) .

Mr President , I should like to thank Mr Friedrich who was the Vice-President in charge of the conciliation on road transport , and also Mr Rocard who took part as chairman of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs ; in fact , all members of Parliament 's delegation , because it was very much a team effort .
Thanks are due to Commissioner Palacio and her staff for the crucial part they played at several points when it seemed we were at deadlock .
Finally , I should like to thank the Belgian presidency for the energetic and determined way they pursued agreement on this dossier .
The outcome of the conciliation on road transport is very much to be welcomed .
It plugs one of the last remaining gaps in the working-time mosaic .
It is profoundly important from the point of view of health and safety , and road safety more generally , and it is also important from the point of view of ensuring fair competition between the road , rail and other transport sectors .
On specifics , first we have secured the inclusion of self-employed drivers as a matter of principle .
Some will be disappointed that will not take full effect until four years beyond transposition .
But we should not forget that the Council 's common position would almost certainly have led to the permanent exclusion of the self-employed .
The Council wanted to exclude them in principle and only consider including them on the basis of a Commission study looking at possible distortions at some point in the future .
Even then the Council would have been determined to block such a move from the Commission .
We now have a total reversal of that situation .
The self-employed are included as a matter of principle and can only be excluded if two things happen : first , if the Commission proposes such an exclusion ; and secondly , if we , as co-legislator here in Parliament , agree with such an exclusion .
Neither of those things is very likely to happen .
Another important point in the outcome is a strong definition of self-employment .
Even with only a temporary exclusion of the self-employed , we felt it was very important that we won a clear and limiting definition of what a self-employed driver actually is , to avoid unscrupulous employers pushing drivers into false forms of independence .
We now have a very clear definition in Article 3 ( e ) , and the final sentence of that article is a catch-all : drivers who are not caught by the checklist of criteria included in the definition will be dealt with as though they are employees under the directive .
That is an extremely useful definition .
We have also considerably improved and clarified the definition of working time .
It also now applies to the self-employed except in respect of general administrative work , not linked directly to the specific transport operation under way .
On night work , I again know that some will be disappointed that we did not succeed in limiting night work to eight hours .
I will make three quick points regarding that .
It would have been impossible to get that through Council .
Most delegations were against .
There are valid environmental and road safety reasons to transport goods - if they must be transported by road - at night .
Concession on night work became a key in securing the inclusion of the self-employed .
This is a joint debate involving consideration of the importance of work , information and consultation .
Members will see from Article 8 concerning derogations on weekly working time and night work that we have insisted upon the promotion of social dialogue as the first option .
My final point is that certain aspects of the text before us are highly relevant to the state of affairs being brought to light by the Kralowetz case .
Those aspects seeking to block the creation of false independent status , dealing with record-keeping , and placing a focus on the duties of consigners and others responsible for determining routes and timetables , are particularly relevant .
But Kralowetz makes two things glaringly obvious .
First , in the enlargement process we desperately need additional social safeguard measures and a socially controlled opening of the labour market for workers from central and Eastern Europe , particularly in this sector .
Secondly , it is glaringly clear that if the level of control exposed by this case continues , important texts like this one will be worth less than the paper they are printed on .
We must insist on full and proper application of controls across the European Union .
My final point is that it is absolutely essential that we have European-wide rules that are binding throughout the territories of the European Union , otherwise the Kralowetz case will be just one of many which we will see in the weeks and months to come .
Mr President , today ' s debate and tomorrow ' s vote in the Chamber mark the end of a long , difficult path which the three institutions have been following for some years , conducting a frank , heated debate on a subject of major importance : the information , consultation and participation of workers .
With conciliation , which was concluded satisfactorily on 17 December last , the European Union defined minimum information and consultation standards to be applied throughout Union territory .
Thus , after the directives on European Works Councils , the European Company Statute and the Charter of Fundamental Rights , this directive completes the existing Community and national frameworks , which can help to ensure that necessary preparations are made for the change , that restructuring is carried out in an acceptable context and that the ' employment ' objective is given the necessary priority in the current situation .
It seems to me particularly significant that agreement has been reached before the Barcelona Summit .
Almost all the Member States have a legal framework in place - either statutory or contractual in origin - which seeks to ensure that workers are informed and consulted : almost all , I said , but not all , and this directive extends the right so that it exists throughout the Union .
Basically , this directive recognises the rights of workers and their representatives in all undertakings with less than 50 employees to be informed and consulted about all aspects of the life of the undertaking , particularly the implications of company choices on employment , the organisation of work , training and skill development .
It is important that the directive should focus on the content and procedures , including time frames , for informing and consulting workers .
It explicitly lays down that information and consultation must be timely , for that is a prerequisite for the success of the restructuring and adaptation processes of undertakings and of processes identifying anticipatory measures necessary to offset negative impact on workers .
It recognises a number of rights of workers ' representatives and of workers themselves ; it lays down sanctions that the Member States have to introduce into their own legislation - when implementing and applying the directive - effective , proportionate and dissuasive sanctions .
I feel that this is a particularly important point and it has been the subject of much debate .
The Commission ' s initial plan , supported by Parliament , was to lay down a European sanction .
However , in respect for the principle of subsidiarity , the directive stipulates that the Member States themselves should introduce sanctions .
A transitional period is also laid down for those States which do not yet have any statutory system - either legal or contractual - although it is shorter than that provided for in the common position .
Clearly , the European Parliament would have liked more : it would have liked more specific information , clearer definition and more content , but considering the sensitivity of the subject and the resistance in recent months from both governments and lobbies , I feel that we can consider ourselves satisfied with the result .
The Parliamentary delegation to the Conciliation Committee voted unanimously for this agreement .
We can be satisfied because rights are recognised , the social dialogue is given due importance and the principle of subsidiarity is respected while a uniform framework is defined for the entire territory of the Union : there will no longer be A class workers and B class workers when it comes to the rights recognised in undertakings .
I want to end by thanking , in particular , the Commissioner , Mrs Diamantopoulou , and her staff , the Belgian Presidency and Mrs Onkelinx .
I would point out that we were three women , the three of us , in particular , working on this directive .
I feel that it was our determination and our strong awareness of the major importance of the subject , not least - supported as we were , I by my committee and Parliament and the Commissioner and the Minister by their convictions - which enabled us to bring such a vital process to a conclusion .
In my opinion , the Barcelona Summit will be a good opportunity for us to see whether our conclusions have a positive , practical impact .
Mr President , I am under the impression that Parliament would like me to make a statement on the case of the road haulage driver stuck in the Grand-Duchy of Luxembourg .
If that is the case , then I should like to say the following .
Based on the information at the Commission 's disposal , the Luxembourg authorities conducted a search on behalf of an inquiry led by the Tribunal of Munich in Germany of the premises in Luxembourg of an Austrian-based transport operator Kralowetz .
This company has been active in Luxembourg since 1986 and was an international one established in eight different European countries .
The technical manager , Mr Karl Kralowetz , was arrested on 22 January , and since 26 January approximately 150 lorries belonging to the Kralowetz company from different countries have assembled in Luxembourg on a parking bay of a customs centre and the drivers have complained that they have not been paid for more than three months .
The majority of them may be considered as illegally employed .
The Luxembourg authorities are in the process of organising the return of the drivers by plane to their country of origin and each driver will receive EUR 1,000 by way of compensation .
The real problem is the unscrupulous behaviour of the transport operator concerned .
He had used illegal labour - i.e. without social security status - with a salary which is not in conformity with national law or collective agreements and without a work permit .
For several months the judicial authorities and rogatory committees of several Member States have been conducting investigations and enquiries and drawing up reports .
All those actions have resulted in further searches , the arrest of some of those responsible and the confiscation of documents and equipment .
The Commission welcomes the action of the judicial and administrative authorities but , nevertheless , regrets that such an affair could ever have been possible at all .
This proves the need for a correct application of national laws , as well as the following Community rules in the field of international road transport operations .
Firstly , the rules on admission to the occupation of road-transport operator , namely the three criteria of good repute , financial standing and professional competence ; secondly , the rules on driving times and rest periods , for which the Commission has recently made a proposal for new , simplified and updated EU legislation .
In addition , the following upcoming legal instruments are also relevant ; firstly , the rules on working time , on which an agreement between the European Parliament and the Council is very much to be welcomed , and on which you will vote tomorrow .
I should mention here the Commission 's particular thanks to Mr Hughes .
Secondly , the rules on a uniform driver attestation , for which Mr van Dam was your rapporteur , and for which the European Parliament gave its approval on 17 January .
That regulation will put to an end the illegal employment of non-EU drivers in the Community , through checks on the legal employment status of such drivers .
In conclusion , Community instruments exist or are in the process of being adopted .
They need to be correctly applied by Member States , and this example should serve as a lesson to avoid any further repetition of such unscrupulous behaviour by cowboy operators .
The example which Mr Bolkestein quoted a moment ago is , of course , a blatant , and probably exceptional , example of the abuses in the transport sector .
It is not the only example .
We have witnessed various such examples over the past few years , almost on the same scale as the example we heard about a moment ago .
In addition to the many abuses on a large scale , there are also many abuses on a small scale , for the transport sector is largely characterised by abuses .
The system before us , involving stricter standards for working hours - indeed , not only driving hours are referred to , but also working hours - involves a tightening-up on the system used in the past .
This can only work if the monitoring procedure is improved .
If this does not happen - and I agree with what Mr Hughes has said - all these standards will be meaningless .
Although monitoring is a national competence , a two-yearly report on the results of the monitoring procedure , which is to be submitted to the Commission , must still be drawn up .
I would like to ask the Commission to give its attention to this report once more and to reconsider the requirements made of the Member States in this connection .
One of the aspects which the Commission is apparently verifying is whether foreign hauliers are subject to stricter monitoring than domestic hauliers , the latter being of one ' s own nationality .
Needless to say , this should not be used as a criterion .
The Commission is right to investigate this , but it should widen the investigation as long as hauliers allow people to drive for too long at excessive speeds , because they are often required to arrive at their destination at a certain time .
Commissioner - and I am aware that this is not within your competence - as long as the Member States apply different speed limits , this is all useless .
The speed limit is 90 km / hour in one Member State , 100 km / hour in another and 80 km / hour in the next .
Surely , the way in which transport in Europe is organised is sheer madness .
This should all be improved .
In addition to monitoring , there is also the problem of penalties , which differ from one Member State to another .
Actually , in the field of penalties , minimum standards should exist .
I know that , at present , this is not a European competence , but this should change .
Finally , as long as hauliers ' and truckers ' tachographs have to be inspected , cheating will always take place , because the tachograph is an instrument which ideally lends itself to this .
It is therefore high time that the regulation we are waiting for were issued , stipulating that , in future , digital boxes must be fitted in cabs .
Mr President , given the time constraints , I shall omit the congratulations which I had in mind .
Mrs Ghilardotti , I , too , had noticed that many women have been involved in these reports , both your report and that on working hours , and both during the Belgian Presidency and within the European Commission .
This is a good result , in my view .
Normally , I am not one for using big words , certainly not as long as a negotiation process is still running , but now that we have reached the end of it , I shall venture to use superlatives after all and refer to the achievement of both these agreements as historic .
To start with , it is very good that , after a long time , European labour legislation is now being laid down again .
This fits in with the pursuit of a socio-economically ambitious Europe , as expressed in the Lisbon objectives , a dynamic and competitive economy with more and better jobs and greater social cohesion .
It is useful to stress the latter part of these objectives once again on the eve of the Barcelona Summit .
Historic steps are being taken in both areas .
The directive on information and consultation of employees forms an essential recognition of the right of employees to be involved beforehand in a company ' s important decisions , and this forms part of the mores and the traditions of the European social model .
Innovation in terms of economic activity is necessary , but it also requires a pro-active approach which also takes employee participation seriously .
In the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights , this is recognised as a fundamental right .
This directive elaborates upon this as a right for all companies in the Union .
A third step is required for , if we take this employee participation seriously , it should also apply to restructuring and changes in companies .
The Commission issued a document on this subject recently .
I welcome Commissioner Bolkestein ' s presence this evening , for it is particularly important in my view for this discussion also to be held concerning other areas and for the matter of employee participation to be raised in other areas too , for example in the case of take-overs and mergers of companies , and also in Commissioner Monti ' s competition policy .
In my opinion , this should be a very important discussion in future for , there too , employee participation should form a part of the tradition and routine .
As for drivers ' working hours , I should like to concur with what Mr Hughes said about the case which is running in Luxembourg .
I should like to emphasise once more that a definition of the pseudo self-employed , devised at European level , can play a vital role in solving problems of this kind , because we do not have a European definition of this at the moment .
However , the Member States , including the new countries , use their own definitions .
Mr President , the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party welcomes the agreement reached in conciliation between Parliament and the Council on the directive on the organisation of the working time in the road transport sector and on the directive on information and consultation of employees .
Given the delicate nature of the latter problem and the difficulties encountered in reaching an agreement , we believe that the adoption of the text under the conciliation procedure is a good solution .
The directive on working time in the road transport sector aims to do away with situations where unfair competition and social dumping exist in the single market .
Rules are also needed in order to guarantee suitable working conditions for drivers and thus prevent a decline in safety .
Parliament asked for self-employed drivers to be included within the scope of the directive and demonstrated the need to treat all drivers equally , whether or not they are salaried employees .
The inclusion of self-employed drivers is now provided for , seven years after the directive enters into force .
After the Commission has looked into the matter , it can , of course , decide to re-submit the inclusion of self-employed drivers to the co-decision procedure , especially because the definition of a self-employed worker prevents the creation of new forms of false self-employed drivers .
I agree that this is a good thing , Mr Hughes , but even so , I still feel that there is something lacking .
The case of the lorry drivers stuck in Luxembourg - and I would also add , Mr Bolkestein , that they returned home last Friday with their earnings of EUR 1 000 - illustrates the kind of situation that can arise due to a lack of adequate Community legislation .
As we have seen , there are unscrupulous and fearless transport entrepreneurs who have no hesitation in exploiting the gaps between , on the one hand , national laws and , on the other hand , national and Community legislation , who even go as far as breaking these laws and , most probably , rely on the lack of effective checks .
Some governments are aware of this situation .
Therefore , in 1999 , Belgium , the Netherlands , France , Germany , Ireland and Luxembourg reached an administrative arrangement known as Eurocontrol Route , designed to improve and strengthen cooperation between the control services .
But in order to ensure the competition conditions of road transporters are equal in the single market , we firstly need Community legislation , and then the Member States must strictly implement a system for monitoring and imposing fines .
Mr President , rapporteurs , Mr Bolkestein , I should like to reflect upon the word cowboy .
I have carried out research into this industry for years , and I do not think that we are dealing with a cowboy society , but rather a cowboy industry .
It is widely known that this industry is quite unhealthy .
The rewards in this industry are quite low .
It is a very fragmented industry with very many drivers operating on a small scale .
There are also large companies that have gradually turned small drivers into self-employed or pseudo self-employed drivers .
In short , there is a lot to be done .
Working hours are being fiddled , and so are collective labour agreements as well as many other things .
Against this backdrop , we bear a special responsibility , particularly regarding international transport , and we have duly taken this on .
One of the first things I did , or was allowed to do , when we came here was related to the Willy Betz construction .
This was a case comparable to Kralowetz , but on a smaller scale .
The trucks were of very high-quality , people ensured that all kinds of things were satisfactory , except for the work permits and a few other things .
That led to this drivers ' attestation directive .
Fortunately , we are now in a position where we can welcome a second , very important directive on the organisation of working times .
In my opinion , more loopholes in the legislation will need to be filled in future .
Against this background , it is perhaps very good that the information and consultation directive - I should like to use the word historic - be adopted , for the very simple reason that , in the course of time , many large international transport companies have , in fact , been put under a flag of convenience , a process which often did not involve participation .
They , in fact , turned drivers into self-employed drivers , or contracted them out to small self-employed entrepreneurs .
There was no participation there either .
We are now in a position where we can tackle issues of this kind more effectively .
Mr President , in principle , these are two very important proposals for directives which we are discussing and which are being given very strong support by the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left .
Where the directive regarding lorry drivers is concerned , this professional group will therefore be covered by the general legislation that regulates working time .
This is obviously of significant interest not only to professionals but also to other road users .
During the conciliation negotiations , there were several occasions on which I specifically emphasised the road safety aspect , which I think is important for those governments which are to administer this legislation in the future .
It was also important that self-employed people should now be treated in the same way as other drivers for , from the road user ' s point of view , it is immaterial whether he is run over by an employed or self-employed driver .
What is perhaps worrying about this directive is that the transition periods are so long .
It will in actual fact be , at best , seven years before it is implemented , and we know that , even then , it will subsequently be difficult to track and monitor how the legislation operates in practice .
The second directive , on information and consultation , is a kind of framework agreement providing a legal basis that is important to workers ' being able to demand information and consultation rights .
We must not , however , forget that - by means , for example , of Paragraphs 25 and 26 of the proposal for a directive , which offer scope for a more or less broad interpretation - it also provides legal opportunities to reject workers ' demands in certain cases .
What is crucial , therefore , to how this directive goes on to operate in practice is how it is received in workplaces and how strong the trade unions are when it comes to pushing those demands to which the directive can give some leverage .
I believe that this applies generally to this type of legislation .
We can adopt directives which are sound and well-intentioned in many ways , but when they are then actually put into effect we know that we cannot , in this House , do very much .
Nor do I believe that the governments of the Member States can do very much .
I do not share Mrs Smet ' s view that systems with tight controls can be designed .
It is difficult to know what happens out on the roads , especially at night .
It is difficult to know what goes on behind closed factory gates .
It is only employees themselves who can do anything about what takes place .
I therefore want to conclude this speech with a strong appeal to those in the workplace : Do not rely upon the problems ' being solved in the European Parliament or the Council , but assume that they have to be solved by yourselves and that you can be helped with them by the legislation that has been enacted in the form of the directive .
Mr President , let me start by welcoming , on behalf of my group , the compromise achieved in the Conciliation Committee on the framework directive on information and consultation .
I would like at the same time to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Ghilardotti , for leading us to that compromise , which is now very close to the common position .
We have had quite vigorous discussions in our group on information and consultation , but we agreed that the common position is a really good starting point for a sensible solution .
Starting with first reading in April 1999 , and , indeed , in the committee meetings before that , there were often major differences of opinion between the groups ; the rapporteur had to be agile - she was too - and the same was true for me as shadow rapporteur for the largest group , the PPE-DE .
We have a constructive compromise before us .
What was possible has now been done .
What mattered was at last to get a foot in the door , which can then be opened a bit wider by the next blast of wind .
Second reading stage saw the PPE-DE prevail on many points .
The majority in my group were opposed to European sanctions but in favour of national ones .
The conciliation process saw these ideas incorporated in the recitals .
In its final form , the framework directive primarily contributes to the functioning of the European Works Council .
All local workers ' representatives are given minimum rights helping them to assess the information received from the European Works Council .
Secondly , it helps mitigate problems with restructuring , which affect national enterprises as well .
The Works Councils directive , on the other hand , applies only to multi-national enterprises .
The framework directive prescribes that the procedure be carried out in a spirit of cooperation .
This means partnership , which , on the one hand , aims at the clear representation of interests , but also , on the other , their equalisation by means of information and consultation in shared dialogue .
Information at the right time results in transparency , which itself builds trust and avoids the enterprises sustaining frictional losses - an economic and social gain .
Both employers and workers gain from this , and do so in the same way .
Mr President , I want to begin by thanking the two rapporteurs for their work on two important directives .
I shall concentrate on the directive concerning information and consultation rights of employees , but I also want to say something about working time of persons whose occupation is the performance of mobile road-transport activities .
It is very important that self-employed people should now be included , even if there is a transitional period , for we are concerned here with protective legislation for those whose job it is to drive lorries .
In work of this kind , there is no difference between being employed and being self-employed .
Just as Mr Schmid says , this is also a road safety issue and , from that point of view , it makes no difference whether the person driving is employed or self-employed .
Where information and consultation are concerned , I agree with Mrs van den Burg who , in her speech , said that the directive was of historic importance .
It is of historic importance .
Three women have been involved .
I can add a fourth .
When , in June during the Swedish Presidency , the Council succeeded in reaching a common position , which laid the basis for this directive , a female Swedish minister was also involved .
I think it quite obvious that there should be this type of information and consultation in an internal market , that an internal market is not only about companies ' rights but also employees ' rights and that the latter must be informed and be able to put forward their views .
Sometimes , people in Sweden can be heard saying , ' What does this really mean for Sweden when we , of course , have much better legislation ? '
Well now , that is true .
Our legislation is such that this directive does not perhaps affect us at all .
That being said , minimum directives are still important , not only for those countries which do not have such good legislation but also , indirectly , to prevent an internal market with social dumping arising whereby companies are set up whose employees suffer poor conditions .
Accordingly , it is important for all the countries that we should increase the minimum levels and have minimum directives that lead to better conditions .
Finally , I again want to thank the rapporteurs for two good directives .
I hope that we can go further and improve information and consultation in the future .
Mr President , the Kralowetz case is to some extent a problem specific to Luxembourg , since governments over the past 20 years have used all sorts of benefits to entice a large number of transport enterprises to Luxembourg , without , though , building up a system to monitor the wages these firms pay and the working conditions they provide .
Kralowetz is , though , also in essence a European problem .
It is proof that ' social Europe ' does not exist .
In 1998 , the European Union completely liberalised the transport sector , without at the same time providing for the social security regulations it needed .
Kralowetz and other cases are now showing us the consequences of that .
The Commission must , in my opinion , do more than what has been talked about this evening .
There are , in my judgment , three core issues .
Firstly , the controls must be tightened up .
What is the use of laws if we do not check that they are obeyed ?
Secondly , social security documentation must be harmonised across the EU .
We should not wait until the end of 2003 to do this , but try to get it on track as early as the beginning of that year .
The third , and probably most important , point is that the ECMT transport licence system , which allows enterprises from outside the EU to drive through the Member States , is today encouraging social dumping and illegality and will still be encouraging them tomorrow if we do not manage to tie these ECMT transport licences to minimum social standards .
If this is not done , then Karl Kralowetz only needs to travel to Russia tomorrow and he can continue to run his unscrupulous business from there .
Mr President , European regulation on work times of professional drivers is necessary for three reasons ; firstly for the social protection of the workers , secondly to improve the safety of road traffic and thirdly for reasons of competitiveness .
We take a favourable view of the points achieved in the Conciliation Committee , and are as one with you on the points you have already mentioned , namely the inclusion of the self-employed , a clear definition of self-employment , clearly-defined work times - in respect of which , of course , more redress can again be demanded of enterprises - and the need to define exceptional circumstances as regards weekly work times and work at night .
My colleagues have already stated that , without controls and sanctions , no directive will achieve any kind of progress .
I believe that this is where we have to make a start .
The Commission has presented a new regulation on the harmonisation of certain social security regulations relating to road transport , which will , in consequence , soon be on Parliament 's agenda .
There are , at present , marked discrepancies between the results achieved in the Conciliation Committee and the new proposal , which must be cleared up , and this is something on which coordination is needed .
This , of course , means that we also have an opportunity to play our part in laying down sanctions and controls in much stronger form , for it is a regulation we are dealing with , and that means it is legally binding and effective in quite another way .
What is most crucial in my view is that , whilst taking into account the harmonisation of competition , we should put in first place the need to harmonise social security regulations and improve the safety of road transport .
If we succeed in doing that , we will already have achieved a great deal .
Mr President , I do not share the enthusiasm of my colleagues for the results of this conciliation but I am equally warm in my congratulations to both rapporteurs .
They won and I lost , to my regret and possibly their surprise .
We all know that if the Council had not given in then Parliament itself would have conceded rather than lose either directive .
So Parliament had a weak hand but both rapporteurs played it extremely well .
I congratulate them for their skill .
They were helped by the early climb-down of the UK Government during both conciliation processes .
It was particularly ironic that the UK Minister for Europe should have come to Strasbourg last autumn - to plead with UK MEPs from all parties to vote down the whole Ghilardotti report - to find that not only were Labour MEPs positively promoting the report but the UK representative then bent over backwards to support it as well .
Politics is certainly an odd business .
As colleagues know , I am a fervent supporter of information and consultation but an equally fervent opponent of a one-size-fits-all straitjacket for companies of all shapes and sizes .
This directive , as amended , is more likely , in my view , to be a barrier to employee involvement than a bridge .
Moving to the working time directive : in my view this is bad legislation .
It could have been worse had it limited night-time driving , but I was delighted that the rapporteur finally saw reason and this proposal was removed .
But it is still bad legislation in its provisional extension to include the self-employed .
As the Spanish representative said , when joining other countries in registering his country 's dissent from the final text , it is the first time that the entrepreneurial sector has been included in any directive .
I will certainly fight to make sure it is the last .
We should want to see more jobs , not less .
This should not and must not be seen as a precedent .
Mr President , Commissioner Bolkestein , the situation of the stranded lorry drivers in Luxembourg shows us once again where there is a need for European regulation and monitoring .
Scarcely ever before has it been made so clear to us what is actually going on in this particular labour market and what is happening to these lorry drivers .
If ever you talk to European lorry drivers , you will hear how people in that sector work , some of them illegally , and what sort of wages they are paid for doing so ; they drive to the point of exhaustion , and not all of them have social security insurance .
That is the reality of one European labour market , and that is the problem facing us .
Looked at from this angle , this work time regulation is long overdue - in the interests of our safety on the roads and of the safety of the workers , that is , the drivers themselves .
I might add that , as has already been mentioned , this case is not only an issue for Luxembourg or about a few Austrian businessmen , we now know that we are dealing with a large number of Austrian businessmen .
It is also a European phenomenon .
For me as an out-and-out advocate of European enlargement , the core problem is the way we are doing the dirty on workers from the candidate countries ; it is these workers who are bound today by collective contracts to work for derisory wages , and under conditions which are , in social terms , appalling .
Such is the way this group of workers has entered into our European Union , and that is what we have to take a stand against .
In any case , though , every cloud has a silver lining .
In Austria , my country , a group of hauliers ' representatives has already taken a stand and spoken out in favour of European regulations tending towards controls and measures that will influence even this ruinous competition .
That is the situation we face .
I would add , Commissioner , that you should be prompted by that to think more and better about control systems for workers in the European labour market .
I would , of course , like to start by congratulating all the rapporteurs .
Having said that , I would like to point out that the approval of these two directives constitutes an important step within the construction of European labour law and , therefore , in the construction of a social Europe , and all this , furthermore , by means of dialogue and mutual concessions from positions which were initially comprehensible .
Of course , the inclusion of the self-employed may go against the entrepreneurial spirit , as my country maintained .
In relation to the general framework for information and consultation , the Chapter IV of the European Union ' s Charter of Fundamental Rights , entitled ' Solidarity ' , begins with Article 27 , which establishes , under the title ' Workers ' right to information and consultation within the undertaking ' , that ' Workers or their representatives must , at the appropriate levels , be guaranteed information and consultation in good time in the cases and under the conditions provided for by Community law and national laws and practices ' .
Article 136 of the European Union Treaty already indicated that social dialogue was an objective of the Community and the Member States .
It therefore seems logical and necessary that , outside other specific directives , such as Directive 94 / 45 / EC , a single directive should establish a general framework which lays down minimum requirements for the exercise of the right to information and consultation in undertakings and workplaces within the Community .
These rights , previously laid down in the European Social Charter of 1961 , and in the Community Charter of the Fundamental Social Rights of Workers , of 1989 , are now , as I have said , included in the European Union ' s Charter of Fundamental Rights .
It should surprise nobody that workers , via their representatives , should be aware of the situation and development of the undertaking , the decisions which are to be taken and their repercussions and effects for the future , since their existence and , above all , subsistence , are often linked to the undertaking .
Of course , the content of these rights must be aimed at strengthening the undertaking , increasing employment possibilities and adapting workers to new or revised production processes .
Nevertheless , experience demonstrates that the mechanisms have not always worked well : workers have become involved late in the process of decision-making , when decisions had already been taken .
I therefore feel that the content of Article 4 is particularly worth highlighting ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , we have over the last few weeks dealt with a number of matters - including social security measures - with a direct bearing on the transport sector , and those of us in the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism were also of the opinion that all these measures - and I do believe that work time , which is now at last regulated , is an important chapter in the course of completion - only make sense if the Member States have the will , on the one hand , to tighten controls and , on the other , to adjust sanctions accordingly .
I am myself from a frontier region and know perfectly well that the word in the sector is currently that whoever best knows the rules of the individual countries can make the most money .
The lobby that is active here is neither a lobby for the workers nor a lobby against them - I do not think it has anything to do with Luxembourg 's legislation either - nor is it a lobby for or against the employers .
At the end of the day , both of them are the losers in the Luxembourg situation , and , indeed , we again reminded the Commission of this in the celebrated van Dam report .
Our concern is not with adding more and more directives and piling up ever more detail ; what matters to us is that those countries should be ready to tackle this together , so that employers can charge proper prices without suffering from this dumping that is being organised there and the workers can of course work under proper conditions .
I declare without equivocation that the lobby that is working against this is in essence a lobby supporting nobody but those who cheat and disregard the rules .
To come back to the first report , an HGV driver who is also the owner of his own HGV is always on the fringes of legality if he wants to work and earn a decent living .
That is the situation we are living in .
This means that we have to consider the developing liberalisation in goods transport by road firstly in economic terms , secondly from the employer 's - and also the employee 's - standpoint , but always from the same perspective , and I believe we can represent both interests equally .
Mr President , I want to use the two minutes available to me simply to respond to Mr Bolkestein 's statement on the Kralowetz affair .
What has to be emphasised first in this deplorable business is that it is not Luxembourg 's legislation and practices that deserve to be pilloried here , but the way the Kralowetz affair has highlighted social deficits in the European area and the European Union , a sphere in which such things are inexcusable .
Nor , in the first place , is blame to be laid at the door of the European Commission , but rather at that of the majority of the Member States , who are refusing to agree to common rules on working conditions and respectable wage levels in order to counteract social dumping within the internal market .
As regards the proposed EU directive on lorry drivers ' driving times , it has been the Luxemburgers , of all people , together with the French and the Belgians , who have , in the Transport Affairs Council , worked to include the pseudo self-employed in the directive 's scope .
Despite the praiseworthy efforts as regards the Eurocontrol Route mentioned by Mrs Flesch , it is this nigger that is lurking in the woodpile of the Kralowetz affair .
We need legislation at Community level that leaves no room for legal grey areas , which are shamelessly exploited by people who - as our Prime Minister trenchantly expressed it - possess a certain criminal energy .
That is the lesson we must learn , and I hope that the Member States that have hitherto refused to agree to common rules will now cease from obstructing tighter regulation at EU level , so that this modern form of slavery can now be done away with .
I wish also to emphasise that a reform of the right of establishment in Luxembourg is on its way through the official channels , and will incorporate stricter criteria making it less easy for dodgy firms to get permits and licences to trade in a perfectly legal way , which is in any case not that easy in view of current EU directives on the definition of businesses .
I hope that the devotees of the complete liberalisation of the transport of goods by road , who have so strongly advocated that cause in this House , and no longer have anything to offer against the practices of entrepreneurs like Kralowetz ...
( The President cut the speaker off . )
Mr President , I wish to begin by expressing my warmest thanks to the House and to the parliamentary delegation in the Conciliation Committee .
I should in particular like to thank the Vice-President , Mr Friedrich , and , above all , your rapporteur , Mr Hughes , for their excellent work .
As a result of their efforts , their ability and their determination , it is finally possible to adopt a measure which the Commission proposed more than three years ago - a very successful outcome .
In adopting this directive , we are making essential progress towards eliminating the competition distortions in the road sector but , above all , towards improving road safety .
This directive will not only allow the elimination of abuses in that sector but also facilitate a better balance between modes .
Revitalisation of rail will be possible only with the end of wild competition in road transport .
It is thus essential for Member States to make the necessary controls in order to ensure that the new legislation should be respected .
The directive lays down minimum conditions for the organisation of the working time of drivers and also takes into account all the activities which are performed by drivers in addition to driving .
Thanks to this Parliament , it will ultimately be possible for this directive to cover all drivers of all categories , whether self-employed or not .
That is a great achievement for road safety because tiredness obviously affects all drivers in the same way , whether they work for a firm or are self-employed .
Asking the Commission to investigate the effects of exclusion and as a result of its investigations to propose special conditions for the inclusion of self-employed drivers , certainly is the best approach .
Let me thank you once again for the determination that Members of this Parliament have shown throughout the conciliation procedure , which has enabled us to adopt the directive .
Also , on the report by Mrs Ghilardotti , I should like to express my congratulations to her and to all Members of this Parliament on the agreement reached between Parliament and the Council on this very important directive .
This agreement was only possible due to the spirit of compromise shown by Parliament and the Council .
The final draft of the directive , as we see it now , firstly meets completely the initial Commission goals , i.e. to establish and develop throughout the Union good practices of worker information and consultation , focused on anticipating and managing change .
Secondly , it gives leeway to action from social partners when it comes to implementing the provisions of the directive .
Thirdly , it is compatible with all national systems and provides for mechanisms allowing for a smooth introduction of the new arrangements in all of them .
Fourthly , it reflects the views of the two legislators as at least 15 of Parliament 's amendments in its two readings have been incorporated into the text .
Therefore , the draft before us deserves acceptance , certainly from the Commission but also from Parliament and the Council .
Once adopted , the directive will complete the Community framework in the field of worker information and consultation , a framework which provides European companies and their workers with an essential tool to facilitate change and to ensure that it is carried on in a socially acceptable way .
The Commission very much hopes that the considerable work done in this field in recent years will now be continued through a positive and proactive attitude from social partners in relation to the consultation documents it presented to them two weeks ago on the social aspects of corporate restructuring .
I have received six motions for resolutions , presented pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The vote on the motions for resolutions relating to the Commission ' s statement will take place on Thursday at 12 noon .
Energy performance of buildings
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0465 / 2001 ) by Mr Vidal-Quadras Roca , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on the energy performance of buildings ( COM ( 2001 ) 226 - C5-0203 / 2001 - 2001 / 0098 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , this crucial directive stems directly from the Green Paper on the security of the energy supply , which this House has recently debated at length .
We are obviously all aware that the main component of the Union ' s energy bill relates to buildings : ventilation , refrigeration , heating , lighting etc .
It is within this chapter that most of the Union ' s energy expenditure is concentrated .
Therefore , anything that is done in this field has a special effect from this point of view .
Mr President , this framework directive marks the end of the era of expressions of will or recommendations .
We are entering a new era of decisive commitments , binding actions and a firm will that this type of measure may become a reality .
I wanted to stress three aspects of the directive .
The first is the obligation for all buildings in the Union to hold a certificate testifying to their energy efficiency .
This certificate will certainly be of great value as a signal within the markets and will contribute significantly to energy saving .
The second is the obligation for all new buildings to incorporate an energy-efficiency study as an essential requirement for planning permission .
The third aspect is the obligation for all buildings of an area of greater than 1 000 m2 and which are subject to extensive renovation , to undergo an improvement of their energy efficiency .
There are other actions laid down in the directive , but I wanted to highlight these three because they are clearly the ones with the greatest potential .
It will not escape you that if - as some studies suggest - it is possible to achieve a saving over the next few years of 20 % in the energy bill for buildings , 20 % of 40 % brings us close to 10 % and this , in terms of the oil bill and CO2 emissions , has an importance which is clear to all of us .
Mr President , this is a good time to thank the other groups in the House for their valuable contribution and for their help in ensuring that Parliament ' s amendments improve this important legislative text .
I would like to thank the Socialist Group and Mrs Zrihen for their numerous contributions and , above all , I would like to stress their interesting suggestion in relation to social housing .
I would also like to warmly thank the Group of the Greens and Mrs Ahern for showing such interest and cooperation , and also highlight their wonderful contribution in relation to passive cooling techniques , which are so important in those areas of the Union where the climate is very warm and cooling ( air conditioning systems ) begins to be a determining factor .
I would also like to thank the Liberal Group for emphasising that tax incentives are always better than penalties .
We say in Spanish that ' more is gained by licking than by biting ' , and this is also true in the economic field .
Unfortunately , there are two points on which we have not been able to achieve unanimity in the House : firstly , the time limits for application of the directive , where we have opted for a reasonable midpoint between overly extended periods , which would render it ineffective , or overly strict demands , which would make it unviable .
Secondly , the limit of 1 000 m2 , which the Group of the Greens wanted to reduce .
We understand their intention and we share their concern , but if we really want this directive to be implemented within a time scale which makes it effective , we must accept the figure proposed to us by the Commission .
Mr President , if it is the case that politics is the art of making the necessary possible , this directive will effectively guarantee that , in a very important chapter of the Union ' s energy expenditure , there will over the coming decade be a huge saving which will contribute to the well-being , the progress and the security of all Europeans .
Mr President , I would firstly like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Vidal-Quadras , on his excellent work on this important directive .
As he has pointed out , the European Union consumes more and more energy and therefore also imports more and more energy products , because our demand outweighs our capacity for supply by means of our own resources .
It is therefore important firstly to diversify our sources of energy , by seeking new energy sources including , of course , renewable energy and furthermore we need to promote and pursue energy efficiency .
I hope that Mr Vidal-Quadras has taken a favourable view of the opinion of the Environment Committee , since I believe that the points which we have highlighted within it contribute to enriching some of the aspects of his excellent proposal .
I believe that a key reference for increasing the Member States ' receptiveness to the proposal is that account should be taken of local climatic and special conditions .
Another point on which the Environment Committee has insisted is the homogenisation of building certificates in the different Member States , which would allow for comparisons of the energy efficiency achieved in each building .
We also wanted to define those buildings which are excluded from the application of energy-saving measures and , also , in order that our proposal is not rejected , we have proposed , like Mr Vidal-Quadras , that we accept the Commission ' s proposal aimed at reducing the area of the buildings affected .
I am in favour of this approach , Mr Vidal , like my committee , but I also understand your position .
I believe that we will have to wait and see what the final result is and we will have to respect it .
The important thing is that the directive should go ahead , Mr Vidal-Quadras .
Mr President , I should like to start by congratulating Mr Vidal-Quadras Roca for his usual , very cooperative and consensual approach .
I know that Mrs Zrihen , our socialist shadow , who unfortunately cannot be here this evening , appreciated the way in which he worked .
This directive , part of a package of measures aimed at making our use of energy more intelligent , should disseminate the existing good practice of some Member States right across the EU , and will also be very important in improving the situation in applicant countries where energy-efficient buildings could do much to help their economies as well as protecting the environment .
We as socialists are very supportive of the amendments put forward by Mr Vidal-Quadras Roca and others .
The rapid growth of air conditioning needs to be taken into account more , the possibilities open to Member States in the form of inducements should be clarified , and many of the definitions need to be tightened .
One point that Mrs Zrihen wanted to make was that the surface area definitions must be re-examined over the next four years .
It could well be that this directive is insufficiently ambitious and that it should also apply to much smaller surface areas .
We ask the Commission to prepare for a reduction if that proves necessary .
In conclusion , may I once again thank Mr Vidal-Quadras Roca and the Commission .
We look forward to more directives as promised by the Commissioner in this important area of energy efficiency , of energy intelligence .
Mr President , I should also like to warmly congratulate the rapporteur for a job well done and for his efforts to obtain consensus , which were not altogether successful in my case , as I continued to insist that we deal with a lower surface area than it was possible to agree on .
So I have tabled amendments to that effect .
I would like to know whether Mrs Zrihen will support them in light of the comments just made by the Socialist Group .
We live in hope , and perhaps a review is the best way forward , as Mrs McNally indicated .
Many provisions of this directive have already been envisioned in the SAVE directive in 1993 .
We should now proceed to give it teeth .
As I said , I would have liked to have seen stronger teeth here , but we need legally binding measures - which I believe we have - which will begin a process of really ensuring that we deal strongly with energy saving in the European Union .
In practice , the obligation to review is one of the most important requirements in the report , and for that I thank the Members .
Mr President , I have an interest to declare : I chair the Energy Efficiency Advice Centre which operates in the northern half of the region that I represent .
I hasten to add that it is a technical interest and not a financial one .
Improving the energy performance of buildings , however it is defined , is the most difficult issue that I have ever had to grapple with .
Therefore my sympathy , to some extent , is with the rapporteur in being presented with an issue of this complexity .
In the UK we have too many organisations trying to improve matters .
At the European level we have a certain confusion of objectives .
Are we trying to save energy ?
Are we trying to reduce CO2 emissions , or are we trying to reduce energy consumption ?
These are not all the same things .
It is energy consumption that we should be focusing on .
In my experience it is the existing buildings that are the key to our success .
If you look at the housing sector , the most difficult area is rented accommodation rather than the owner-occupied sector .
We are a long way from solving that one .
In general I support the Commission 's proposals and the report , but I have some hesitation about Amendment No 15 .
We should be focusing more on the common methodology rather than worrying too much at this stage about minimum standards applying right across the whole of the Community .
We are really a long way from being able to achieve that .
I also have some reservations about including a CO2 emission indicator .
If you take a house , it depends on how much gas is being used or how much electricity .
Therefore you cannot compare them very easily .
But it is a step in the right direction .
Mr President , successful management of energy issues is one of the most important prerequisites for building the sustainable society .
What we are now discussing is energy efficiency .
In his report , the rapporteur has done well to highlight a series of measures that will contribute to increased efficiency where energy use is concerned .
It is important to consider both large and small measures .
All in all , there is a very great deal to be done when it comes both to greater conservation of resources and to the development of different techniques .
If the necessary objectives are to be achieved , political initiatives are required that include both legislation and measures that act as a stimulus .
The whole of society must share responsibility for these efforts .
That applies both to companies and individuals , both to public and private enterprises and both at European and national and local levels .
How we solve energy issues will naturally affect our comfort and prosperity , but also our future living environment in the broad sense of the word .
Mr President , I wish to begin by congratulating Mr Vidal-Quadras Roca on his excellent work on the proposed directive concerning the energy performance of buildings .
I should also like to thank the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy for its thorough and thoughtful discussions and to express my satisfaction with the way in which the debate in Parliament has sharpened the focus of the proposal and strengthened it .
It will very likely be one of our most important means of meeting the European Union 's Kyoto commitment and of improving our security of supply .
As has been pointed out , the buildings sector accounts for over 40 % of all EU final energy consumption .
It also has a very large cost-effective savings potential .
This proposal may lead to a significant improvement in the energy performance of buildings by promoting better minimum standards in Member States and in their building codes and by requiring more frequent updating and wider application of these codes .
Not only would this apply to new buildings but , as has been said this evening , even more importantly to many existing buildings when they undergo major renovations .
That is where the real potential for improvement lies .
The Commission welcomes Parliament 's report and the proposed changes that will serve to improve , clarify and strengthen the proposal .
Many amendments do this by enhancing the technical and financial definitions , giving concrete examples and defining the proposal 's scope and implementation more exactly .
For example , Amendments Nos 2 , 4 , 5 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 14 , 19 , 23 , 24 , 25 , 26 , 28 , 29 , 31 , 35 , 36 and 37 are amendments the Commission can accept , many as they are , some with minor redrafting .
Amendments Nos 3 and 6 encourage the use of subsidy schemes and incentives to promote the implementation of the proposal , taking into account socio-economic implications , and are thus also acceptable .
Amendments Nos 7 and 22 , on individual metering and billing and authorisation of inspectors respectively , can also be accepted if their financial and legal implications are illuminated more clearly in the text .
Mr Adam mentioned Amendment No 15 .
That is a comprehensive amendment , parts of which are acceptable to the Commission .
The setting of efficiency levels at Community level is , however , not yet feasible .
Amendments Nos 18 and 20 are also acceptable in parts , bearing in mind the need to allow CO2 indicators to remain optional .
Amendments Nos 1 , 12 , 13 , 16 , 17 , 21 and 27 are not acceptable to the Commission for technical and definitional reasons , including the degree of detail or because of related problems of subsidiarity that would result for example from the setting of efficiency levels at Community level .
Because of the heterogeneous nature of the building sector as a result of differences in climate , culture and building traditions , subsidiarity and flexibility for Member States are important in the implementation of this directive .
The Commission feels that the most effective way to improve energy performance requirements in Member States is to provide methods to encourage them to improve their own building codes , set their own performance levels and ensure full application and regular revision of those .
While methods of calculation , many norms and a number of standards can be established at Community level , the actual efficiency level of energy performance of buildings should remain a Member State matter .
Most of the amendments proposed take these principles into account .
Another important point is with regard to the threshold for upgrading the energy performance of existing buildings when they undergo major renovation .
Upgrading existing buildings is an important part of this proposal .
For many Member States it represents a new area of endeavour which will require new performance standards , new resources and substantial investment .
We feel that the proposed threshold of 1 000 m2 for upgrading is therefore the best possible compromise attainable at this early stage .
Finally , as regards the period for transposition of this directive we feel that it is important to underline that we should avoid an unnecessarily long period if we are to meet the target date for Kyoto which is usually set at between 2008 and 2012 .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon ..
( The sitting was closed at 8.50 p.m. )
Announcement by the President
At the Conference of Presidents ' meeting on 31 January 2002 it was decided to alter the duration of the adjournment of the session .
I should like to inform you that pursuant to Rule 10 ( 4 ) a plenary sitting will be held in Brussels on Wednesday , 20 March 2002 .
The purpose of that sitting will be to hear the outcome of the Barcelona Summit meeting .
It will be addressed by the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Aznar .
EIB Annual Report for 2000
The next item is the report ( A5-0392 / 2001 ) by Olle Schmidt , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the EIB Annual Report for 2000 ( C5-0541 / 2001 - 2001 / 2218 ( COS ) ) .

Mr President , Mr Maystadt , I should like to thank you , Mr Maystadt , very much for the kindness and readiness to help which you and your colleagues have shown to me and the committee .
It made the work considerably easier .
I also wish to thank my colleagues .
The role of the EIB has been of topical interest in the debate in recent years , and criticisms have been made .
These have mainly been targeted at deficiencies when it comes to environmental issues , openness and transparency .
The EIB has understood the criticism , and significant changes have taken place .
For this , you , Mr Maystadt , and your colleagues deserve our recognition .
The analysis for the year is in many respects a follow-up to the sterling work carried out a year ago by Mr Lipietz .
A number of the views put forward at that time are being repeated now .
As is well known , the most important issue for the EU is enlargement .
This involves a fundamental change constituting a major challenge both for the candidate countries and the current Member States .
Today , most EIB loans go to different types of regional development project within the EU .
That is certainly fully compatible with Statutes of the EIB , but future enlargement makes it necessary to reconsider this distribution of resources .
There must be an increase in the future Member States ' share of the total loans .
Solidarity on the part of the EU must also , of course , extend to include third countries that until now have been recipients of EIB loans .
Among these are the Balkan countries , the Mediterranean countries and the ACP countries .
Now it is also Russia ' s turn .
There is also a need for discussion concerning which less developed countries the EIB is mandated by the Council to support and concerning whether , for example , the 49 least developed countries are not in fact in greater need than the ACP countries traditionally supported by the EU .
In the information society , economic growth and an improved standard of living are not only the results of constructing new roads and factories , but also of education , innovation , new technology , e-commerce and the development of other knowledge-intensive sectors .
In my view , this has to be reflected to a greater extent in the EIB ' s activities .
It is important that the EIB should continue to strengthen its support for small and medium-sized enterprises .
There are clear opportunities for growth in this area .
The EIB needs to become more active in making SMEs more aware of the possibilities that already exist for granting such loans .
From having been a rather closed institution , the EIB has begun to change its attitude to information and transparency .
Contact with democratically elected representatives at local and regional levels is important .
There is a knowledge of the projects at local level .
Contact with non-governmental organisations has improved , and the bank ' s web site has also improved .
The EIB has published a list of projects at the assessment stage .
In my opinion , it would be good if all the public documents from the internal evaluation unit were published on the Net .
As matters stand , the EIB is supervised by its Board of Governors , that is to say by the 15 Finance Ministers , but it lacks prudential supervision by a competent authority .
The committee has discussed the possibility of letting the European Central Bank , or ECB , exercise supervision over the EIB because the EC Treaty provides for the Council to give the ECB specific tasks of prudential supervision .
If the Council does not want to give the ECB this remit , the issue should be clarified at the next Intergovernmental Conference , with the objective of establishing proper prudential supervision of the EIB ' s activities .
In order to improve the way in which the Bank fulfils its obligation to render accounts , the committee proposes that the external Auditors ' Committee forward its findings to the European Parliament , as well as to the EIB ' s Board of Governors .
Mention might be made of the fact that the EIB has already shown a willingness to cooperate more closely with OLAF .
The environment is the issue which the NGOs are most interested in .
These issues received much attention in the Lipietz report last year .
I believe that the EIB has become more aware of environmental issues and that the Bank ' s support for environmental projects has increased considerably .
Another key factor is the EIB ' s environmental assessment capacity .
At present , the EIB has only one person responsible for coordinating environmental issues , while the project teams are composed of engineers and economists who have received additional environmental training .
In my opinion , more staff are required in this area .
More trained environmental experts should be appointed or contracted to review the environmental impact assessments correctly .
There are , therefore , many demands upon the European Investment Bank .
If all of these needs are to be met , it is necessary to increase the capital of the Bank .
In line with what applies to commercial banks able to handle greater risks , the Member States should , for example , consider reviewing the ratio of capital borrowed by the Bank to capital of its own , with the purpose of including the EIB ' s reserves .
Mr President , I should like to welcome the Commissioner to the House .
Finally , I want to comment on the amendments that have come in .
I am able to support Amendments Nos 1 , 3 , 4 and 6 from Mr Lipietz etc .
They do not change the content of the report but highlight the environmental issues and the issues concerning openness and transparency .
I cannot , however , support Amendment No 2 , which I find unnecessarily far-reaching .
I am only able to support Amendment No 5 as a supplement to Paragraph 30 .
Mr President , I want to begin by thanking the rapporteur , my Swedish colleague Olle Schmidt , for a very good report .
It sheds light upon the important areas of Europe ' s future development , which the EIB has a major responsibility for promoting within the framework of its powers .
The report also addresses the demands Parliament should make upon the EIB as Europe ' s financing institution .
I therefore want to confine myself to highlighting a few more of those aspects I consider to be most significant .
I am thinking of the candidate countries , the way in which projects are prioritised , small and medium-sized enterprises and supervision of the EIB .
Where the candidate countries are concerned , it is extremely important that there should be a significant increase in their share of the total loans of EUR 36 billion .
In 2000 , they had access to EUR 2.9 billion .
In view of the forthcoming enlargement of the European family , there must be an increase if it is to be possible to achieve the objective set at the Lisbon Summit .
When it comes to prioritising projects , it is important to safeguard Europe ' s competitiveness and therefore prioritise infrastructure in the broad sense of the word .
That applies , then , to communication not only in the traditional sense of roads , connecting links and the availability of energy-efficient transport systems for goods and people , but also in the sense of telecommunications , IT , e-commerce , education , increased knowledge and support for new technology .
Small and medium-sized enterprises at present account for more than 60 per cent of EU jobs .
In an enlarged EU , they will probably account for a significantly higher percentage .
Of the 18 million companies in the EU , 99 % are small and medium-sized enterprises employing 66 % of the workforce .
More than 90 % of these companies have fewer than ten employees .
If , like many new companies , the existing small and medium-sized enterprises are to be given the opportunity to grow and become larger , or simply become large companies , more must be done in terms of supplying information , contributing to projects and providing access to venture capital .
The rapporteur has proposed that the Commission be called upon to give the ECB powers to exercise supervision over the EIB .
I agree with that .
The Bank has no national connection and cannot therefore be compared with a private commercial bank .
The ECB is therefore a suitable supervisory body until such time as a possible European finance inspectorate is established .
In view of the objective set by the Lisbon Summit , priority must be given to those projects which lead to economic growth , development and increased employment in an enlarged Europe and which attach major importance to small and medium-sized enterprises ' opportunities for growth .
Competitiveness and staying power should be the guiding principles here .
Greater demands must be made upon the EIB in terms of providing information and evaluating projects and the importance of proper professional supervision and auditing must be emphasised .
Mr President , first of all , I should like to extend a warm welcome to the President of the European Investment Bank , Mr Maystadt .
In February last year , I expressed the hope of turning the discussion of the annual report in this Parliament into an annual tradition , and this is what we are honouring now .
It has taken a while before the report could be included on the agenda - indeed , it was already completed in November - but it is good to uphold this tradition .
Moreover , I understand that , this coming Thursday , you also intend to present the plans for the future and the 2001 annual report to the press and the Council .
Last year , we met immediately after this presentation , whereas this year , our meeting immediately precedes it , and I hope that you will be able to lift the veil and give us some information about these plans for the future .
Before I deal with the content , I should also like to thank Mr Schmidt for his report and for the sound cooperation during the handling of the amendments tabled by us and other groups .
In my opinion , it has been a productive group effort .
I should now like to turn to a number of points which were also raised in our annual report last year , and note with satisfaction that you have indeed devoted attention to these in your further plans , and that Parliament ' s areas of concern indeed recur in the Corporate Operational Plan which you presented this year .
I should like to comment on a few of these areas of concern .
I will skim over other points , because these have already been dealt with by others .
I trust that the environment will be dealt with adequately by the Greens and others .
Needless to say , we support this , as well as the tabled amendments , although , like Mr Schmidt , we are loathe to replace Paragraph 30 which concerns the balance between the environment and other objectives .
In other words , we do want to maintain this balance and only accept the amendment in question as a supplement .
Transparency and evaluations have also already been commented on , and the subject of SMEs has already been raised by Mrs Grönfeldt .
I should , however , like to touch upon the matter of supervision .
Last year , this was the subject of an extensive debate here , and you noticed that we made it very clear this year in the report that it is desirable for the European Central Bank to play a role in this supervision .
You have probably seen the Financial Times of 29 January and ascertained that this is now also very much being considered in ECB circles .
This was evidently raised during a lunch meeting with the Chairman of the FSA , the British financial authority , and I remember that we , too , raised the point during a lunchtime meeting with Mr Duisenberg and his colleagues in the past .
It is my impression that , although the Bank is amenable to the idea , it is quite reticent because it is not equipped for this at the moment .
I would call for a somewhat broader discussion to be held about this financial supervision in this Parliament , but also in the Council and in the Commission , for I have the impression that this topic is being dealt with in different reports in a very fragmented manner .
It is important to sketch the broad outlines in this matter too .
Perhaps we could do this in a more coherent discussion some time in the future .
As far as the EIB is concerned , it is not so much about supervision of the latter ' s conduct .
A number of arrangements have been made on this score and this supervision is also being exercised in a number of areas .
It is mainly about the economic supervision of companies .
The advantage of that could be that , by means of the financial resources available within the Bank , and also with the available reserves , more could be done and more risk-bearing action could be taken than is currently the case , provided that sound supervision is in place .
I would now like to turn to another topic which , with a view to the future , will become an important point of discussion , namely that of increasing the Bank ' s capital .
I assume that the supervisors , the Ministers for Economic and Financial Affairs , will be talking about this during the forthcoming meeting in June .
You have seen that , in Paragraph 33 , we declare our support for such a capital increase .
This matter should be brought to a conclusion from 2003 , and should particularly play a role in enlargement .
The point of departure in this is - this is actually a comment I should like to make - that it should add value to EIB loans .
The EIB should not do what is also possible within the market , and I believe that it is important that it act in a transparent manner .
Unfortunately , I am unable to make any of my other comments , but I shall do so in due course .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Maystadt , President of the European Investment Bank .
My colleague , Olle Schmidt , the rapporteur , has already expressed the opinion of the Committee on Economic Affairs on the annual report of the EIB and has presented proposals which , according to our committee , would improve its operation and also meet the need to provide it with greater resources to fulfil its commitments .
I would like to draw your attention to a very specific and topical point .
In Laeken it was agreed that the EIB would carry out a study to create a financial instrument or institution which would guarantee that , in terms of the cooperation between the European Union and the third countries of the Mediterranean , the level of use of resources responds to the effectiveness and possibilities for development cooperation that the situation demands .
We know that in the Mediterranean , in the medium term , very serious conflicts may arise with the European Union itself , and that in order to ensure our own peace and stability in the future it is necessary to strengthen this cooperation and ensure better application of resources which , according to the experience of the first MEDA programme , has only been 30 % .
Therefore , this initiative agreed at Laeken , of presenting a proposal or alternatives to increase the level of application , seems to us absolutely essential and urgent .
Also , if this could be consolidated at the next meeting of the Special Council of Barcelona , we believe that it would be even more appropriate , because the whole issue of development cooperation with the Mediterranean was born in 1995 in Barcelona , under the Spanish Presidency .
The current Presidency of the Council has also considered the issue of cooperation with the Mediterranean to be an urgent priority and we decisively support this initiative .
Mr President , as Mr Schmidt also pointed out , the initiative leading to Parliament ' s resolution on the European Investment Bank ' s annual report was taken by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , with Mr Lipietz as the original rapporteur .
I think it necessary for the European Parliament to express an opinion about the EIB ' s activities because the EIB is not only a Bank but also an EU institution that finances large projects and uses Community funds to steer development .
The EIB has been criticised for neglecting environmental issues , as well as the issues of openness and transparency .
Mr Schmidt also mentioned that positive changes to the EIB ' s policy have taken place recently in response to the criticism .
I hope that the EIB will continue in the same spirit .
I want to congratulate the rapporteur on an excellent report that addresses important issues .
It proposes , for example , that loans to the candidate countries should be increased and that evaluations should be made more easily accessible to the general public .
A further proposal is that dialogue between the two sides of industry , politicians and non-governmental organisations etc. should be strengthened as aspects of openness and transparency .
The report could , however , have been more vigorous when it comes to environmental issues .
The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance has tabled six amendments that specifically address environmental issues and matters of transparency .
A prerequisite for expressing our support for an increase in the EIB ' s capital should be that the projects lead to sustainable development .
Performance indicators must also be established so that the EIB ' s activities can be measured and evaluated properly .
I am delighted that the rapporteur expressed his support for most of our amendments .
In accordance with Mr Schmidt ' s wishes , I also accept Amendment No 5 as a supplement to Paragraph 30 .
It would , however , be unfortunate if Amendment No 2 were not to be adopted .
If civil society is to be able to keep track of an issue , the documents must obviously be available in the national language .
I call upon MEPs to vote in favour of this amendment .
Mr President , the European Investment Bank may be said to be one of the European Union ' s unknown powers that be .
With loans amounting to EUR 36 billion granted in the year 2000 and total capital of EUR 100 billion , it exercises significant influence through its policy .
In spite of its influence , there has been very little discussion of the Bank .
This is the second year that we are discussing the annual report in Parliament .
What is perhaps most remarkable of all , however , is how little all this is discussed by the Bank ' s owners , in the Member States and in the parliaments of the various Member States which , I believe , are in many cases quite unaware of the Bank ' s activities .
This situation may be compared with that in relation to the World Bank , which has been exposed to extensive examination and debate , or with that regarding the European Development Bank which has also been examined in a different way to the European Investment Bank .
A good deal of criticism has been directed against the EIB ' s activities and in two areas in particular .
First of all , the EIB has been criticised for having supported a series of projects that have increased environmental problems , as well as for shortcomings in terms of environmental impact assessments .
Secondly , the EIB has been criticised for a lack of openness and of willingness to engage in dialogue with , for example , environmental movements in different countries .
I think that this criticism has been justified .
Comparisons show , for example , that the World Bank is in actual fact significantly better than the European Investment Bank at providing environmental impact assessments and at publicising these .
It is rare for the Left to have occasion to praise the World Bank , but it does in this case .
For some years now , the European Investment Bank has shown a new attitude to greater openness , which is very welcome .
What is important , however , is that this new positive attitude also be followed up by practical measures .
Mr Schmidt ' s report addresses certain demands for measures with which I agree , referring , for example , to the need for more resources , including more staff working on environmental issues and the question of greater openness .
There is a need to go further , however .
I believe , for example , that it is reasonable to demand that , if environmental impact assessments are carried out , they should always be published before decisions are taken .
The EU ' s demand for environmental impact assessments must also be fulfilled when loans are granted to projects outside the European Union , and these assessments must be available in translation in the national languages of the countries to which the loans are granted .
The European Investment Bank should also comply with the Århus Convention , entailing an obligation of great openness towards the environmental movement . This should mean a big improvement .
The EIB should also have a more evolved policy when it comes to development issues , for example , development in the Developing World as the Bank ' s activities there increase .
The Gothenburg Summit gave the EIB the task of supporting sustainable development and concentrating on climate issues .
This should have far-reaching consequences for the type of transport and energy projects that can be supported .
It should imply , hopefully in practice too , a change of focus for the Bank .
I believe that increasing the Bank ' s capital must be conditional upon reforms being carried out .
Only if the Bank is obliged to implement such reforms should it be agreed to increase the capital .
I am opposed to the idea of allowing the European Central Bank to act as a supervisory authority .
The European Central Bank is a genuinely undemocratic institution which should not be given tasks of this kind .
Mr President , it is right and proper that we should keep on highlighting the significance of SMEs for the European economy .
SMEs ensure growth and employment in Europe .
It is therefore right , and indeed important in terms of Europe 's development , that the EIB should step up its support for SMEs or carry on with it .
Half of the total lent , about EUR 5.7 billion , was used for that purpose in 2000 .
This amount should be increased or its continued availability ensured .
We must not stop the support measures .
It is also important that more risk capital should be made available to these enterprises , and this is something which I personally strongly support .
It goes without saying that the points of criticism made in the report must be taken seriously .
It is not acceptable for the EIB 's own home page to list its activities in only two or three languages .
By so doing , the EIB is limiting its own significance .
Mr President , Mr Maystadt , the Lisbon Process cannot be imagined without the European Investment Bank .
Support for SMEs and for entrepreneurship as sources of employment is becoming more important , as external finance other than through banks is becoming more expensive and bank finance for small and medium-sized enterprises is becoming more and more problematic .
When we consider what the European Investment Bank has achieved since 1968 , in terms both of funds and of initial support for projects , I consider the outcome to be an impressive one .
I must say that the integration of the EIF and the EIB under one roof , which was pushed through by the Lisbon Process , has resulted in an optimisation of the European Investment Bank 's activities right across the board .
I would therefore ask those who now want to push for the founding of another bank , to rely on , and make use of , the competence and qualified expert staff that the European Investment Bank has at its disposal .
It is for that reason that I oppose the founding of another bank .
It would surely also be in the interests of the Central and Eastern European States for the work of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development and that of the European Investment Bank to be more efficiently harmonised and coordinated with each other .
I am therefore sure that both the European Investment Bank 's quality and its financial activity will be improved still further , or advanced , at the European Summit in Madrid , due , among other things , to the European Commission 's consolidated report .
As has been pointed out by my fellow Members and also in Mr Schmidt 's report , one must surely see to it that the best possible use is made of funds for small and medium-sized enterprises .
It will , without doubt , be a matter for our concern that there may be a decreasing number of small and medium-sized banks and financial institutions available with which the European Investment Bank can manage the flow of its funds .
So it is , of course , very encouraging that the European Investment Bank has a network of 130 active intermediaries and that activity in Italy has now resumed to an encouraging extent .
We should bear in mind , though , that what matters , above all , is that small and medium-sized enterprises should really be enabled to get access to working capital and also risk-capital financing at their local level .
It is therefore important , Mr Maystadt , that an assessment should be submitted of what influence this activity by the European Investment Bank has actually had on growth and employment at local and regional level .
Regional development is , after all , one of its main fields of activity .
We know that the whole European Union benefits if economic and social cohesion can be realised at regional level .
So this assessment must be carried out , as should in future be done , before the Spring Summits , so that even better use may be made of the European Investment Bank 's instruments .
One final plea , Mr President .
All the institutions are committed to the need for gender mainstreaming .
I have noted that progress has been made in appointments to the European Investment Bank .
There is so far , unfortunately , only one woman on its board , and so the Member States are urged to give women , too , the facilities and opportunities to play their part in the Investment Bank 's work .
I also note that , at its highest level of management , only one of the twelve officials is a woman .
There must be changes here .
Mr President , I will make a few quick comments which have occurred to me during the debate .
Firstly , I would like to thank Parliament for taking the initiative of holding a debate on the annual activities of the European Investment Bank .
You know , and some of you have highlighted , the important role the Bank plays in the channelling of savings towards investment in key sectors of the European Union as well as sectors outside it .
You have highlighted the Bank ' s fundamental objective of contributing to our aims in close cooperation with the Commission .
The Bank has already implemented the Lisbon initiatives .
Initiative 2000 is fully operational and continues to increase its actions in the funding of small and medium-sized businesses .
President Maystadt will make some subsequent comments , but I would like to congratulate the Bank on the good work it is doing in this particular sector and , above all , on the transformation which has taken place as a result of paying greater attention to risk capital .
In this respect , the European Investment Fund is turning risk capital into an important Community institution as a complement to the market forces which govern supply and demand .
Some of you have suggested that the Bank should pay greater attention to environmental factors .
I believe that we must be aware that each institution has its own function and the function of the Bank is basically financial .
Environmental issues are fundamental , of course , but each institution must play its corresponding role .
I would like to make two further comments .
The first relates to the extension of the Bank to other areas .
I believe that this issue is mentioned in the seventh point of the report .
Nevertheless , we must not forget the extension of the Bank ' s actions over recent years .
We only need to remember that , in 2000 , Croatia was included in the CCEE contribution and the special option for the Customs Union with Turkey , and that in November 2001 the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia was included .
Some of you have expressed your concern with regard to the careful monitoring of the Bank ' s activities .
It is true that the statutes of the European Central Bank open up this possibility , but it is also true that it has no authority whatsoever .
Even if it had it , we would have to raise the question of whether the idea of monitoring the European Investment Bank is consistent .
The European Investment Bank is not a commercial bank . It is a multilateral bank which belongs to the Member States and has been established as a Community institution by the Treaty .
Therefore , in my opinion , it is doubtful whether it is correct to have additional monitoring of one Community institution by another Community institution .
Above all , bearing in mind that we now have a clear system for controlling the Bank by means of the auditing that is being carried out , which directly informs the Council and the government and is attended by external auditors .
Furthermore , you also know that the Court of Auditors already carries out inspections of its activities when they involve European Union funding .
Therefore , I believe that this issue warrants more profound analysis .
We do not believe that we should create other monitoring posts or institutions .
Finally , with regard to the issue of Barcelona and the possibility of funding cooperation with the Mediterranean , raised by Mr Gasòliba , President Maystadt will comment on the actions of the European Investment Bank .
I will simply say that the Commission is working on the Laeken mandate in order to have a report as soon as possible .
We would all have liked it to have been finished for Barcelona , but , naturally , we will have to follow the normal procedures .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I would like to say what an honour it is for me to have another opportunity to answer the questions raised by the House , as Mrs van den Burg wished ; this could become an annual tradition .
Although the European Investment Bank has no formal obligation to report to the European Parliament , I think that it is natural , in a democracy , for all public institutions , including the financial institutions , to have to respond to questions and to take into account the priorities expressed by the representatives elected by the citizens .
It is therefore a great pleasure for me to attempt to answer the questions that have been raised , bearing in mind that five minutes does not , of course , give me enough time to provide a detailed answer .
We will , however , have the opportunity to continue the dialogue , particularly within the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , under the dynamic chairmanship of Mrs Randzio-Plath and on the basis of the excellent report by Mr Olle Schmidt .
Today , I would simply like to give some details in response to the four categories of questions raised .
The first category contains questions on the activities of the EIB ; the second relates to questions on supervision ; the third category regards questions on the policy regarding information and transparency and , as for the fourth and final category , I will speak briefly about equal opportunities , an area that is particularly close to Mrs Randzio-Plath ' s heart .
First of all , as far as the EIB ' s activities are concerned , Mrs Randzio-Plath quite rightly pointed out that regional development was still the main task of the European Investment Bank .
In conjunction with Commissioner Barnier ' s services , we developed a set of indicators and we are attempting to assess , in a more systematic manner , the impact of projects that we finance on regional development .
The growing importance of the EIB ' s activities in the candidate countries has also been mentioned and Mr Schmidt quite rightly emphasised this point .
Enlargement is a huge challenge for us all , for those who are already in the European Union and for those who are about to join it .
Clearly , the European Investment Bank must step up its work in these countries to assist them in fulfilling the conditions of membership as quickly as possible .
Currently , the EIB already has a portfolio in excess of EUR 16 billion , so far mainly for infrastructures - such as transport , communication and energy infrastructures - but also for the environment and these funds are increasingly being granted directly to promoting the private sector .
The environment is another area on which the rapporteur and other speakers have focused in particular , and I think that it must be approached from two angles .
The first angle is that of the number of environmental projects that we finance ; these are projects which play a direct part in protecting or improving the environment .
I can now give you - before anyone else hears them - the figures that I will be publishing next Thursday .
Last year , we granted EUR 6 billion to environmental projects in the form of individual loans and EUR 2 billion through what we call global loans , in other words , loans to intermediaries , which themselves provide loans to local authorities .
This therefore amounted to EUR 6 billion for environmental projects in the European Union and EUR 0.5 billion in candidate countries , which means that , currently , approximately one fifth of our loans go directly towards improving the environment .
We hope to gradually bring this figure up to a quarter of the total volume of our loans .
This is the first angle , but there is obviously a second angle - and your Committee has quite rightly paid this a great deal of attention - which is that the other projects , those that are not directly aimed at improving the environment , must also take into account the impact they have on the environment .
We must therefore put in place the resources to enable us to assess more systematically the environmental impact of these projects .
This is the reason why , following a suggestion made in last year ' s report by Mr Lipietz , we carried out internal restructuring and set up an environmental group within the project department , whose specific task is to ensure that proper account is taken of environmental aspects when assessing such projects .
And we , of course , intend to further improve our resources dedicated to this task .
To continue on the subject of the EIB ' s activities , we must mention the Mediterranean .
Without going into too much detail , I would simply like to say that we have taken note of the objectives announced by the Spanish Presidency and that the EIB is at the Council and Commission ' s disposal , if it is felt , given the extent of our activities in the Mediterranean , that the EIB can help to achieve these objectives .
Lastly , I note the concern expressed by several of you , particularly Mr Schmidt and Mrs Randzio-Plath , regarding the support given to small- and medium-sized businesses .
We are continuing to provide this support , not only through global loans but also through the European Investment Fund , which last year gave risk capital of EUR 800 million to small- and medium-sized businesses .
With regard to supervision , we should bear in mind , as Commissioner Solbes stressed , that the EIB is already supervised in various ways .
I would simply say that we are working to apply the prudential banking rules .
If it were considered advantageous to organise additional supervision by a body that is specialised in banking supervision , the EIB would , of course , have no objection .
We would welcome an external authority specialised in banking supervision checking that we are correctly applying the prudential rules .


As for the policy regarding information and transparency ; first , we now publish all our strategy documents ; second , we publish an overview of our assessment methods ; third , we publish , with a few exceptions , the list of all the projects currently being examined so that the public can respond and submit its comments ; last , we now publish all the full assessment reports carried out by the independent ex-post evaluation department , which was set up a few years ago .
I should like to end by briefly touching upon the subject of equal opportunities .
Mrs Randzio-Plath has , on several occasions , drawn our attention to an undeniable imbalance within the Bank ' s higher management .
There is still only one woman on the Management Committee .
I regret this , but it depends on Member States .
As far as the management itself is concerned , we decided last year to appoint four women to senior management level , which will therefore begin to correct this imbalance .
To sum up , Mr President , we are determined to ensure that the EIB remains an institution that serves the European Union , something which requires , by necessity , greater cooperation with the Commission and strengthening dialogue with Parliament .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at noon .
Financial services legislation
The next item is the report ( A5-0011 / 2002 ) by Karl von Wogau , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on the implementation of financial services legislation ( 2001 / 2247 ( INI ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am very pleased to be responding on behalf of the European Commission to Mr von Wogau ' s report on the implementation of financial services legislation , in the context of the Lamfalussy report .
I would like to start by congratulating Mr von Wogau and thanking him for all his impressive efforts to build consensus on this important matter in this House .
Let me also congratulate Mrs Randzio-Plath , who chairs the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and who has helped to stimulate the Commission ' s thinking on these matters .
Implementing the proposals contained in the Lamfalussy report in a fair and balanced way is of major importance to the European Union .
It lays down essential stages for delivering the entire Financial Services Action Plan by 2005 , as requested by the Lisbon European Council , and the measures relating to the securities markets by 2003 , as requested by the Stockholm European Council .
The aim is , of course , to build a strong , stable , pan-European capital market , a market which will benefit its citizens and businesses by improving future employment and growth prospects throughout Europe .
We have reached a fair and honourable compromise . Let us , together , seize the moment .
I am confident that our debate today will yield a positive result and send out a strong signal of the renewed and effective cooperation between Commission , Council and Parliament .
Before making a formal statement on behalf of the Commission , I should first like to dispel any possible doubts by stating that the Commission will act both on this statement and on the Stockholm European Council resolution and what is set out in the letter of 2 October 2001 from Commissioner Bolkestein to Mrs Randzio-Plath , Chairman of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
I should also like to draw your attention to three vitally important points .
Firstly , the Commission will naturally respect Parliament ' s powers of codecision and the rights to information and transparency which underpin our democratic process .
The Commission will do business with Parliament and the Council on a joint basis , fully respecting the current interinstitutional balance .
Secondly , the Commission will , without exception , take full account of the European Parliament ' s position , as is provided for in the Stockholm European Council resolution .
It will do everything in its power to find appropriate solutions in keeping with the current interinstitutional balance .
Thirdly , with a view to the longer term and the revision of the Treaties , the Commission wishes to see Article 202 amended and both its own future executive duties and the joint role of the two co-legislators clarified .
This concludes my preliminary remarks . I shall now make a formal statement on behalf of the European Commission :
" As was recalled at the Lisbon and Stockholm European Councils , the integration of financial services markets is fundamental to strengthening the European economy .
The delivery of the Financial Services Action Plan by the deadlines set by the European Council conclusions - 2005 for the entire Action Plan and 2003 for the measures relating to securities markets - is crucial to achieving this objective .
Ahead of the Barcelona European Council , which will take stock of the European Union ' s economic reform process as mapped out in Lisbon , the Commission welcomes the close cooperation between the Community institutions and expresses confidence in its harmonious development when it comes to implementing the Commission ' s proposals , in line with the recommendations of the Committee of Wise Men chaired by Baron Lamfalussy .
The Commission stated in its White Paper on European Governance that , in general , its executive responsibilities need to be more clearly defined and that the Council and the European Parliament should have an equal role in controlling the way in which the Commission carries out its executive role .
In the White Paper , it also announced its intention of launching a debate on this issue in the context of the forthcoming Intergovernmental Conference and indicated that it favours an amendment to Article 202 of the EC Treaty .
In the meantime , before the next revision of the Treaty and without setting a precedent , flexible regulatory mechanisms in the field of financial services are needed that fully respect the institutional balance .
In this regard , a letter was sent on 2 October 2001 by the responsible Commissioner to the chair of Parliament ' s Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
In this context , the Commission is now in a position :
to take note of Parliament ' s intention to limit the duration of the delegation of executive powers to the Commission to four years from the entry into force of each particular directive , subject to an extension being proposed by the Commission and accepted by Parliament and the Council . The Commission could accept amendments adopted by Parliament to this end ;
to ensure that Parliament is given a period of three months from the first transmission of draft implementing measures in which to examine them and to give its opinion . However , in urgent cases that are duly substantiated , this period may be shortened ;
to ensure full transparency vis-à-vis Parliament throughout the entire procedure for the adoption of implementing measures . The Commission will also ensure that there is wide public consultation before draft implementing measures are drawn up ;
to support Parliament ' s wish to see the establishment of a market participants group attached to the Committee of European Securities Regulators , and it strongly encourages its establishment in as short a time as possible ;
to recall its political willingness to endeavour to ensure that Parliament benefits from equivalent treatment and , in order to secure effective cooperation between the institutions , reaffirms its commitment to take the utmost account of Parliament ' s position and any resolutions that it might adopt with regard to implementing measures exceeding the implementing powers provided for in the basic instrument and the Commission ' s aim of reaching a balanced solution in such cases . "
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I hope you will firmly support the approach that I have outlined . It is the fruit of a lengthy debate and very close cooperation between Commission and Parliament .
Indeed , with this approach , we can now take another major step forward towards European financial integration , which is the next crucial step after the introduction of the euro .
Today ' s positive result makes it even more essential for work to start in the interinstitutional working party to which Prime Minister Aznar , no less , pledged his authoritative support before this House during the January part-session .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , it is an extraordinarily important debate that we are taking part in today .
It is important to banks , insurance companies and investment funds , because this debate will make it clear that we are pressing onward - and that without delay - on the road that leads to a common European market in financial services .
The debate is though , also important to the European Union 's citizens , as we are removing obstacles from the path of cross-border competition in the field of financial services , in the granting of credits and the negotiation of insurance policies .
Competition of this sort will put the citizen in a stronger position and enhance Europe 's competitiveness .
What , then , is this debate about ?
Alexandre Lamfalussy and his Committee of Wise Men have made proposals as to how we can speed up the great legislative package needed to make this common market in financial services a reality .
In doing so , he made the wise suggestion that the legislator , that is Parliament and the Council , should focus on setting the essential objectives , whilst leaving to the Commission , working together with experts , the small print of the implementation provisions .
That proposal is a very good one .
Where , then , is the problem ?
The problem is that we have always found , in our experience as parliamentarians , that it is to us that the public and firms come with complaints about the European Union 's bureaucracy , and that they are not complaining about the law , be it a directive or a regulation , that we have helped to enact , but about the provisions made for its implementation .
That is why Parliament has insisted on being able , jointly with the Council , to carry out a kind of final check on whether the implementation provisions that are enacted actually correspond to what the legislator intended .
What have our negotiations with the Commission and the Council now achieved ?
At this point , let me warmly thank President Prodi for his statement , but also Commissioner Bolkestein , Mr John Mogg and many others , as well as the secretariat of the Constitutional Committee .
I have to tell you that the discussions lawyers had in this area occasionally reminded me of disputations in ancient Byzantium on the sex of angels .
I wish to thank very warmly all those who helped me find my way judiciously through this labyrinth .
What have we achieved ?
Transparency first of all .
That is important , as we are informed about everything that goes on in the Commission .
We also get to see preliminary drafts .
Secondly , we have achieved the reduction of the mandate to four years , after which period it must be renewed by Parliament and the Council .
We have , furthermore , gained the right to monitor outcomes , which is where President Prodi 's statement was extraordinarily important .
Like the Council , we have three months in which to do this , in which respect we are given equivalence with them .
President Prodi , indeed , spoke of parity and equivalence , which adds up to an additional safeguard .
Thirdly , we must be clear in our own minds about the actual relations between the powers .
We are faced with a large number of legislative acts , which have to be adopted .
Each time , Parliament and the Council together must give the Commission a mandate , and if the Commission were to fail to take Parliament 's justified interests and objections into account in this respect , it would have cause to fear that it would not be granted that mandate when it came to the next legislative act .
What this means is that , today in any case , we as a Parliament are in a very strong position in this context .
To that extent I take the view that , in this context , or on the basis of President Prodi 's statement , the equivalence we demanded has been granted .
Something that strikes me as also especially important is the committee of market participants , which we decided on .
This represents a first step towards the European Union 's lawmaking becoming more modern .
We must reach the situation in which legislation generally makes a clear distinction , as Alexandre Lamfalussy proposed , between the Parliament and the Council 's intentions as joint legislators and the small print of the technical details .
Here , for example , the supervisory authorities and the experts should be involved , but at the same time the market participants , too , should be included in the structures as purely practical issues are under discussion .
In that sense I also believe that what we are deciding on today can also be a model for the Convention , the Intergovernmental Conference , and the improvement of the European Union 's legislative procedure , and so I wish to ask you to adopt my report .
Mr President , more and more often in present-day society we are seeing situations where legislators are expected to enact laws very quickly and effectively .
It would seem that these demands being made with regard to financial services are quite justified .
This means we really have to evolve a modern legislative process , as Mr von Wogau mentioned .
Unfortunately , a modern legislative process often seems to mean that it is the European Parliament that is expected to give up some of the legislative powers it enjoys by virtue of the Treaty .
The problem with the Lamfalussy package is that the European Parliament cannot be completely certain it would not , in fact , be surrendering the legislative power it has on behalf of the citizens of the EU to the Council , on the one hand , and the Commission , on the other .
In this regard , the European Parliament must ensure that these parliamentary supervisory powers are brought into closer focus .
As President of this institution , you will surely seize on the proposal that the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market has put forward : whenever the European Parliament suspects that the Commission is using more than its fair share of powers of implementation , you could negotiate an ad hoc scrutiny mechanism to prevent Parliament ' s legislative powers from being watered down .
We all know that Parliament ' s legislative power is not an end in itself : we really try to ensure , on behalf of the public , that decisions are taken openly and democratically , and that all views worthy of attention are taken into consideration during the process .
It is also perfectly clear that the EC Treaty is no longer relevant to modern times in this respect .
The Commission ' s commitment to amending Article 202 of the Treaty in the very near future , which would restore Parliament ' s legislative and supervisory powers , is to be welcomed with open arms .
It should also be emphasised that the European Union needs a hierarchy of legal acts , with legislative powers and powers of implementation being defined very clearly .
At present we are in a grey area with this Lamfalussy package , the direct result of level 2 decision-making .
Mr President , not many Members of this Parliament are attending the debate today in this House .
And this debate is probably not going to be treated as a priority interest by the media .
Nevertheless , and I am addressing the public who are in the galleries , this is a very important debate for European citizens .
I hope that today , after many months of work , negotiation and seeking a consensus , this Parliament will take a decision on the report which has been admirably well drawn up by Karl von Wogau , and which represents one more step forward in the process of constructing an economic and monetary Europe , and furthermore , is an important step within the framework of the process started at the Lisbon European Council aimed at achieving greater flexibility , competitiveness and growth and creating jobs .
I also hope that this process will include other important decisions at the next European Council in Barcelona .
At a point when the euro and its implementation have been a great success , this Parliament , the Commission and the Council must demonstrate that they are fulfilling the obligations laid down for them in the Treaties .
Mr President of the Commission , you have done this recently - and I thank you for being here today - by adopting the appropriate measures and reproaching those countries which are on the point of exceeding the criteria established in Maastricht in the field of deficit .
This is a good decision , and I am therefore deeply disappointed that the German Commissioner has shown a lack of solidarity in certain comments made in Bild am Sonntag .
I do not approve of this , because what we want is to maintain the internal cohesion of the European institutions and the balance between all of them .
In this respect , this exercise is politically positive , because Parliament has had to fight hard to gain its competences , like all parliaments .
Therefore , having gained them , we want to keep them , since that is what the people demand .
Baron Lamfalussy ' proposals , which we all agree are needed , also mean , in the long run , putting our trust in the European Commission .
On behalf of my group , I would like to tell you that we have always defended the European Commission , because it is at the heart of the Community institutions and is the most obvious motor for integration .
However , as Mrs Berès and Mrs Hautala have quite rightly said , we must take precautions .
We neither can nor want to give anybody a blank cheque .
That is why this negotiation has gone on so long and has involved so many people .
And I would like to acknowledge , not only the rapporteur , whose work we have all praised , but also Mrs Randzio-Plath , Mr Napolitano , the coordinators of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , Mr Bolkestein and his team , as well as Mr Rato .

Mr President , we have finally achieved a text , whose declaration you have read today and which , in the judgment of the Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , fully satisfies - and I say this emphatically - our expectations : we are going to be treated on an equal basis with the Council , our rights of codecision and the transparency requirements we demanded are going to be guaranteed and there is a formal commitment from the European Commission that , in the next reform of the Treaties , which the Convention is going to analyse , there should be a modification of Article 202 .
Today is therefore a good day for European integration : we are sending messages to the markets that we are prepared to make even more progress in realising all the aspects of economic union .
It is also good news for the citizens , who , thanks to our choosing this method , are going to see the disappearance of much rigidity , which will give us hope for greater growth and employment in the future .
Congratulations , Mr Prodi and Mr von Wogau .
Congratulations to all of you .
Mr President , what we are debating is the proposal that Parliament and the Council should delegate substantial implementing powers to the Commission .
Parliament is happy to go along with that , provided there are substantial guarantees as regards the oversight of such delegated powers .
Those who sometimes worry that in seeking such guarantees Parliament is trying to modify the interinstitutional equilibrium should remember that this substantial delegation of powers is itself a modification of the interinstitutional equilibrium as it exists and that in those circumstances it is quite legitimate for Parliament to seek to obtain certain guarantees .
After many months of discussion , talks and negotiations with the Commission , the result has now been put forward to us in the form of the statement just made by Mr Prodi .
I must say that it contains a number of significant steps forward .
First , the Commission recognises that Article 202 of the Treaty should be changed at the next revision of the Treaty - it supports Parliament 's position on that .
But , in the meantime , the Commission recognises that Parliament has the right to examine and take a position on the implementing measures that it puts forward to the specialist committees that will be set up to work with the Commission .
Parliament will have three months instead of just one month , as it has under existing procedures , to examine and take a position on such implementing measures .
The text of the Commission does not limit Parliament 's right to examining whether the Commission has gone beyond what has been delegated to it , something which we could anyway solve by means of a legal case , if ever it came to a conflict .
It gives us the right to object , if need be , on the substance .
That is also very important .
But what happens if Parliament objects and then the Commission does not accept its objection to an implementing measure ?
There the text is a little ambiguous : it speaks of equivalence without saying equivalence with whom .
Mrs Berès has already made the point : equivalence with the Economic and Social Committee , equivalence with the press ?
No , it is obvious for us insiders that it means equivalence with the Council .
That is what we have been talking about for months , and Mr Prodi 's introductory remarks made it clear that the Commission too accepts that it means equivalence with the Council .
That is how we interpret it and I think there can be no other interpretation .
We have a third step forward and that is a guarantee in case all this does not work .
We have the sunset clause : after four years the delegated powers will revert to Parliament and the Council , unless we agree to renew them .
That is a guarantee to us and it will concentrate the minds of the Commission in between times , making it aware that it must exercise these implementing powers in a way that Parliament finds satisfactory if it wishes to have any hope of their renewal .
Fourthly , we have some important guarantees as regards openness and transparency , and we have acceptance of Parliament 's idea that a market participants ' committee should be set up alongside the other committees .
So , all in all , we can be satisfied with the progress that has been made , even if the drafting on the points I made earlier could have been a little better .
Nonetheless , I would ask whether the full text of the Commission 's statement and Mr Prodi 's statement today could be incorporated not just in the Verbatim Report of Proceedings but also in the Minutes , because it was a very significant statement and should be recorded in our Minutes , so that we have a proper record of what the Commission has undertaken to do .
Mr Corbett , your request has been anticipated .
This will appear in the Minutes as a document of record of some substance .
Mr President , for more than a year we in Parliament 's negotiating teams , together with the Commission and the Council of Ministers , have been struggling with a puzzle .
We have all agreed with Baron Lamfalussy and his wise men that effective regulation of financial markets and the creation of a single financial market require us to delegate powers to the Commission and to a more nimble official committee .
But there has been a key problem .
Although this House was given the power of codecision vis-à-vis such legislation by the Maastricht Treaty in 1992 , it was not given the power to oversee effectively the role of any committee .
What we have seen of such committees in the past , we have not liked ; they have been secretive , bureaucratic , Kafkaesque .
One condition on which my group insisted was that this culture of secrecy must change fundamentally , opening up decision-making not only to us in Parliament , but to the world outside .
We needed guarantees of transparency , openness and consultation .
Here they are in the President 's statement and in the letter that Commissioner Bolkestein addressed to the chairperson of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
But how were we to ensure that those promises of a changed culture , so often honoured in the breach , were finally respected ?
It became clear that no lasting change could happen before the convention and the intergovernmental conference of 2004 had been concluded .
Only an IGC could change Article 202 , which basically gives sole rights of oversight of committees to the Council of Ministers , ignoring the new role of Parliament .
We needed a promise that our concerns , ignored in successive treaty revisions , would be taken on board .
We needed an interim solution that meant that Europe 's savers and investors did not have to wait still longer before the completion of the single market in financial services , which was first launched in 1973 .
The health of the European economy depends on this legislation .
A vital and dynamic economy depends on an efficient financial system for collecting savings and funnelling them at low cost to the most productive uses .
It was long clear to the Liberal Group that the only interim solution would be to put a time limit on the delegated powers .
For the first time in EU legislation , we will have a sunset clause that will remove the powers of the Commission and the committee after four years unless they are used wisely and well .
Thankfully , the initial opposition of the Socialist Group and the European People 's Party , together with concerns about legal uncertainty , were overcome .
Any regulations passed by the committee will remain on the statute book even if its powers are suspended , but Parliament can bite if it needs to .
This is an important moment for liberalisation of the European economy .
The deal will underpin the euro - for what is a single currency if the markets on which it is traded are still divided by national barriers ?
It will give confidence that , whatever the challenges ahead for economic and monetary union , the European Union can surmount them , and it shows that Parliament is a serious and responsible legislature and partner in economic reform .
The Lisbon reform process is back on track .
I wholeheartedly congratulate Mr von Wogau , our rapporteur , and commend this report to the House .
Mr President , what is interesting about this report is the expressed concern for Parliament 's rights .
This is matched by the claim that the committee wants to enhance democratic control over this fast-moving area .
What I do not see is any concern expressed for those in financial services or for the customers they serve .
Without dwelling on any particular aspect of the financial services legislation to which this report refers , I have to fulfil my own democratic responsibility and point out that the aggregation of Community legislation is slowly , but inexorably , strangling the financial community and making it almost impossible to trade .
In this context I am constantly reminded by my constituents that those most affected are the small and independent financial advisers , the net effect being that business is becoming steadily concentrated in the hands of larger and larger firms .
On the other hand , I see no slackening in the number of financial scandals which break into the headlines .
In fact , the very reverse seems to be the case .
Coming as I do from a tradition where parliament is the guarantor of safeguards and freedoms of individuals , I therefore find this report yet another exercise in increasing the power of the Community institutions , with no thought for what the legislation is trying to achieve .
The committee is counting the angels dancing on the end of a pin while the industry gradually collapses .
This to me typifies what the Community is about .

Mr President , President Prodi , Commissioner Bolkestein , once again , we are faced with the inadequacy of the European legislative procedure , as Mr Huhne pointed out a short while ago too .
In this context , Parliament has two distinct aims , which could have been conflicting : on the one hand , the need to secure a more significant , effective role for Parliament in these matters , to secure , that is , greater democratic legitimisation of the rules we are debating ; on the other hand , however , there is the urgent need to conclude the Financial Services Action Plan with all speed in order to implement the common market in this sector .
We are seriously behind schedule , and the persistence of this hotchpotch of regulations is creating barriers which are costing the European citizens dearly .
One example is the case of pension funds , which have long been constrained by protectionist rules in the different Member States .
The average size of European pension funds is one sixth of that of pension funds in the United States and the yield in Europe is 60 % of the American figure .
This represents a severe handicap for pensioners , for savers in general and for the efficiency of the economy .
The time factor is crucial .
We are lagging behind severely and we must therefore be responsible in our attitude and not neglect the need to give a vigorous boost to the construction of the internal market in our pursuit of the goal of securing a proper role for our institution .
To sum up , Mr President , my view is that the rapporteur , Mr von Wogau , Mrs Berès , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and the Committee on Constitutional Affairs have succeeded in achieving a balance between these requirements , providing us with a good short-term solution and pointing the way for the future .
The Italian radicals will therefore vote for the measure .
Mr President , as various Members have said , the Commission has been engaged in frequent discussions with those closely involved in this issue in Parliament , and the importance which the Commission gives to this important matter is also reflected in the presence of the Commission President here this morning .
Various Members have referred to angels this morning - either to the sex of angels or to how many could dance on the head of a pin .
May I say that it is often in the detail that one encounters the devil .
Let us hope that the devil and angels will compensate for one another and that we can achieve a balanced compromise this morning .
According to some Members who have spoken this morning , Mr Méndez de Vigo for example , that is indeed the case .
He said that this is a good day for integration and offered congratulations to the rapporteur - congratulations which I should like to echo on behalf of the Commission .
I should like to thank Mr von Wogau and the Committee on Constitutional Affairs very much for having crafted this compromise .
It is only right that the Commission should give expression to those feelings .
Mr von Wogau started by referring to the ambition of the European Union as expressed by the European Council in Lisbon , which is , as is well known , that the European Union should become the most competitive place in the world .
The Lamfalussy report should be seen in that context .
Mrs Berès also referred to the ambitions expressed in Lisbon .
Indeed they form a whole , and I do not need to emphasise our wish to give as much impetus and stimulus as possible to our moves towards greater competitiveness .
Once again , this debate and the result which I hope it produces are of importance to the economic well being of the Union .
I do not have to explain what the report of the committee headed by Baron Lamfalussy is about and the way it refers to the comitology procedure for implementing measures or executive proposals .
The report by Mr von Wogau enumerated what has been achieved .
Mr Corbett has also done so .
He referred to the fact that , in the Commission 's opinion , Article 202 of the Treaty should be changed in the context of the next intergovernmental conference - and this is the heart of the matter .
Parliament has often impressed upon myself and others the need to achieve equality with the Council in the oversight granted to both Parliament and the Council in considering executive proposals .
The Commission agrees and also sees the need for equal standing for Parliament vis-à-vis the Council in the whole comitology procedure .
Unfortunately , from the point of view of Parliament - and the Commission recognises its feelings and opinions - this is not possible at the moment .
Article 202 is clear : the comitology procedure arrived at in June 1999 is also clear and , as much as the Commission sees the point of view of Parliament and has said so in its own White Paper on governance , it is at present unable to grant Parliament 's wishes .
The Commission 's view as laid down in the White Paper on governance is that Article 202 ought to be changed .
However , the Commission itself cannot do that ; any such change has to take place in connection with the next intergovernmental conference .
Mr Corbett mentioned that Parliament now has three months to consider the executive measures put forward by the Commission .
There is full equality with the Council here , and that is a good thing .
He went on to say that Parliament now has the possibility to object in substance .
Yes , indeed , the substance concerns us all and Parliament has the inherent right to put forward its positions and its arguments .
The Commission has said that it will take the fullest possible account of Parliament 's position .
That is also what Parliament would want the Commission to do .
Mr Corbett spoke about equivalence - a fine word - but equivalence with whom ?
Obviously , equivalence with the Council .
That is what the whole debate is about and it would not do to deny what is clear to every one .
Parliament wants that equivalence with the Council ; the Commission is willing to grant it , takes the same view , and has said so in its declaration and in discussions .
Mr Corbett mentioned a sunset clause , which is another example of a weapon available to Parliament to ensure that the Commission takes the utmost account of Parliament 's wishes .
The sunset clause means that the delegation of executive measures to the Commission lasts for no longer than four years .
It may be prolonged on the initiative of the Commission , but it certainly keeps the Commission 's nose to the grindstone and is a powerful weapon available to Parliament .
The same applies to another factor , mentioned by Mr von Wogau .
In his introductory statement Mr von Wogau said that if the Commission does not carry out its promises - as set out in the declaration made by Mr Prodi - then the next time a directive comes around Parliament knows that it can keep a tight rein on the Commission .
The Commission is well aware of that .
That is another way in which Parliament can put forward its opinion forcefully and with conviction .
The Commission would therefore be well advised to listen carefully and take the utmost account of that opinion .
Mr Corbett 's last remark - apart from the desire to have the declaration put into the Minutes - was on openness and transparency .
The Commission has stated this morning and in the letter I sent on 2 October to Mrs Randzio-Plath , chairperson of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , that it is most willing to practise that openness and transparency .
Mr Titford said that the industry would collapse .
Methinks this is a poetic exaggeration .
I am not under the impression that the industry is about to collapse .
Yes , scandals emerge - perhaps less so in the European Union than in other parts of the world - but that is a fact of life .
I do not think the proposals made by Mr Prodi this morning will fuel more scandals .
They will , in fact , go a long way towards avoiding them , and therefore I cannot agree with the sentiments expressed by Mr Titford .
Finally , I come back to Mr Méndez de Vigo who said that it was a good day for integration .
He congratulated Mr von Wogau , and I join him in that .
I wish to congratulate Mr von Wogau personally on the fact that at 11 o 'clock this morning he will receive a high French decoration , the Légion d 'Honneur .
The Commission congratulates him .
I will have the opportunity to reply to further questions later in the debate , so I rest the Commission 's case here .
Mr President , I would like to ask you to record Mr Bolkestein ' s comments in the Minutes of our meeting , because , if I am not mistaken , Mr Bolkestein is correcting Mr Prodi on a crucial point .

He is saying that the word ' equivalence ' does indeed mean equivalence between Parliament and the Council .
Mr President , may I briefly reply to Mr Goebbels ?
There is no contradiction between what the President said and what I said .
The equivalence is with the Council and nobody has ever thought differently .
Colleagues , if you read the text of Mr Prodi 's preliminary remarks , you will see they carry the sentiment in substance .
Those remarks will be Minuted .
They cover the issue that has been referred to .
Mr President , on behalf of the British Conservatives and the rest of the PPE-DE Group I would like to say that we strongly support the compromise set out in the von Wogau report and reiterated by Mr Prodi this morning .
Parliament has secured significant concessions on transparency , on consultation and on oversight .
Parliament 's rapporteur is to be congratulated for securing those .
Parliament should also express its appreciation to Mr Bolkestein and his staff , and to the Commission , for responding to the concerns that we raised about these matters .
Mr von Wogau deserves much praise for drawing to a conclusion the lengthy negotiations that we have had on this important issue .
We in Parliament have taken a pragmatic approach .
This is a workable interim solution pending final resolution of the whole matter of delegated legislation in 2004 , when Parliament could and should ask for a legally binding call-back mechanism , which is desirable but , sadly , not permissible within the terms of the current Treaty and arrangements .
It is of vital importance that Parliament backs this compromise when it votes at 12 noon today , because without it we will not be in a position to deliver an integrated financial market - whether in 2004 , 2005 or indeed ever .
That financial market is not just of interest to bankers ; it could also lead to cheaper prices and a wider choice of financial products for consumers and businesses , cheaper borrowing , higher returns for savers and investors , as well as doing a great deal to start defusing the pensions time bomb .
All these are highly significant benefits to the ordinary people who elected us to serve on their behalf .
Accepting this compromise will bring us considerably closer to achieving our goal of an integrated financial market and delivering those benefits to ordinary people right across the European Union .
.
Chairman of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs . ( DE ) Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , Commissioner , I want to vigorously emphasise that nobody in this House underestimates the significance of the financial markets .
We all know how important it is that we catch up on the United States ' integrated market in terms of the productivity of capital .
On the other hand , we are also aware that the European financial market has significance not only for enterprises but also for those who rely on proper provision for old age , in other words who are , as consumers , dependent on it in view of their small pensions .
Parliament therefore bears a heavy responsibility for coming to the right decisions in the co-decision procedure .
In today 's proceedings , with our debate on the von Wogau report , we have an extremely sensitive topic to deal with .
The rapporteur has attempted to find cautious formulations in order to give a chance to all the parties who are particularly sensitive to the effects of this legislative process .
I wish to underline again that Parliament , which demands more and more rights of co-decision , will not refrain from doing so in the parliamentary legislative procedure and that today 's compromise in the von Wogau report is without prejudice to the possibility of Parliament giving up this legal position .
If we come to a transitional arrangement for secondary legislation today , that will only mean that we as a Parliament had previously been unable to push through the cementing of secondary legislation in the Treaty .
That had previously been a matter for the Commission .
In my capacity as Chairman of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , I wish to express my thanks to Mr Bolkestein for the fact that our negotiations on governance , laborious and difficult though they were , nonetheless succeeded in getting this formulation incorporated into the White Paper as a Commission proposal .
That is a success in which we all share .
Now we also have to achieve a successful conclusion to the next Intergovernmental Conference and the next amendment of the Treaties .
That is , without a doubt , very important .
One question , though , has not been answered - that of to what extent we can actually attribute real significance to the Lamfalussy procedure in all this legislation , because all of what has been described as technical , today , is very often political .
Parliament cannot be satisfied with a role legislating only in outline ; we must rather still hold on to our authority to define , item by item , detail by detail , paragraph by paragraph , and article by article .
We shall pay attention to that .
I think it should also be clear , Mr Prodi , following your statement and also Mr Bolkestein 's , that we will also take care to ensure that Mr Bolkestein 's letter of 2 October to the committee will also , as an interpretation , be part of this protocol .
The third thing that is clear is that , by its two statements , the Commission is committing itself , today , in the implementation of the Lamfalussy procedure , not , under any circumstances , to follow the recommendations of the Securities Committee against a qualified majority .
This was , fortunately , clear today .
So I think we can be full of optimism and constructive spirit in approaching this form of cooperation on the basis of parity and equivalence .
Mr President , I should like to say thank you to Mr von Wogau who has expertly prepared a very well-considered report on this difficult issue .
It is an issue which has been waiting to be solved for a very long time , and I wish to be the first to welcome a solution .
Our debate today shows the general dilemma we face between , on the one hand , wishing to be effective and , on the other hand , wishing to secure democratic control by means of the legislation we adopt , and it is this issue of , on the one hand , effectiveness , and , on the other hand , democratic control which is to be discussed in detail during the forthcoming Convention .
Those of us who want to see clear ground rules for the European institutions are often criticised for being nit picking and preoccupied with power .
I disagree very strongly with that view .
In my country , Denmark , we had a constitutional struggle that lasted from 1866 right up to 1901 , in which parliamentarianism was finally adopted as the central democratic principle .
It is the same process we are now in the throes of at European level .
I am therefore also very pleased that , in the midst of this struggle , we in the EU are able to deliver a result , namely this practical agreement .
To refer again to the situation in Denmark 130 years ago , the whole political system was just about paralysed during the Danish constitutional struggle .
I am therefore very pleased about the President of the Commission ' s , Mr Prodi ' s , statement that the Commission approves the content of this report , which ought to receive considerable support from the European Parliament .
However , it is extremely important that the Council not merely accept the content , but also the basic message , of this report .
Quite a few Members of the Council basically believe that this whole matter is futile and is merely a case of Parliament ' s making a nuisance of itself .
That is not so .
It is , in short , about exercising democratic control by means of our common European legislation .
Mr President , I will comment briefly on five points .
Firstly , at this point in the debate the facts have been well established .
The history of the tempestuous relations between Parliament , the Council and the Commission have been well described and if , as Lenin said , only fools discuss the facts , I do not want to fall into that temptation and I will say no more on this point .
Secondly , if you will allow me to speak autobiographically , I belong to the generation of Spaniards who well recognise the importance of parliament in a democracy .
What is more , I was part of the Spanish Parliament that created the Constitution .
I therefore have great sympathy for Mrs Randzio-Plath ' s defence of the rights of Parliament .
Thirdly , to continue in an autobiographical vein , I am also a committed European and I am absolutely sure that , just as the euro was essential yesterday , today structural reforms are absolutely necessary and , amongst them , we must place special emphasis on the reform of financial services if we want the European economy to be competitive .
My fourth point is the reconciliation of these two objectives : doing things well and doing them quickly , speeding up the process and respecting the rights of Parliament , must be carried out , as Mr Huhne said , within strict limits , the limits laid down in Article 202 , which are badly worded and whose reform we advocate .
Finally , the solution to this dilemma has been discovered by the new Knight of the Order of the Legion of Honour , Karl von Wogau , and supported by this Parliament .
I hope that the Commission appreciates this vote of confidence from Parliament in the Commission and the Council , and that it will never fall into the temptation - since Mr Bolkestein likes Latin - to alter the par conditio , because the reaction of a spurned lover is unpredictable .
Parliament has the powers to try to go into the maximum detail within level 1 , which would delay the process .
Parliament could , like a spurned lover , delay discussing the proposals and that would mean doing the opposite to what we should be doing .
I believe that today is a great day for all of us .
I congratulate Karl von Wogau , the Commission and the Council and I hope that in Barcelona we will be able to reap the harvest which we have begun to sow today .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , today is indeed a most decisive day as far as the role of Parliament is concerned .
President Prodi 's statement - which I see as an undertaking by the Commission - has made clear in an unprecedented way that the Commission will put its weight behind the idea that the two components of the legislature should have real equality of rights in what they do .
I believe that what Commissioner Bolkestein had to say was also of particular value .
It was , in particular , thanks to Mrs Randzio-Plath 's initiative and endeavours that we were able to convince Commissioner Bolkestein as well , something that was not so easy , nor was it clear from the outset that we would be able to do it .
I do not believe that Commissioner Bolkestein has now been transformed from a devil into an angel , for we did not see him as a devil and he is not an angel now , but a good piece of work has been done .
Commissioner Bolkestein , I would also like to express my respect for the way you today clarified and enlarged on what President Prodi said .
Firstly , I see this as a clear commitment by the Commission to bring about the parity , as President Prodi stated , of the two components of the legislature , to give equal weight and value to the roles of the two legislative bodies , the Council and Parliament , and finally , to do so by means of the amendment to Article 202 .
The statement is clear and unequivocal , and it is as such that we will always , to some extent , keep it in mind .
There are , secondly , definite statements on how this equal treatment will affect financial services .
I assume that other areas are also affected by the intention - even subject to the legal position as depicted by Mr Bolkestein - to do everything legally permissible to achieve de facto equal treatment for the two components of the legislature .
I must acknowledge that what you say , Mr Bolkestein , is indeed how the law stands .
What I can read between the lines , though , is that the legal position will not be used to keep the unequal treatment in place until Article 202 is amended , but that everything possible is to be done in the meantime to achieve de facto equal treatment of the two legislative bodies in all essential matters .
For my third point , Mr President , I will address you , for it has to do with the setting up of an interinstitutional working party to make appropriate preparations , something which President Prodi has repeatedly urged , most recently persuading Mr Aznar , the President-in-Office of the Council , to give a positive response to the effect that this working party is now actually going to be convened .
I would think it right and proper , Mr President , if joint discussions in the Conference of Presidents were to prompt you also to take the initiative in order to achieve what , as I have said , President Prodi was the first to propose , namely this interinstitutional working party .
Today is an important day in the sense that it is now a matter of record that we recognise the knowledge and insight possessed by the experts , but at the same time that democratic control means that it is parliaments that , at the end of the day , decide on political objectives .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr President of the Commission , Commissioner , I would like firstly to congratulate Mr von Wogau on the wonderful work he has done on this report .
This report and the statements made about it by both the President of the Commission , Mr Prodi , and Commissioner Bolkestein , free up a process which has really prevented the speed that we would have liked in the negotiation of projects and the proposals for the creation of an internal market in the financial sector .
In the little time remaining for me , I would like to focus on two aspects .
Firstly , once we have freed up the process by means of the agreement that today ' s debate represents , what we have to do is get to work .
That is to say , we have to make the 42 directives envisaged a reality , by 2003 in the case of the capital market and by 2005 in the case of financial services .
Secondly , I would like to point out that the European Parliament has never created obstacles when it has been asked for speed , urgency and cooperation in the implementation of projects and issues of such importance as the implementation of the euro or the European internal market itself , which are two very important successes of European construction .
The Commission has not normally created obstacles , nor has Parliament , and if we have ever been faced with obstacles , it has been in the Council .
In other words , everybody must fulfil their responsibilities .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to take up a position on this issue and propose to do so in seven stages .
Firstly , I wish to congratulate the rapporteur and thank him for this report and for his gesture of commitment to various committees and institutions , in order to resume progress towards realisation of a common objective .
This instance has provided an answer to the question as to what sex an angel is ; here the parliamentary angel was a male one in the person of Karl von Wogau .
Secondly , I would like to thank him , again , today for the excellent work he has done for the Community on the Committee for Economic and Monetary Affairs , which he has left after many decades and to which - as to all the other committees he sits on , as this report shows - he has brought massive experience and economic knowledge .
Thank you , Karl .
My second point - and this is probably beyond doubt - is that we must speed up the Lisbon process , and - not only for that reason , but certainly for that reason - we must create an internal market for securities as rapidly as possible .
My third point is that whoever wants to do that must take all necessary steps to enhance the efficiency of the decision-making procedure and accelerate the legislative process .
That , after all , is the reason for this report and for the Lamfalussy report too .
There is just one contradiction I wish to clear up .
There is no contradiction between speeding up the procedure and Parliament having greater efficiency and more codecision .
There is a contradiction between Article 202 and Parliament 's codecision procedure ; that is why it needs to be amended .
So I do not only expect codecision , information and transparency to be adhered to , as this is so formulated in most of the translations of the Commission 's reports ; rather , I expect us to make every effort to help bring to fruition something that is a fundamental Parliamentary right and a precondition for transparency and information .
This report is an important step towards making this possible .
In this connection , I would like to direct your attention to item 5 of the report - I do not need to explain it at the moment - and to two events that show why we are so sceptical .
I recall that the Commission presented a report in October 2000 on occupational pension schemes , which Parliament adopted in July by 460 votes , yet the Council has not , to date , adopted a Common Position on it .
I recall the European Company , on which we are in agreement on matters of content but not at all as regards form , because we act on the basis of Article 95 and , in Nice , the Council pulled the legal basis for codecision from under our feet .
That is why we are so sceptical .
Now for my last point .
Mr President of the Commission , I wish to refer in this context to the sentence in your statement in which you said that it is the introduction of the euro that makes this report so important , and that , by this report , we are contributing to a strong and solid capital market .
I therefore do not at all understand how a member of your Commission can , in a German newspaper , criticise your decision to send a notice of poor performance to the Federal Republic of Germany and actually dissociate himself from the thinking behind it .
I would like a statement on that as well , as the Stability Pact and adherence to it are issues affecting the credibility of the euro and a precondition for public confidence in it .
I consider the letter necessary because we must not differentiate between States , but must do our utmost to ensure that the Stability Pact is applied to everyone equally and with its full weight .
Anyone who dissociates himself from that is endangering the credibility of the Stability Pact and , thereby , confidence in the euro .
Mr President , Mr von Wogau has submitted an excellent report .
Nevertheless , Mr Prodi ' s answer is not totally satisfactory , because Mr Prodi was still vague on the crucial point , namely that of equal rights between the Council and Parliament .
Mr Prodi tells us that the Commission is declaring its political will to work towards a situation where Parliament enjoys equal treatment .
Equal with whom and equal to what ?
Commissioner Bolkestein told us that we must not discuss the sex of angels , but that ' equivalence ' obviously means equivalence between Parliament and the Council .
At the same time , however , Mr Bolkestein is warning us that the Commission cannot guarantee us this equivalence .
Why did Mr Prodi not use these simple words , namely ' equal treatment with the Council ' ?
Mr President , I am the European Parliament ' s rapporteur on the market abuse directive .
I must now table an amendment , therefore , laying down in substance that the Commission will be permitted to make technical amendments to this directive and that Parliament will have three months in which to respond .
If , within this time , Parliament has not adopted a resolution stating that the proposed technical amendments go beyond the executing powers specified in the directive , the Commission will stop its measures .
So far , so good !
If this does not happen , I will have to write ' the Commission will work towards a situation where Parliament enjoys equal treatment ' .
Mr President , who are you trying to fool ?
Can you really propose this sort of text to Parliament ?
I think that the Commission must make a commitment to show respect for the resolutions adopted by Parliament .
That , Mr President , is democracy - pure and simple .
Mr President , even though I have only two minutes in which to speak , I have to begin by saying this : Esteemed Commissioners , we MEPs are now committed to working on the assumption that the Commission 's statement is made in accordance with the thinking behind the codecision procedure and on the basis of the role played by Parliament and the Council in the Lamfalussy procedure being one of equivalence and parity .
And what are we doing today ?
This is a very important stage in the new European Union 's coming into being , and I think we have managed to specify what paper and pencils are to be used , where the entrances will be , which architects to appoint and what they can do and when they can do it on the road towards standardised financial services .
What we should not forget in all this , though , is what the edifice will look like , because it will be one of the most important high-rise blocks in the European Union .
Following this trial of strength between Parliament , Commission and Council , the issue is now what we want this building to be like .
That is the next step and also what we in Parliament expect .
Our expectation is that the standardisation of financial services will not result in the problem of consumers having this sort of excess of information , that , in other words , once equal entitlement to them is offered without regard to national frontiers , that it does not come pouring in like a flood of videoclips inundating the consumers , who will then be ' overnewsed and underinformed ' .
We , of course , expect to prevent the big businesses ' desire for excessive market concentration , resulting in a mere two or three players ending up defining the market .
The insurers Allianz have said that they will only go into markets where they will be among the top three , and that , on an international level , will become a self-fulfilling prophecy .
The third problem is the insecurity of investors .
We are implementing this at a time when only 65 % of Germans who invest in stocks and shares state that they want to carry on doing so .
We live at a time when we have to deal with the collapse of important pension facilities in the USA , and ' ruinitis ' is going round .
This must not be allowed to happen in Europe .
There you have a demand for what your legislation should contain .
If we end up with USA-style unequal distribution , then we in Europe will have failed .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur and all the speakers for this excellent debate on an extremely important subject , which has focused both on the matter at hand and , more importantly , on its symbolic value and on the joint commitments we must make for the future .
We all know , we all realise that we need to respect the current sensitive and possibly inadequate balance between institutional matters and policy , but we also know that we will have ample opportunity to go back over these issues during the debate launched within the Convention .
Today , the Commission has committed itself according to the terms of the statement I have read - and it could do no more - but soon it will undertake to work with Parliament to ensure that its institutional rights are fully recognised .
Mr President , Mrs Randzio-Plath has drawn to our attention the importance of financial markets and the Commission wholeheartedly subscribes to her words in that respect .
She said so in order to stress the importance of the report by Mr von Wogau and there again the Commission agrees with Mrs Randzio-Plath .
Mrs Villiers very succinctly put her finger on the sore spot by saying that a compromise is necessary and that is what we are discussing this morning because the call-back option is not permitted under the Treaty and the comitology procedure .
That is perfectly correct .
Mrs Villiers then went on to say that we are talking here about benefits for ordinary people .
There again the Commission wholeheartedly agrees .
Fortunately we are living in the European Union where more and more ordinary people own shares and all we are doing this morning is providing a legislative framework which safeguards the interests of ordinary people .
I am very pleased to say that we are making good progress in this work .
If I have understood Mrs Randzio-Plath correctly , her interpretation implies that the Commission would not go against a simple majority in Parliament .
Without saying so she refers to the " aerosol declaration " which the Commission appended to the comitology decision of June 1999 .
If that is what she meant - this is not the first time that Mrs Randzio-Plath and I have discussed this matter - then that is not a possibility for the Commission because , as Mrs Villiers and other Members of Parliament know , it does not agree with the comitology decision or with Article 202 .
I should like to address Mr Goebbels ' comments .
He said that the Commission should show respect for Parliament 's resolutions .
The Commission does show respect for Parliament 's resolutions .
More to the point , the Commission has said that it will take the fullest account of Parliament 's position .
What more can Mr Goebbels want ?
I should like to add that the Commission has respect for Parliament 's resolutions , but it has more respect for the Treaty .
It has more respect for the agreed comitology procedure .
The Commission shows respect all around but is bound by the formalities of the Treaty and wishes its words to be interpreted in that way .
Mr Goebbels also made reference to the word " equivalence " .
The Commission has very clearly indicated its sympathy with Parliament 's position with respect to Article 202 .
It has laid that down in black and white in the White Paper on comitology .
The Commission will continue to work on that basis - as stated by the Commission President , Mr Prodi , when he said that the Commission would continue to do that and , fully respecting the existing institutional balance , the Commission would treat Parliament and the Council on an equal footing .
In the end we are striving for what we can achieve only at the next IGC , which hopefully will start in the year 2004 .
Since this is close to the hearts of Members of Parliament , may I end by summarising in seven points the safeguards which this Parliament has .
Firstly , the extent of delegated powers will be defined through codecision .
Secondly , there will be a fully open and transparent process including a market participants ' group attached to the European Securities Regulators ' Committee .
Thirdly , there will be a sunset clause - and this is in response to a specific request from Mr Huhne in this Parliament - limiting the duration of the delegated powers to four years after adoption of each legislative act .
Fourthly , the Commission , as I have mentioned a few times this morning , will take the utmost account of Parliament 's position and of any resolution - Mr Goebbels - stating that the Commission has exceeded its delegated powers .
Fifthly , the Commission will support a change to Article 202 at the next IGC .
Sixthly , there will be a full and open review in 2004 and we hope an interinstitutional monitoring group to ensure everyone carries out their commitments connected with the Lamfalussy process .
Seventhly and lastly , if the Commission fails to respect its engagements Parliament will not grant any further delegated powers in future .
In effect , Parliament can make its voice heard in no uncertain fashion and the Commission is bound to listen to that .
I should like to thank the rapporteur and Members of Parliament for their constructive attitude .
Mrs Randzio-Plath was kind enough to say a few kind words in my direction .
May I reciprocate and say that I have always found the discussions with the chairperson of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs very fruitful , friendly and , in the end I hope , constructive .
Mr President , may I briefly put a question to Commissioner Bolkestein ?
On the basis of which article of the Treaty did the Commission agree , at Stockholm , to declare that it would not go against a majority opinion of the Council ?
Mr President , both Mr Goebbels and Mrs Randzio-Plath are well aware of the answer .
They know that when the comitology procedure was decided on in mid-1999 , the Commission issued a unilateral declaration , which has become known as the " aerosol " declaration , which was given in exchange for something called the contre-filet , another procedural device .
The Commission and Council accepted that the contre-filet procedure would disappear , and in its place came this unilateral declaration , which referred to a much earlier case in connection with veterinary matters .
That is why in the unilateral Commission declaration mention was made of particularly sensitive cases , because the veterinary situation back in the early 1980s concerned human health .
The declaration stated - again by way of replacement of the contre-filet procedure - that the Commission would not go against a majority opinion of the Council , thereby basically maintaining the status quo , while bringing things into sharper focus .
Therefore the Stockholm resolution adds nothing beyond what was already in place under the comitology procedure , because the same words - the ipsissima verba - that appeared in the declaration by the Commission in June 1991 reappear in the resolution of the European Council .
So matters have basically remained the same .
If Mr Goebbels is asking on which article this is based , then the reply is on Articles 202 and 211 .
Mr President , there has been a qualitative change in the form of the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam .
This shows me , though , how necessary it actually is to have secondary legislation on a basis that accords with the Treaties .
I just want to ask whether the Commission is now , at last , declaring itself willing to grant the competent committee in Parliament , the Committee for Economic and Monetary Affairs , observer status on the Securities Committee and invite it to the meetings on a regular basis .
Mr President , much as the Commission would like to come to a final and positive agreement with Parliament , I regret that on this specific point the Commission cannot agree with Mrs Randzio-Plath since the presence of a parliamentary observer in the Securities Committee would not be in accordance with normal constitutional principles .
As Mrs Randzio-Plath says , it would amount to a mixing of executive and legislative powers , and for that reason the Commission cannot see its way to agreeing with the chairperson of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at noon .
Structure and rates of excise duty applied on manufactured tobacco
The next item is the debate on the second report ( Á5-0016 / 2002 ) by Mr Katiforis , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on the structure and rates of excise duty applied on manufactured tobacco products .
Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , Article 93 of the Treaty states that efforts must be made to harmonise excise , that Parliament must be consulted in this procedure and that the aim of the Treaty is to harmonise taxation to the extent that harmonisation is necessary to ensure the establishment and the functioning of the internal market within the time-limit laid down in Article 14 .
Of course , Article 14 expired a long time ago , back in December 1992 ; however , as the internal market has not quite been completed , the purpose of the Commission 's first proposal was to serve the objectives of Article 93 , with which we have no choice but to agree , given that they derive directly from the Treaty .
Because Parliament has a consultative role in the matter , the Council is pushing for a fast response from us .
The Commission too has put pressure on Parliament , brandishing the fact that the Council is in unanimous political agreement on the matter , so all that is left is for us to endorse the Council 's and the Commission 's faits accomplis .
This was , in my view , an unfortunate way of dealing with Parliament , especially on the part of the Commission , because it is tantamount to asking Parliament merely to endorse a fait accompli without making any contribution of its own whatsoever .
Our purpose in life is not to sign blank cheques , Commissioner .
And , may I say to the Council that I trust that its haste in requesting an urgent procedure does not mean that it is merely going through the motions and that it will give serious attention to Parliament 's opinion , into which , I can assure you , we have put a great deal of thought .
Parliament has already rejected the previous Commission proposal by a large majority .
The main tenet of that proposal was to impose a minimum fixed tax of EUR 70 per 1000 cigarettes , alongside the minimum 57 % tax charged on the most popular market brand .
I do not want to go into the technicalities of how this tax is calculated at this point .
Parliament rejected the proposal because it accepted the following arguments : first , imposing a minimum fixed tax would put small and medium-sized tobacco companies at a distinct disadvantage .
Assuming that the only way a small tobacco company manages to get its most popular brand on to the market is by reducing the price , it immediately faces a heavy fixed tax which bears no relation to its production costs , putting it at a disadvantage in relation to large tobacco companies .
Secondly , the immediate effect of the Commission proposal was to increase prices in southern countries , where per capita income is lower than in the northern countries in the main zone of the Union .
Insofar as taxes were harmonised , they were harmonised upwards , by increasing prices .
Parliament had , in fact , called for this sort of harmonisation in the past , but it was clear from the last vote that the new Parliament voted in took a different view and in 1996 and 1999 , Commissioner , the rapporteurs voted against the Commission proposal .
I believe that Parliament is now convinced that constantly increasing the price of cigarettes does not achieve the objective , which I support , of reducing smoking ; all it does is to reduce legal sales of cigarettes and encourage cigarette smuggling which , in some countries , has reached worrying proportions .
In addition , the Commission proposal would result in astronomical price increases in candidate countries of 200 % to 400 % .
Consequently , the Commission 's old proposal , which in essence forms the basis for the Council 's political agreement , does not serve the purpose of Article 93 because it tends to destabilise rather than consolidate the internal market .
However , as the Commission and the Council are determined to stand by their initial position , although they have no reason to do so , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs has asked me to table a compromise proposal .
This proposal is as follows : the Council can adopt the Commission 's initial ideas and Parliament will withdraw its opposition to them .
However , it will call for an alternative method of harmonising taxes .
This alternative will be based on a combination of minimum excise duty of 57 % plus a minimum value added tax of 15 % which , once the relevant mathematical formula has been applied , gives a harmonised tax of around 71 % .
So what we propose is to introduce two methods of taxation and to allow the Member State in question to choose between them .
The pros of this solution are as follows : first , it will not push up prices and put the industry in certain Member States in the south at a disadvantage .
This is , of course , vital to the candidate countries , as I have already said .
Secondly , it will help to harmonise prices , in that we already had price convergence with the minimum 57 % tax and it was the value-added tax which was causing the fluctuations .
Consequently , our new proposal does more for harmonisation than the Commission proposal .
Thirdly , it allows Member States to protect their small and medium-sized enterprises from distortions of competition caused by imposing a fixed tax .
And by shifting the focus away from price increases on cigarettes , these measures will discourage smuggling .
I think the Council should show courage and imagination , accept the two different versions and leave the final decision to the Member States .
I am positive that the new proposal , which I am confident my fellow Members will support , has so many advantages that the Member States will opt for it and we shall soon have just one system of harmonised taxation .
Allow me to finish , Commissioner and members of the Council , by saying that I , too , want to see smoking reduced .
But I do not think that we can do so by constantly hiking up prices .
Cigarettes are already extremely expensive in Europe and smoking shows no signs of abating .
Which is why I am against the amendments tabled by Members trying to support the anti-smoking campaign by raising prices . I do not think the price mechanism can be used to achieve everything .
There is much that it can be used to achieve , but not everything , which is why I am against these proposals .
This is my compromise proposal to Parliament and I call on the Commission and the Council to take it seriously and not to look on it as a mere formality , because that would be insulting to Parliament .
Mr President , it is with some regret that I must disagree slightly with my colleague , Mr Katiforis .
I am speaking particularly on behalf of the UK PSE delegation in order to say that we will not be supporting this report for many of the reasons that Mr Katiforis has already outlined .
We do not accept the argument that price makes no difference to the amount of cigarettes consumed .
In fact , I have figures here from the UK , which show that a 10 % increase in the price of cigarettes leads to a 4 % decrease in consumption .
So there is a link between the cost of smoking and the amount that is actually smoked .
That is the case that the UK PSE delegation is making , particularly with regard to Amendments Nos 2 and 3 on reducing the excise duty below that set out in the original report .
It is important for Parliament to vote against this report , because very recently we adopted the tobacco directive , which , as we all know , took various public health measures to reduce smoking .
It therefore seems very inconsistent to adopt this report , which seeks to pass measures and form opinions which will , to some extent , go against the measures we have already taken on public health grounds .
That is not to say that we do not understand the issues raised about the applicant countries and about small and medium-sized tobacco producers .
If voting against this report has an effect on them , that is unfortunate and is not something that we would wish to see .
But when we are discussing tobacco we are talking about a product which is harmful to health wherever you happen to live , and that is the main argument .
This is a health measure rather than anything to do with production or with harmonising duty , though that we accept the latter as a principle .
I felt that I needed to explain our position and say why the UK PSE will be voting against this report later today .
Mr President , it is obvious to us , too , that increased prices lead to a drop in the consumption of tobacco products , particularly cigarettes and hand-rolling tobacco .
The situation in the United States and Sweden , where excise is very high and consumption relatively low , illustrate this trend , as well as a study conducted by the World Bank .
In two previous resolutions from 1996 and 1997 , the European Parliament left no doubt as to the fact that it is seeking an upward harmonisation of tobacco prices by means of increased excise duty .
As the Commission proposes in the explanatory note , the new minimum excise amount in euros for cigarettes is based on the average excise yield in the Member States , namely EUR 90 per 1 000 cigarettes and subsequently reduced to EUR 70 per 1 000 cigarettes in order to prevent the majority of the Member States from having to increase their excise duties .
It is , in this connection , once again worth mentioning that the excise yield in nine Member States is even more than EUR 70 per 1 000 cigarettes .
This is why my group is opposed to a further reduction .
In our view , Commissioner Bolkestein ' s proposal is a big improvement on the current situation .
He already mentioned health aspects during previous discussions a few months ago .
We would like to further reinforce this aspect .
We have tabled a number of amendments , in conjunction also with Mr Blokland .
Firstly , there is the VAT issue in respect of which the rapporteur has submitted proposals which we support .
Secondly , we believe that this matter should be firmly placed in the context of existing negotiations in the World Health Organisation .
We are of the opinion that more should be done to combat differences in smuggling prices , since they form one of the reasons for fraud and smuggling , although they are not the only reason .
In our view , a system should be considered during the four-yearly review by means of which the use of more harmful products can be discouraged .
In the final analysis , and I am taking this opportunity to repeat what I have said before , it remains an unacceptable anomaly , on the one hand , to increase the excise duty on tobacco products , although partly for health reasons and , on the other hand , to continue to heavily subsidise tobacco growing in the European Union .
Mr President , there is no doubt that cigarettes seriously damage your health .
However , it is hypocrisy on the part of the Commission to maintain that it is helping to protect public health by introducing more taxes on tobacco products , which are a widely consumed product , when it leaves consumers at the mercy of very dangerous products in the food chain , imported tobacco products of dubious quality , and is pushing for health to be completely privatised .
One thing is for sure : increasing taxes - and hence the price to the consumer - will not reduce smoking .
Otherwise it would surely have happened by now .
What will happen if taxes are increased is that consumers on lower incomes will be forced to buy cheaper contraband cigarettes from third countries which are possibly even more damaging to their health .
In other words , smuggling will increase , not decrease , as the Commission maintains .
The proposed measures will increase the cost of living at a time when consumers ' wages are constantly being eroded by the policy of the European Union .
The campaign against smoking and the campaign against tobacco cultivation in the European Union have become one and the same and we are against that .
The campaign against smoking benefits consumers ' health , while the campaign against tobacco cultivation benefits large-scale producers and industry , mainly in the USA , to the detriment of tobacco farmers and processors in southern Europe .
That is precisely why we are against abolishing or even reducing tobacco-farming subsidies , as many would have us do .
That would wipe out tobacco farming in the European Union , which would then be wholly dependent on imported cigarettes .
These are just some of the reasons why we are against any form of additional excise because , as I have already said , it does nothing to protect public health ; in fact , it may well have the opposite effect .
Finally , we suggest that revenue from tobacco taxes should be used to fund education , preventive measures and centres where smokers can kick the habit and obtain treatment .
Thank you , Mr President , we all seek clarity , including clarity in the policy on tobacco products and the excise duty that applies to them , excise yields which are largely used to combat the negative effects tobacco consumption has on health .
Unfortunately , Mr Katiforis ' s report lacks this required clarity .
However , the report has made it clear that the rapporteur wants to protect the interests of the tobacco industry , and particularly in those countries where products are also available at low prices .
The rapporteur ' s approach serves the interests of the cigarette industry and not the interests of the citizen .
It is therefore very disappointing to note that the rapporteur confines himself to amending the Commission proposal where the level of excise duty is concerned without giving a reasoned consideration .
This consideration is something which the European Commission itself does give with regard to increasing excise duty , namely in terms of promoting a well functioning internal market and discouraging smoking by pursuing a consistent and convincing policy .
This is underlined in the amendments I have tabled together with Mr Maaten .
In the past , Parliament has in two resolutions clearly called for an upward fiscal harmonisation of excise on tobacco .
The claim that the increase in excise would encourage smuggling is not proven .
Quite the reverse , in fact , smuggling practices occur precisely in those areas where tobacco products are cheap .
However , research has shown that the increase in tobacco prices encourages people to quit smoking and deters non-smoking young people from taking up the habit .
It will be to the credit of Parliament if the amendments that I have tabled together with Mr Maaten are adopted .
Finally , I should like to note once again that , sadly , one billion euros ' worth of tobacco subsidies still go up in carcinogenic smoke .

Mr President , Commissioner , in the United States - a country which has achieved the most striking results in curbing cigarette consumption - the incidence of taxation in relation to price is much lower than in all the European countries , even those with the lowest excise duty levels .
I feel that this is a benchmark we must not disregard .
There is another factor that we must not lose sight of .
The British Member said that increasing prices leads to a reduction in cigarette consumption , and this is evidence to prove it .
However , what happened in Italy is that an increase in cigarette prices brought about by an increase in taxation did indeed reduce the consumption of cigarettes sold on official markets but only because it greatly increased the consumption of contraband cigarettes .
This is especially true in that cigarette smuggling takes place not between European countries with differing excise duty levels - and we would point out that excise duties in the United States vary from State to State - but from outside Europe to inside Europe : cigarettes are smuggled from Montenegro across the Adriatic and by this route to the whole of Europe .
Moreover , we will be in danger of exacerbating this phenomenon of criminal , mafia smuggling if we continue to pursue this policy of increasing excise duties .
The positive results obtained in terms of public health in the United States - I want the Members to understand this - were pursued and achieved by applying lower rates of excise duty than in Europe .
Mr President , I will make a few brief and concise observations .
I fully agree with what the rapporteur said about the legislative procedure , the role of Parliament and the need for loyal cooperation between the institutions .
I also agree with the rapporteur on his modifications to the Commission ' s basic proposals .
The Commission proposes a special tax , an abscissa of 50 % with a threshold of 70 % .
Mr Katiforis proposes , firstly , to reduce this threshold to EUR 60 - a proposal which my group agrees with - and secondly , to offer the States which this directive is aimed at an alternative option : to apply the rate of 71 % , including within this rate both special taxes and valued-added tax .
I believe this is an innovative and important approach which respects the principle of price proportionality , which to a certain extent puts an end to the minimum threshold , and introduces a degree of clarity into indirect taxation .
The accumulation of indirect taxes and value-added tax have been repeatedly condemned by this Parliament and this option - to establish a combined minimum level for the two taxes - seems to me to be a good solution .
I also agree with the rapporteur that price plays a part in dissuading people from smoking , but it is not the only method , and we therefore expect the Commission to send us supplementary proposals soon , aimed at putting an end to this habit .
I also agree that the price increase in coastal and border countries may lead to an increase in fraud .
I would ask the Commission to strengthen the cooperation procedures in order to eradicate fraud , which is one of the elements that erodes indirect taxation , especially here , but we will talk about that later with Mr Bolkestein , in relation to the Kauppi report .
Congratulations , Mr Katiforis .
On this occasion you can count on the support of my group .
Mr President , we feel that the Katiforis report on the proposal for a directive on the structure and rates of excise duty applied on manufactured tobacco products is a good compromise on the Commission and Council ' s proposal .
Indeed , adopting the Commission ' s proposal , we would ultimately have made the legislation too inflexible and created great difficulties , particularly for the manufacturing sector , with the result that the cost of national production - especially in southern Europe - would have increased and its quality decreased . There would also be an increase in smuggling , as has already been pointed out .
In particular , we feel that the idea of a fixed amount minimum excise tax on cigarettes , as proposed , would not have protected - or rather , would have compromised - equality in the field of competition between very large and small and medium-sized tobacco companies , thus leading to distortion of the principle of competition .

In our opinion , Mr Katiforis ' report focuses on three goals .
Firstly , the goal of tax harmonisation - it proposes a rate of 71 % - in that VAT rates are made subject to a common rule for we are imposing a total tax for the first time : excise duties plus VAT ; by taking this line , we will achieve greater convergence and avoid indiscriminate price increases and penalising the manufacturing industries of the Member States of southern Europe .
Secondly , the goal of combating fraud and smuggling .
Thirdly , it also achieves the aim of greater prevention of health risks , which is not obtained through continually increasing taxation but , we feel , especially through specific investment in research too .
Lastly , we feel that the position on cigars and cigarettes as presented in the Katiforis report is more convincing in that it also avoids potential employment slumps , thus safeguarding the principles laid down in Article 127 of the Treaty .
Therefore , Mr Katiforis , the Italian members of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , European republicans , democrats , Italy of Values members and liberal socialists will support your report .
Mr President , 22 % of all cigarettes purchased in Great Britain and Northern Ireland are smuggled into the country .
In the year 2000 smuggling of tobacco caused losses of GBP 3.8 million to the British Exchequer .
Her Majesty 's Customs and Excise have been able to cut the cross-Channel bootlegging of tobacco by an impressive 76 % since March 2000 .
The bootleggers are up in arms at this , but now , with the Commissioner announcing his intention to take action against the United Kingdom for creating barriers to the free movement of goods , the door could be opened even wider to give smuggling an even greater field day .
The cheap smuggled tobacco has produced new smokers among the young people in the United Kingdom .
That is a tragedy .
It has also threatened the few remaining jobs in the British tobacco industry .
The British tobacco industry should have an even playing field with the tobacco manufacturers in the rest of the European Union and should not be penalised .
Mr President , I and my delegation of British Conservatives welcome the rejection of the Commission 's proposal in the previous vote in Parliament , and we regret the current proposal to accept the Commission 's proposal , which is flawed .
We will be supporting a number of Mr Katiforis ' amendments because they make a bad proposal rather better .
However , overall , we cannot give our support to this proposal because we do not believe in the upwards harmonisation of tobacco taxes .
Tax is a matter for nation-states , for domestic governments , and should remain the preserve of domestic governments , which are democratically elected and democratically accountable , tax being one of the most fundamental aspects of nationhood and statehood .
In addition , we are by no means convinced by the health arguments on smoking and tax .
We are increasingly concerned that ever-spiralling levels of tax on cigarettes may lead to increased smuggling .
Such illegal smuggling of cigarettes from outside the European Union is now causing a great deal of concern and may lead to an increase in smoking , certainly in my constituency and much of the United Kingdom .
So the health issues in favour of high tobacco taxes are not clear cut but , even more importantly , we do not believe in the upward harmonisation of excise duties or , in particular , the upward harmonisation of tobacco taxes .
Hence , we will be opposing the Commission 's proposal .
Mr President , Commissioner , smoking is dangerous both for people who smoke and for those in their vicinity .
Even those who are not even born are harmed by the fact that their mothers or fathers smoke .
Smoking is therefore very much a public health issue .
We must therefore do everything to prevent people from starting smoking .
I know what I am talking about , Mr Katiforis , for I , myself , have been a smoker .
The words ' public health ' do not even appear in the report .
Mr Katiforis is a very intelligent and agreeable fellow MEP , but even intelligent MEPs are occasionally wrong .
This time , Mr Katiforis is wrong .
There is a lot of evidence to show that higher cigarette prices reduce the level of smoking .
Less tobacco is consumed , and fewer young people begin smoking .
In my country , the Public Health Institute has calculated that the one-off effect of the increase in cigarette prices in 1997 was to save 12 500 people from premature death , thanks to the fact that 100 000 people gave up smoking when cigarettes became more expensive .
We are talking here simply about my own country , Sweden , which has only 9 million inhabitants .
As is well known , taxes in Sweden are , moreover , significantly higher than in the EU generally .
The arguments are therefore in favour of our being obliged to accept the Commission ' s proposals .
However , I do not believe it is sensible for the EU to support tobacco cultivation at the same time as great efforts are being made to prevent smoking and reduce the spread of cancer .
We must be a little more consistent and not engage too much in double standards .
I therefore hope that Parliament will support Mr Maaten ' s amendment and , through it , the Commission ' s proposal too , albeit in a somewhat stricter form .
Mr President , I belong to the majority in this House that rejected the Commission 's proposal in November , and I would actually have been quite happy to have left it at that , but now we are confronted by a second report that we have to vote on .
Unfortunately , the Commission is sticking to its plan to raise the minimum rates of excise duties .
Today 's are on tobacco ; according to my information , the Commission wants to introduce a proposal to increase excise duties and to abolish the zero rate on wine , even though it is a proven fact that wine drinkers are more intelligent and less prone to weakness of mind in old age .
What else the Commission plans to cook up the day after tomorrow , I do not know .
This proposal will not achieve the objective set for it , that is , the progressive convergence of excise duties in the internal market , and puts an unnecessary question mark against the balanced compromise achieved in 1992 under Luxembourg 's Presidency between supporters of proportional and specific taxation .
If this hapless proposal from the Commission were to be implemented , there would also be a massively greater risk of smuggling , especially in the countries of the South and in post-enlargement Central Europe , because the price of cigarettes there would increase by between 200 % and 500 % .
As far as the campaign against tobacco consumption is concerned , which has to be pressed into service in justification of the Commission 's exorbitant proposal , I can only reiterate that there is no proof whatever that cigarette prices slow down tobacco consumption .
Far from it , smoking then even becomes a status symbol .
In view of these considerations , I reject the Commission 's proposal .
The amendments introduced by our rapporteur , leaving it to Member States to choose between excise duty at EUR 60 per thousand cigarettes and excise duty plus VAT of 71 % of the price , represent the lesser evil , and , politics being the art of the possible , I will , of course , follow the rest of my group in voting for Mr Katiforis ' report with full conviction .

Mr President , the new report brings the positions of the Commission and Parliament closer to each other and I welcome the efforts made by Mr Katiforis in that respect .
His report now proposes to approve the Commission proposal subject to two amendments .
The first amendment concerns the taxation of cigarettes and offers Member States a choice between two taxation systems .
The Commission is , however , of the opinion that this will lead to less rather than more harmonisation of tobacco taxation .
The option proposed would not oblige any Member State to change its level of taxation and would even make it possible for a number of Member States , including Member States applying relatively low tax levels , to lower their rates .
This would be in clear contradiction to health policy objectives , as has been pointed out by Mrs Honeyball this morning .
For this reason , the Commission cannot accept this first amendment .
Moreover , it feels that one of the reasons why it is proposed - in particular the need to conserve the balance between specific and percentage taxation - is already taken into account in its proposal .
As I explained previously , Member States affected by the introduction of the fixed amount in euro retain the flexibility they enjoy at present to determine the proportion of the specific and ad valorem components of cigarette taxation .
To justify the amendment , the report also points to the situation of candidate countries , for which the minimum duty level should be an achievable objective .
But offering them a choice between two taxation systems after accession would leave us with a wide gap between their tax and price levels and the tax and price levels of the present Member States , resulting in substantial revenue loss for present Member States .
The Commission is aware that achieving the amounts in euro will require a significant effort from most candidate countries and has therefore proposed to the Council that limited transitional periods should be granted to candidate countries to reach the minimum rate of taxation .
The second amendment rejects the change in the definition of cigars and cigarillos .
However , the Commission remains of the view that products having the characteristics of cigarettes should also be taxed as cigarettes .
That change was requested by a number of Member States and has the unanimous support of all the others .
It has also received substantial support from the cigars and cigarillo industry .
I would also like to comment upon the two other amendments adopted in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
The first one suggests adding a new recital , calling upon the Commission to submit proposals to eliminate fraud and smuggling .
The Commission shares the view that rate harmonisation in itself will not eliminate fraud and also that other measures are required to combat fraud and smuggling .
However , this does not need to be re-emphasised .
A number of initiatives to combat fraud in the sector of excise products , have already been launched following the 1996 report of a High Level Group on fraud in the alcohol and tobacco sector .
The most recent example is the Commission proposal of 19 October 2001 for a decision of the European Parliament and the Council on computerising the movement and surveillance of excise products .
It will be more appropriate to discuss the issue of fraud , which is a general issue relevant to all excise products , within the context of this proposal .
The second amendment concerns the upper limit of the euro amount proposed by the Commission and suggests lowering the amount from EUR 100 to EUR 85 .
The motivation of the amendment is that EUR 85 is easier to achieve than EUR 100 for the applicant countries , which today apply excise duty levels between EUR 6 and EUR 24 .
I would point out that this upper limit is not relevant to applicant countries .
It is only relevant for Member States already applying a very high amount of duty but which , in spite of this , do not meet the 57 % minimum .
In conclusion , I can say that the Commission sees this report as a step forward in comparison with the first report , as it endorses the need for enhanced approximation of rates of excise duty .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
Mr President , once again it was quite impossible to hear the Commissioner 's winding-up speech .
It is totally unfair to our Commissioners who come here to address us after they have listened to our speeches .
I wonder whether , at the start of this two-and-a-half years of your presidency , you might consider a five-minute break between the end of business and Members coming into this Chamber , because we cannot continue in this way , showing this discourtesy to our Commissioners .
Mr Corrie , your point is well made .
Your suggestion is one possibility .
We also need to ask the huissiers to ensure that when Members enter the Chamber they are not engaged in conversation .
Conversations are for outdoors .
Vote
The next item is the vote .
Recommendation for second reading on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council directive relating to the type-approval of two or three-wheel motor vehicles and repealing Council Directive 92 / 61 / EEC ( 8402 / 1 / 2001 - C5-0472 / 2001 - 1999 / 0117 ( COD ) )
( The President declared the common position adopted )
Simplified procedure :
Proposal , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( EEC ) No 2019 / 93 introducing specific measures for the smaller Aegean islands concerning certain agricultural products ( COM ( 2001 ) 638 - C5-0590 / 2001 - 2001 / 0260 ( CNS ) )
( Parliament approved the Commission proposal )
- Proposal , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , for a Council decision on the arrangements concerning the AIEM tax applicable in the Canary Islands ( COM ( 2001 ) 732 - C5-0691 / 2001 - 2001 / 0284 ( CNS ) )
( Parliament referred the proposal back to the committee )
- Proposal , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , for a Council regulation temporarily suspending autonomous common customs tariff duties on imports of certain industrial products and opening and providing for the administration of autonomous Community tariff quotas on imports of certain fishery products into the Canary Islands ( COM ( 2001 ) 731 - C5-0692 / 2001 - 2001 / 0289 ( CNS ) )
( Parliament approved the Commission proposal )
- Proposal , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , for a Council regulation establishing measures to be applicable in 2002 for the recovery of the stock of cod in the Irish Sea ( ICES Division VIIa ) ( COM ( 2001 ) 699 - C5-0690 / 2001 - 2001 / 0279 ( CNS ) )
( Parliament approved the Commission proposal )
Report ( A5-0015 / 2002 ) by Nisticò , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive amending for the twenty third time Council Directive 76 / 769 / EEC relating to restrictions on the marketing and use of certain dangerous substances and preparations ( substances classified as carcinogens , mutagens or substances toxic to reproduction ) ( COM ( 2001 ) 256 - C5-0196 / 2001 - 2001 / 0110 ( COD ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0468 / 2001 ) by Palacio Vallelersundi , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( EEC , Euratom , ECSC ) No 259 / 68 laying down the Staff Regulations of officials and the conditions of employment of other servants of the European Communities ( COM ( 2001 ) 253 - C5-0249 / 2001 - 2001 / 0104 ( CNS ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0013 / 2002 ) by Hughes , on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council directive on the organisation of the working time of persons whose occupation is the performance of mobile road-transport activities ( PE-CONS 3676 / 2001 - C5-0688 / 2001 - 1998 / 0319 ( COD ) )
( Parliament adopted the joint text )
Report ( A5-0026 / 2002 ) by Ghilardotti , on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council directive establishing a general framework for improving information and consultation rights of employees in the European Community ( PE-CONS 3677 / 2001 - C5-0687 / 2001 - 1998 / 0315 ( COD ) )
( Parliament adopted the joint text )
Report ( A5-0460 / 2002 ) by Oostlander , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the Commission proposal with a view to the adoption of a Council framework decision laying down minimum provisions on the constituent elements of criminal acts and penalties in the field of illicit drug trafficking ( COM ( 2001 ) 259 - C5-0359 / 2001 - 2001 / 0114 ( CNS ) )
( After the vote on the Commission proposal )
Mr President , I wish to express the Commission 's disappointment that the vote has gone against its wishes .
The only thing that remains for me to do is to bring the result of this vote to the attention of the Commission , which will take due account of it and inform Parliament accordingly .
Mr President , I have asked for the floor , when you have given it to the Commission , to say that what we have just rejected in this House is Mr Oostlander ' s report , not the Commission ' s proposal .
We do not have the power to vote on the Commission ' s proposal .
We have rejected the report by Mr Oostlander , together with his opinion of the Commission ' s proposal .
You are quite correct .
That is what I declared - that the report , as amended , was not adopted .
The procedure that now takes place , if the Commission does not withdraw the proposal , is that we refer it back to the committee responsible without voting on the draft legislative resolution .
Report ( A5-0436 / 2001 ) by Ludford , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a Council Directive concerning the status of third-country nationals who are long-term residents ( COM ( 2001 ) 127 - C5-0250 / 2001 - 2001 / 0074 ( CNS ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0455 / 2001 ) by Kessler , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a Council regulation on the conditions in which third-country nationals shall have the freedom to travel in the territory of the Member States for periods not exceeding three months , introducing a specific travel authorisation and determining the conditions of entry and movement for periods not exceeding six months ( COM ( 2001 ) 388 - C5-0350 / 2001 - 2001 / 0155 ( CNS ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0016 / 2002 ) by Katiforis , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the proposal for a Council directive amending Directive 92 / 79 / EEC , Directive 92 / 80 / EEC and Directive 95 / 59 / EC as regards the structure and rates of excise duty applied on manufactured tobacco products ( COM ( 2001 ) 133 - C5-0139 / 2001 - 2001 / 0063 ( CNS ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0464 / 2001 ) by van den Berg , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the Commission communication to the Council and the European Parliament on Linking relief , rehabilitation and development - an assessment ( COM ( 2001 ) 153 - C5-0395 / 2001 - 2001 / 2153 ( COS ) )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0392 / 2001 ) by Schmidt , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the EIB Annual Report for 2000 ( C5-0541 / 2001 - 2001 / 2218 ( COS ) )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0011 / 2002 ) by von Wogau , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on the implementation of financial services legislation ( 2001 / 2247 ( INI ) )
Before the vote on Paragraph 13 :
Firstly , I would like to congratulate the new President of Parliament personally .
I hope that he will have the patience to listen to me as the previous President used to .
I have to tell you that I took part in the work of the Conciliation Committee establishing the working hours of mobile workers performing road transport activities .
I discussed the matter with my friend , Mr Ugo Gustinetti from Alzano Lombardo in the province of Bergamo , who has worked as a driver all his life , and he said to me : ' What is much more important than rules is that there should be genuine monitoring of driving time ' .
Therefore , I propose that the Galileo satellite system should be used to monitor all the vehicles moving in the European Union from the sky .
Mr President , I wish to make an oral statement on the vote on the directive on working time in the road transport sector .
My delegation welcomes the adoption of the directive .
The improvement of road safety in general and greater protection for crew are both matters for concern across the whole of Europe and must therefore be regulated on an EU-wide basis .
The latest events in connection with the hauliers ' scandal in Luxembourg and in my homeland , Austria , have shown that there is much wrong in the transport sector .
The plenary 's adoption in January of the proposed regulation introducing an attestation for drivers was a proper indication of the desire to get the better of the illegal employment of third-country nationals .
The directive that the plenary has adopted today represents another important step .
The requirement to adhere to rest breaks and the laying down of maximum and night work times are making their contribution to safety on Europe 's roads .
It is for that reason that we voted for the adoption of the directive .
It is , however , regrettable and disturbing that self-employed lorry drivers have not , for the time being , been included in the scope of the directive .
That is a problem .
It will probably give rise to new forms of pseudo self-employment .
- ( PT ) The result achieved by the Conciliation Delegation is very positive and represents a very significant achievement for the European Parliament .
By adopting this directive on the organisation of the working time of persons whose occupation is the performance of mobile road-transport activities , we will eliminate distortions to competition within the sector and at the same time promote road safety .
I welcome , in particular , the agreement achieved on the central issue of this directive : the inclusion of self-employed workers .
Including these workers within the scope of the directive seven years after its entry into force and the possibility of the Commission undertaking a study of the consequences of the exclusion of self-employed drivers , to be carried out two years before the end of that seven-year period , have proven to be a useful and balanced formula for overcoming the resistance of some Member States and thereby obtaining the agreement that is crucial to the adoption of this new directive , which is of vital importance to the common transport policy .
The definition of a self-employed driver put forward in the directive also makes a valuable contribution to preventing the creation of new forms of false self-employment during the period of temporary exclusion of self-employed drivers .
With regard to the hours of night work , guarantees are provided for the competitiveness of the outermost countries , whose drivers have to travel long distances in order to reach the main centres of production and distribution , travelling at night when traffic is less heavy .
The outcome of the agreement between Parliament and the Council , therefore , represents an appropriate balance between the economic aspects and road safety and the health of workers .
. I am a supporter of the general principles involved in regulating working time , for the benefit of workers in terms of health and safety considerations and , in the case of road transport , for the road safety / accident prevention benefits that will be achieved .
I do believe that regulations of this nature must balance the acknowledged benefits against the practical realities faced by transport operators , especially in rural and island areas where no viable alternative to road transportation exists .
The concession on limitation to night working is important to Scotland , where long road distances are unavoidable and where transport operators already suffer such disincentives as high fuel taxation and relatively poor road networks in many areas .
Rapport Ghilardotti ( A5-0026 / 2002 )
Mr President , Mrs Ghilardotti has documented the debate on the directive on consulting and informing workers in an excellent report , which I support .
Moreover , I was sure she would do a good job , for Mrs Ghilardotti was Chairman of the regional council of Lombardy , the largest region in Italy , when I was a regional councillor , and this document will certainly help workers to take part in the life of the undertaking they depend on for a living .
However , I would like to ask Mrs Ghilardotti , who , I regret , does not appear to be in the Chamber at the moment but who , I am sure , will read my explanation of vote , whether we cannot manage to achieve a directive which would require workers always to be informed of their pension rights as well .
. This directive will give valuable protection to many employees whose livelihoods are at risk , in particular due to the increasing ease with which companies relocate .
It will not , of course , stop job losses but it will prevent situations from arising where employees read that they are being made redundant in the newspaper .
It will also enable preparations for large-scale job losses to be made if they are inevitable .
It does not adversely affect the 97 % of companies with fewer than 50 workers that fall outside the terms of the directive .
This final agreement is certainly not as strong as the Green / EFA Group wanted .
Nevertheless , we will support the agreement because it is a major step forward in some states like the UK , which currently has no such protection for workers .
We saw this in my constituency , Wales , when Corus made 3,000 steelworkers redundant , with disastrous effects on many communities and no prior consultation with the workforce .
The six-year exemption unfortunately shows that the UK Government has learned nothing from that experience and workers in Wales will continue to be amongst the most vulnerable in Europe to job losses .
I hope it will not take six years before all workers in Europe enjoy the same rights .
. A stark example of the need for improvement and the establishment of a common European framework for informing and consulting employees is occurring in my home area at this moment .
A long established multi-national company - Levi-Strauss - recently gave advance notice of redundancy in relation to workers at two factories in Scotland , at Bellshill and Dundee .
The news media were informed first , and the announcement was accompanied by a statement explaining that the company had unilaterally considered and rejected any possible alternative to closure .
This type of action is deplorable , not helped by the fact that the UK is seen as having the weakest legislation in this area .
I therefore welcome and support moves towards a reasonable EU-wide standard for proper consultation with workers .
Rapport Oostlander ( A5-0460 / 2001 )
Mr President , I too voted against Mr Oostlander ' s report , but this does not mean that I am against combating drug traffickers .
We all agree that it is right to fight to eradicate the scourge of drugs from the face of the earth - not just from European territory - but if we do not restore our young people ' s faith in values , including the values of politics , we will never succeed .
Therefore , when will we decide , for example , to remove from bookshops a book by a certain Italian journalist named Mario Giordano , entitled ' L ' unione fa la truffa ' [ The Union is a fraudster ] ?
It is unacceptable to sell books entitled ' L ' unione fa la truffa ' in European bookshops .
I call upon the Presidency to take the necessary measures .
. I have been on record many times before and I would reiterate this call today that soft and synthetic drugs should not be legalised in Europe .
I do not support the legalisation of ecstasy , cannabis or other synthetic drugs such as LSD or amphetamines .
The UN Convention against the Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs prohibits the use , manufacture and distribution of ecstasy , LSD and amphetamines and this policy position must be fully upheld .
I would like to say for the record that I did not register my vote today because there was a wholescale misuse of language put forward in various amendments which sought to fully confuse the key elements of the debate today .
It is undeniably the fact that the use of these drugs causes damage to the user ' s health .
They can hardly be perceived as providing a positive function .
I believe that the World Health Organisation has taken the correct approach on this issue .
We cannot and must not support the creation of a drugs culture in our society by legally permitting the use of soft and synthetic drugs .
For example , some people have put forward the proposition that ecstasy use should be deemed quite normal in society .
I abhor this particular line of argument particularly in light of the fact that there has been a number of tragic deaths in Ireland and across Europe from the use of ecstasy .
The long-term effects of the use of ecstasy are still very much unknown , other than we know that ecstasy is still a drug that can cause depression and memory impairment .
While the European economy is performing strongly , we must also ensure that key social problems such as drug abuse are combated in a society .
European initiatives to reduce the level of drug abuse in Europe must be supported at every opportunity .
I do believe that the European Social Fund has played a key role in this regard in the past and must continue to do so .
- ( NL ) Those who organise international trafficking in hard drugs are only concerned with making money on the back of the suffering of others .
Proposals not only to lock these criminals up but also to strip them of their profits receive my support .
Without these profits , they have no motive for continuing their harmful trade .
Unfortunately , Mr Oostlander argues that , within his group , he is not one for splitting hairs in order to fight the thirteen amendments from the Left .
Those amendments focus on organised cross-border crime , national competences and the consideration of therapeutic and personal use .
In addition , he makes no secret of the fact that , in his view , the proposals are minimal , and he hopes that they will be further tightened up in future .
Some see his proposals as a way of opening the door to ruthlessly combating the production , transport and use of soft drugs .
This would lead to the criminalisation of the users , who would then need to make their purchases from criminals who trade in hard drugs .
With regard to those amendments , I consider whether they contribute to the discouragement of soft drugs in a way similar to that employed in connection with other harmful , but legal , stimulants , such as alcohol and tobacco .
The rejection of the improvements by the Left necessitates my rejecting the entire package , unfortunately including a few sound proposals made by the rapporteur .
. I wholeheartedly applaud the efforts to standardise the meaning of and define the penalties for drug trafficking .
Essentially , this report represents a balanced , far-reaching , sensible and tough approach to a perennial problem which besets all Member States of the EU .
For too long , the terms and conditions of what constitutes a drug trafficking offence have been too woolly , thereby creating serious pockets of crime in some parts of the world and within the EU .
An additional welcome measure is the standardisation of penalties , with prison sentences with a maximum term of no less than five years .
Once this law becomes enforceable , it should act as a real deterrent .
Fines should only be used as an additional measure to prison sentences since otherwise they could lead to the belief that you can somehow pay your way out of a criminal offence .
Lastly , I welcome the nuanced approach that the report takes vis-à-vis mitigating circumstances .
For example , minors and those who have committed offences under physical duress , should clearly not be subject to the same penalties as all offenders .
Report Ludford ( A5-0436 / 2001 )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we naturally welcome the proposal for a Council directive which is totally in line with the Treaty of Amsterdam and the Tampere conclusions , which stressed the need to finally put in place a policy for integrating third-country nationals .
Having said that , we could not support the report .
We regret that the proposal does nothing more than set out the conditions governing the residence of third-country nationals and that it does not , in any shape or form , establish a genuine European status for third-country nationals comparable to that of EU citizens .
By the same token , family members must enjoy the same rights as the person they are joining .
Yet , the way in which it is presented in the report , the right to live a normal family life , which is internationally recognised , does not take into account certain fundamental laws .
Although the right to vote was , in principle , adopted in part , the conditions of application are not mentioned . Political rights are , however , an integral part of any integration policy .
Fundamental rights are universal and if the universality of rights must be applied without exception , it should also apply to everyone , whether or not they are EU citizens .
As for the criteria regarding resources and evaluating the stability of resources , would it not be better to offer all residents access to the labour market , rather than to confine some of them to exclusion ?
Furthermore , there is no reason why students or persons that have been granted residence with subsidiary protection should be excluded from the scope of the proposal .
Firstly , however , the concepts of public order and security , which are reasons for excluding persons from permanent status , require a common definition .
Yet these concepts are now left to the discretion of the States or the competent authorities , which gives rise to serious discrimination , particularly towards third-country nationals .
Lastly , with regard to procedures , the examination process takes six months , which is far too long .
If the application is refused , a redress period , which does not exist , should be provided and this must have a suspensory effect , enabling any attempt at the expulsion of the person to be blocked , in the name of the right to self-defence .
My final point is that the directive does not cover the millions of third-country nationals who are residing illegally , but who urgently need a political solution from Europe .
The Union must therefore shoulder its responsibilities .
To sum up , this report does not promote equality between citizens of the Union and citizens of third countries .
The European status of a long-term resident does not exist .
We must not therefore sanction this type of political approach .
Mr President , Baroness Ludford ' s report calls upon us to facilitate the movement within Europe of citizens who wish to stay here for at least three months of a six month period .
The Pensioners ' Party is for this and is pleased to see citizens of any other State travelling within Europe .
In this regard , however , I feel we should distinguish between citizens who come to visit Europe with honest , noble intentions - Baroness Ludford belongs to the nobility so she , better than anyone , can understand that nobility must be valued - and the honest citizen is noble , and citizens with ignoble intentions .
In other words , an open doorway for the new nobility of honest citizens but doors closed to the delinquents who , I am sad to say , are to be found everywhere , just like black sheep .
The nobility , however , the new nobility of people with noble intentions , must be allowed to enter Europe .
- ( DA ) The Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party in the European Parliament has abstained from voting in favour of the overall report because we are unable to support Article 5 ( 1 ) of the Commission ' s proposal .
- ( PT ) This proposal for a directive has my vote because it represents a major step forwards and makes a valuable contribution to the creation of a more coherent Community policy in the field of immigration .
It is an attempt to define the status of long-term resident , because we all recognise the need for the European Union to reach a compromise on harmonising the situation of citizens of third countries residing legally and permanently in a Member State , in which they must be guaranteed legal , economic and social rights on a par with those enjoyed by the Union ' s own citizens .
This status will be obtainable after five continuous years of legal residence , at the request of the interested party , who must have financial resources and sickness insurance , so that he or she does not become a burden on the Member State , and as long as the applicant ' s behaviour poses no threat to public order or to domestic security .
On the other hand , once this status has been granted , the individual will be guaranteed a set of rights , such as the right to work , to education , social security , healthcare and access to goods and services , etc . , thereby making this a real instrument for integration into the society in which the individual lives .
It is worth emphasising once again the importance of creating a more energetic policy for integration , which is crucial to promoting greater economic and social cohesion and to preventing discrimination and racism .
Nevertheless , we must also stress the fact that genuine integration requires efforts on both sides .
Furthermore , I welcome the series of procedural guarantees established in this proposal for immigrants who are anxious to be granted this status and which will enable us to prevent potential abusive behaviour by the competent authorities of the Member States .
We voted against the Ludford report , which supports the Commission ' s proposal to establish a single status for third-country nationals , who have been legally residing in one of the EU countries for more than five years .
In our view , this idea is fundamentally flawed , as it will make the existing status uniform and more rigid , and deprive each Member State of any margin for manoeuvre in an area - namely , the presence of long-term foreign residents on its territory - which must , first and foremost , remain a matter for the national sovereignties .
Secondly , we cannot give this proposal a legal basis without distorting the meaning of Article 63 ( 3 ) and ( 4 ) of the Treaty establishing the European Community , which only provides for ' measures ' regarding residence and not a ' status ' in the full meaning of the word .
It is true , however , that if the Treaty of Amsterdam had not been ratified , the weaknesses that the Commission is now exploiting would not exist .
Lastly , we are seeing once again that , in practice , the Commission is using the concept of status as a lever to grant long-term resident third-country nationals ( including refugees as well , for good measure ) rights that are virtually equal to those of national citizens .
Article 12 of the proposal for a directive lists the areas where equal treatment would be de rigueur , in other words , almost all of them , except the right to vote .
This systematic equality is unjustified ; although foreigners clearly have a right to receive benefits in return for having paid social security contributions , each nation must have the freedom of choice to decide whether to grant benefits that are funded from tax contributions .
We wonder whether this desperate attempt to achieve equal treatment for all is one of the profound causes of the disaffection towards citizenship that is currently evident in our countries .
We are in favour of full equal rights , including political rights , for everyone living and working in the European Union , whether citizens of a Member State or third-country nationals .
The proposal for a Council directive sets itself a different objective altogether ; amongst others , that of increasing the mobility and flexibility of the immigrant workforce within the European Union .
Nonetheless , the proposal makes several improvements - which we have voted for - to the status of persons who originate from third countries and who are residing in the European Union .
That said , the proposal aims to limit even these few improvements to long-term residents only , which we cannot adopt .
It is even more difficult for us to adopt most of Parliament ' s amendments , which further restrict the original text and have no other aim than to pander to nationalist , sovereign or xenophobic prejudices .
We shall not vote against this text , because , in many ways , it improves the situation of certain third-country nationals who live and work in the European Union .
But we refuse to give our backing to the numerous restrictions that it contains .
We therefore abstained on the whole text , rejecting the particular amendments - that is , most of them - that would make the original text worse .
It is a pleasure and a joy to see our fellow Member Baroness Ludford back at work .
Since she was appointed a senior human rights specialist at the European Parliament , we can only remember the emblematic report that we voted on last March , which was dedicated to the fight against racism and xenophobia .
She threw all her belief and all her effort into the task so that she would succeed in impressing upon us her passionate belief in ' anti-racism ' .
Today , thanks to her impressive resilience , she has not disappointed ; the active integration of third-country nationals will be achieved more quickly and to a greater extent and will be a useful weapon in the fight against racism and xenophobia .
Baroness Ludford has reassured us and put our minds at rest .
Her report is therefore presented as a list of duties .
Duties that are , of course , reserved exclusively for the people of Europe .
Therefore , third-country nationals who have been residing in an EU country for more than five years shall automatically acquire the status of long-term resident .
The administration has mandatory powers to issue the resident permit which is valid for ten years and is automatically renewable ( Articles 8 and 9 of the directive ) .
Once the status has been granted , Member States can only withdraw it under very restricted and specific circumstances .
The legal certainty of the holder must be as high as possible .
The holder can therefore be absent for a period of more than two years without having his long-term resident status withdrawn .
The host Member State is obliged to grant to third-country nationals and their families , under the right to family reunion , the same rights as those granted to nationals , whether this is in terms of education , professional training , social protection , social assistance or tax .
They can also enjoy additional welfare benefits , such as economic or cultural benefits , in order to enable them to integrate completely .
To complete the picture , obtaining this status must constitute the first step towards being granted the nationality of the Member State in which they reside .
This objective will fulfil the desire that Parliament has voiced on numerous occasions to see a multiracial , multicultural society flourish within the Community , where there could be no discrimination on grounds of race , gender , ethnic origin , religion etc .
We are greatly looking forward to seeing Baroness Ludford welcome with open arms the several thousand refugees from Sangatte who are hoping to settle in England .
Home , sweet home !
- ( NL ) If the measures for residents and visitors from outside had not been prepared before 11 September 2001 , they would probably have been subject to a long delay due to the new fear of terrorism and lack of security .
It is high time we tore down the last vestiges of statutory discrimination against a large proportion of our population .
This discrimination affects people who , mainly in the 1960s , were attracted as ' guest workers ' from Turkey or Morocco to come and fill the most unpleasant and worst paid jobs .
Initially , their permanent residence was not taken into consideration by the six Member States of the then European Communities .
After 40 years , many of these people from the first generation of migrants still do not have the nationality of their country of residence .
For these people , there was no European unity for years .
Unlike people with the nationality of a Member State , they were required to continue to comply with visa obligations in each separate Member State which they crossed in order to spend a holiday in their country of origin .
The fact that they are now afforded more equal rights is unfortunately not so much the effect of indignation about the discrimination against them as it is a way of building one large European super state and of demonstrating that the old national borders have largely become defunct .
- ( DA ) I have abstained from voting in the final vote on this report .
I have done so because Denmark has a reservation in this area and not because I disagree with the intention behind the report or the directive .
I would emphasise that I am in favour of giving rights to third-country nationals when they accept work in another EU country .
Rapport Kessler ( A5-0455 / 2001 )
Mr President , this directive is not unlike the previous , noble directive of Baroness Ludford . As I see it , it discusses the possibility of movement , particularly for unemployed people who come to Europe to seek work - which is good - but also for pensioners and elderly people who wish to see the beautiful sights of our Europe .
As representative of the Pensioners ' Party , I would like to take this opportunity to call upon Parliament , in addition to allowing the movement of people who wish to visit our beautiful European countries , to do everything possible to make it easier for those elderly people who have worked for a lifetime and now , at last , have the time to dedicate to healthy , intelligent , educational , cultural travel round the beautiful sights there are to see in Europe .
The Commission ' s proposal on the movement of third-country nationals within EU countries for stays of less than three months is not restricted to harmonising conditions ; it also aims to reduce certain controls in the name of ' freedom ' .
This is the case , for example , with the ' reporting of presence ' by foreigners under the Schengen Convention which I mentioned in yesterday ' s debate .
Even if this obligation to declare oneself was poorly applied , I was of the opinion that it was a matter of urgency to strengthen this obligation , rather than to weaken it .
In another area , the Commission is also pursuing its former approach by proposing to introduce a ' specific travel authorisation ' issued by a Member State which will apply in all the others , in order to facilitate the movement of third-country nationals for a period of less than six months .
This reform is a good illustration of the subversive technique whereby a series of small steps can finally bring about the grand plan .
As things stand , stays of more than three months are subject to national visas which fall within the sovereignty of each State .
The ' travel authorisation ' proposed by the Commission would erode this mechanism .
In order to justify this derogation , on page 9 of the Explanatory Memorandum , the Commission mentions the case of certain foreigners who would need to move around the EU over a six-month period in their capacity as ' recipients of services ' , such as ' tourists ' or ' persons taking health cures ' or even ' musicians ' , as Commissioner Vitorino mentioned during the debate .
This pretext is rather weak ; hardly any tourists stay for six consecutive months in the EU and there is no justification for developing a directive specifically for them .
The advantage for the Commission is elsewhere , namely the destruction of the coherence of a system based on national sovereignties in order to introduce a different kind of system , one that has supranational objectives .
This dogmatic exercise will not bring any other benefits for our current area of priority , which is controlling migration flows and security .
On the contrary , there is a danger that it will harm it , by encouraging weaknesses and inconsistencies to appear .
Rapport Katiforis ( A5-0016 / 2002 )
Mr President , before I left for Strasbourg , I met my great friend and colleague , Mr Giuseppe Italia - that really is his name , the same as my country , Italy - and Giuseppe Italia , who lives in Cremona , said to me : ' I know that you are going to vote on this report .
That is good , I am in favour of that .
I am a chain-smoker and I am prepared to go out of my house to have a cigarette if there is someone indoors who does not like smoke .
However , I am sixty-two years old : I don ' t drink , I don ' t have sex any more because ... ' - he did not expand on this point - ' but , at least , leave me the pleasure of smoking cigarettes for I do not disturb anyone and I have no other pleasure left in life . '
Therefore , I voted for the motion : I am in favour of smoking in appropriate places and I am against increasing taxation on cigarettes .
Mr President , after Mr Fatuzzo ' s diverting speech , I would like to add my comments on the Katiforis report .
I come from the south of Italy and I am sad to say that we continue , as always , to be badly served by airlines .
I should have been in the Chamber for one of my reports - I am a shadow rapporteur - but I did not get here in time .
In any case , I would like to point out here that this connection between smoking and health which we are continuing to make in resolutions on excise duties and State tobacco subsidies is inappropriate .
There is clearly a connection between health and smoking but this is not the way to solve the problem .
In southern Italy , particularly in Naples , contraband cigarettes are sold door-to-door and on the street : therefore , if we really want to boost the smuggling activity , the way to do it is to continue to wage war on this product .
I would also point out that in some very poor areas with a high level of delinquency , such as the province of Caserta , tobacco succeeds in literally keeping3 000 workers off the breadline , and these jobs would be placed in extreme jeopardy .
Congratulations , Mr Katiforis , on your two-fold resolution which the House has endorsed almost unanimously .
Mr President , I should like to make a comment on the Katiforis report .
I share the concern about the less privileged regions .
I have the feeling that some States - and I am thinking of France , but do not rule out that there may be others - use the whole tobacco excise issue to put themselves in a good light abroad by adopting a progressive policy , that is to say a policy that promotes health and is against tobacco , while they actually devote too little attention to compensatory measures for their regions that rely on tobacco for a living .
I also heard in Corsica a complaint similar to the one expressed by our fellow MEP .
I therefore believe that those in Paris care little about the suffering in the regions in their concern to make us more healthy .
Not by cutting down on sex , but by cutting down on smoking , Mr Fatuzzo .
Rapport Van den Berg ( A5-0464 / 2001 )
Mr President , yesterday , I followed with great interest the debate on the reform of development cooperation policy and the debate with the Commission on the grey zone between relief and development cooperation .
I fully concur with the report by Mr Van den Berg .
I should like to stress that , wherever I go , I hear complaints from women in situ about the lack of involvement and the lack of participation in the practical implementation of reconstruction .
In Somalia , for example , the women are on the spot but the men take the decisions in Kenya , far removed from reality .
I therefore believe that the verbal concern about gender aspects is not sufficient .
We must insist on women being actively involved in the field ; they are sufficiently responsible to consider , and help assess , the way in which reconstruction should take place in practice .
Relief , rehabilitation and development : pensioners and the Pensioners ' Party are in favour .
Indeed , they are so much in favour of this that I too , Mr Andria , was delayed in my plane journey to Strasbourg .
Why is that ?
Because I had to stall hundreds of pensioners - doctors , lawyers , architects and engineers - who , having learned of this report , wanted to leave immediately for developing countries to offer their services to help them , free of charge , with no remuneration , in the hope that this document would support , encourage and assist those elderly people and pensioners who so wish to continue to be useful after their retirement in the many developing countries .
It was very difficult to dissuade them and I hope that , next time , they will have reason to applaud the European Parliament because it accepts their help .
We voted in favour of this report for the sole reason that , if the European Parliament rejects the text , this should not serve as a pretext for making further cuts to emergency interventions that are granted to cope with natural disasters in poor countries , interventions which are already disgracefully low .
By condemning the coordination problems alone , the report is , however , concealing the dreadful lack of resources .
What is more , the report makes no mention of the fact that , despite the fact that natural disasters have equally disastrous consequences in poor countries , and that these countries are completely incapable of coming to terms with even the slightest of their consequences , this is because they do not have the material and human resources , such as hospitals , doctors and transport , and that they are so poverty-stricken from being plundered , both in the past and present , by the capitalist companies of the world ' s most powerful countries .
To speak of ' gaps ' in ' international assistance ' is utterly scandalous when referring to the most powerful countries , which restrict themselves to making purely symbolic gestures when they have to assist a poor country in coping with a natural disaster , but which , in fact , spend astronomical amounts on dropping bombs on a poor country such as Afghanistan ( and many others before it ) .
Rapport Olle Schmidt ( A5-0392 / 2001 )
We have voted in favour of the report in view of the importance it attaches to transparency and environmental considerations .
We would nonetheless make it clear that we are opposed to Paragraph 22 , designed to make the ECB the EIB ' s supervisory authority .
Report Von Wogau ( A5-0011 / 2002 )
Mr President , Mr von Wogau could not fail to win the vote of Mr Fatuzzo and the Pensioners ' Party on this major document on European finances , public finance and the financial market .
Pensioners and the elderly like to keep abreast of money matters , of course , because they know the value of money after a whole lifetime of dealing with it .
I would like to take this opportunity to express the great joy with which elderly people throughout Europe welcomed the introduction of euro notes and coins , the new currency ; they feel as if they are in a fairy tale country , in a land of dreams where there is more money than before .
I am sure that this European finance policy will bring pensioners and the elderly greater pensions , more money and greater well being . Europe is drawing closer to them .
Before I explain why I voted for the report in question , I would like to draw your attention to Mr von Wogau ' s major contribution to Parliament ' s work as a member of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs . I know he will be just as valuable as a member of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs .
My heartiest congratulations !
The process of integrating the financial markets involves reshaping all the structures which supplement financial services .
In this context , it becomes even more important to take note of experience gained in markets outside as well as within Europe in terms of organisation , operating procedures and the functioning of control measures .
In particular , to this end , we need to introduce new telematic technologies to increase the efficiency of the securities markets .
In fact , the use of these new instruments , which both allows the level of competitiveness between securities operators to grow and makes it possible to manage large volumes of transactions according to time frames and procedures which , until a few years ago , were unhoped for , has helped to raise the ' quality ' of prices on these markets and to reduce brokerage costs .
The implementation and integration of the securities markets must , however , be based on a more effective decision-making process - I refer here to the Lamfalussy report - which safeguards the interinstitutional balance while fully respecting all the levels of democratic control established and in operation .
That said , the first thing we need to do is speed up and streamline the legislative process , adopting legislative acts at first reading where possible .
Secondly , there must be an increase in transparency and provision of information , for these are an essential basis for the development of an integrated European securities market .
The third improvement needed is consistency and clarity of procedures for both consumers and investors .
We therefore need an information system to facilitate transactions , from the placing of orders through to payment .
Lastly , it is vital to regulate the role of securities brokers .
This should take the form of regulation of brokers and regulation of activities , in addition to establishing a new balance of supervisory powers in which Parliament ' s powers are equal to those of the Commission .
The report by Mr von Wogau on ' comitology ' within financial services - namely , on the Commission ' s introduction of implementing measures for legislation in this area - raises a number of very interesting questions , but , in our view , does not always provide the right answer .
The starting point of the discussion is the current wording of Article 202 of the Treaty establishing the European Community , which grants to the Council , and to the Council alone , the responsibility of delegating implementing powers to the Commission , which is contested by the European Parliament .
It believes that , given the recent extension in its co-decision power , Parliament should now jointly decide the rules , as well as the implementing measures .
The European Parliament is putting forward some excellent ideas in the von Wogau report , such as the automatic inclusion of a sunset clause in legislative acts , under which any delegation of powers to the Commission with a view to taking implementing measures would be suspended at the end of four years so that its appropriateness can be re-examined .
On the other hand , Parliament is departing from its true role in wanting to verify all the implementing measures , and even ' to attend meetings of the Securities Committee as an observer ' .
The Council traditionally enjoys two types of powers , executive and legislative .
Due to its executive powers , Article 202 grants it a specific role in drawing up implementing measures .
The same does not apply to the European Parliament , which has only a legislative role in applying the Treaties , and must not therefore be involved in everything .
Nevertheless , the Commission clearly has a problem when it comes to supervising the drafting of the implementing measures .
The European Parliament ' s reaction may not be fully appropriate , but it has been triggered by a genuine reason .
The next Intergovernmental Conference should respond to this by strengthening the role of the Council in the execution committees , and by strengthening the democratic scrutiny exerted over these committees : the scrutiny of the European Parliament over the Commission ' s representatives , possibly , but also the scrutiny of sectoral assemblies made up of national parliaments , which would be exerted over the Council ' s representatives .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.08 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Situation in the Middle East
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is not only my obligation , but also my desire , to begin by warmly congratulating you on your election last month to this extremely important post , which is a fundamental pillar of the European Union ' s institutions .
Mr President , I have said this in private , but please allow me to repeat it publicly .
It is going to be a great pleasure for me to work with you , with the Presidency , and with Parliament , and rest assured , ladies and gentlemen , that whenever our complicated agendas allow it , I will be very happy to attend Parliament to explain the important actions the European Union is taking in the field of security and foreign policy .
Ladies and gentlemen , I have been asked to attend today to speak essentially about the Middle East and that is what I will focus on , but I would also like to take this opportunity to exchange a few words with you on the situation in Afghanistan and the Balkans , where - we must not forget - we have very serious commitments .
Ladies and gentlemen , the first term I am going to use when talking about the situation in the Middle East is frustration .
For those of us , like myself , who have spent years trying to find a formula for resolving the problems of the Middle East , the situation we are in can only be described , both from a personal point of view and from that of the parties involved , as highly frustrating .
I first became involved in the problems in the Middle East at the Madrid Conference , which was the driving force that demonstrated that we needed a formula essentially based on the idea of ' peace for territory , territory for peace ' and which subsequently gave rise to the Oslo process , which brought results , but not all the results we wanted , and which suffered from the enormously tragic assassination of Prime Minister Rabin .
Today , unfortunately , ladies and gentlemen , we cannot talk of a peace process , since there is neither a process nor any peace .
My first comment , ladies and gentlemen , is therefore to say how much I , as a person involved , regret the consequences of this lack of a peace process , as do the people who are suffering on both sides .
Should we be pessimistic then ?
I would say not , and despite all the frustration , despite everything that is happening , we must retain a certain degree of optimism and a sense of future possibilities .
I believe that the European Union is performing its task correctly by not throwing in the towel .
We must stick vehemently to our principles and our commitment to this process .
Ladies and gentlemen , we must not just defend and help the Middle East peace process because of the principles and values which inspire the European Union , but also because , in this globalised world , the Middle East , the Mediterranean , is our home territory .
We cannot conceive of a stable Europe , a progressive Europe , without a Mediterranean and a Middle East which are also progressing .
It will be very difficult to achieve a stable and peaceful Europe , which is worthy of the status of a great world actor , if we are not also capable of having a Mediterranean which is peaceful , tranquil and prosperous .
Please allow me to say that , since I had the opportunity and the privilege to work on the drawing up of the Mitchell report , almost a year ago now , there have been many , too many , missed opportunities .
Too many moments when something could have been done and it was not .
Too many occasions when progress could have been made and it was not .
The European citizens and we in Parliament , their legitimate representatives , must collectively commit ourselves to never again allowing an opportunity to be missed .
At this point there are certain opportunities which I would like to mention to you .
But please allow me to go a little , not into the broader story , since we have had the opportunity to discuss that on several occasions in this House , but into more recent history .
Please allow me to return to December of last year .
On 10 December , I was in the Middle East .
I was able to be there and talk to all the political leaders .
I also met with General Zinni , the representative of the United States there .
There was a tough stage , as you will remember , but later there was also a moment of hope .
And we must recognise that , thanks to the effort of Miguel Ángel Moratinos , the representative of the European Union in situ , we achieved , from around 10 December , the most significant moment of peace for many , many months , which lasted until the middle of January .
There was opportunity during that period , the most significant demonstration of which was the speech by President Arafat on 16 December .
You will remember perfectly that on 16 December President Arafat made a speech in his own language , broadcast by television stations , as requested by the Members of the European Union , in which he called for a cease-fire , for peace and for the terrorist groups to stop their violent acts on behalf of the Palestinian Authority .
As I have said , there were a few days of peace , of hope , which were related to the Christmas celebrations . Even when President Arafat himself was not authorised to go to Bethlehem to celebrate Christmas .
Unfortunately , ladies and gentlemen , since 10 January we have a situation similar to the previous one .
First of all violence broke out amongst Palestinians in one of the settlements , later Israeli forces murdered an important member of one of the Al Fatah groups and later there was the incident involving the vessel , the Karim A. I would like to talk about both things very briefly .
It was a terrible tragedy that violence should have broken out again in January .
Because we had passed that crucial period of seven days of total calm and the opportunity was not taken to make a qualitative jump forward .
I remember , and I will never forget , how , in Tel Aviv airport , on 6 December , late at night , together with the United States ' representative , General Zinni , we were thinking about the plan to implement the Tenet plan and the implementation of the Mitchell plan .
We had agreed on a trilateral meeting between the Palestinian , Israeli and United States security services and subsequently a bilateral meeting between the Palestinians and the Israeli forces .
Terrorism and violence from both sides destroyed the opportunity we had over those days .
And it was complicated - as I said previously - by the famous episode of the Karim A. Please allow me to stop a moment and explain to you what the famous Karim A has meant .
As you know , the ship , which contained arms of a higher calibre than those normally used by the Palestinians , also had a strategic value for the Israeli leaders and for the United States , since it was the beginning of the relationship , not yet finally proved , but very possible , between ' somebody ' in the Palestinian Authority and Iran .
Ladies and gentlemen , the relationship between the Palestinian Authority and Iran has been practically non-existent for many years .
If that relationship comes to be proven , it would significantly change what we might call the Middle Eastern landscape .
There is no firm proof which I have been able to see physically , but there is no doubt that something of that nature has taken place .
As you can imagine , ladies and gentlemen , all of this has led to an increase in the already significant distrust between the two parties .
If Camp David represented a break in the trust between the two parties , the situation of the early days of January this year have lead to huge further increase in that distrust .
What can we do from now on ?
How can we try to resolve the situation ?
Remember the famous European Union declaration in Laeken , in the final days of December .
It assigned clear responsibilities to the two parties and I believe it is one of the best declarations made by the European Union .
We must continue in this direction , which was the one taken by the last General Affairs Council .
That Council , as well as making that declaration , sent me to the United States to try to find a common position between the European Union and the United States , above all in relation to the situation of the Palestinian Authority .
As you will remember , President Arafat is practically a prisoner in Ramallah and the Israeli authorities are still claiming that the Palestinian Authority has become unnecessary and irrelevant .


You know that that is not the European Union ' s position and that we believe we should maintain the Palestinian Authority and its President , for various reasons : firstly , because it has been elected by the Palestinian people and , secondly , because we firmly believe that there will be no military solution to this conflict and that therefore the only possible solution is dialogue , and that dialogue requires negotiators , and the negotiator elected by the Palestinians are the members of the Palestinian Authority , headed by President Arafat .
Therefore , ladies and gentlemen , we are maintaining that position .
And I have had the opportunity over recent days - I have spent the whole week in New York talking to the Secretary-General , Kofi Annan , and in Washington with Vice-President Cheney , Secretary of State Powell and the President ' s adviser , Condoleezza Rice - to try to discover whether we are able to give further joint impetus in the face of this terrible situation in the Middle East .
I believe that these visits have some consequences .
I do not want to talk about the influence of any one party , or the influence the European Union , but I will restrict myself to describing the facts .
Last Wednesday night when I was in the United States , Prime Minister Sharon , for the first time since saying that he would never again hold contacts with the Palestinian Authority , received three very important Palestinian leaders in his private residence : the President of the Parliament of the Palestinian Authority , Abu Ala ; the person who is considered to be the number two in the Palestinian Authority , Mr Abu Mazen ; and Mohamed Rachid , who is considered to be one of the most important people in the financial world within the Palestinian Authority .
For the first time , Prime Minister Sharon received these people in his house .
I can also tell you that yesterday and today Secretary of State Powell has received Abu Ala , President of the Palestinian Parliament , in Washington .
In other words , we are at a point where we can once again say that there is a tiny glimmer of light at the end of the tunnel .
The aim of all this effort is to try to recover a political perspective .
We can and must continue to fight against violence .
We must continue to condemn terrorist attacks , but we must also be capable of giving the conflict a political perspective .
That was the spirit of the Mitchell report . That was the spirit in which I participated as a representative of the European Union , and that is the spirit which must inspire all of us .
That is where we stand , ladies and gentlemen .
I cannot tell you at this point that I have great hope .
I have a little bit of hope .
I began by saying that I was very frustrated , but I can also see that there is some possibility that we may inch forward a little .
Any movement in the right direction is worth trying , however small it may be .
Because , ladies and gentlemen , I do not know how many of you have been there recently , but the situation , from the citizens ' point of view , is truly horrendous .
It usually took me twenty minutes to get from Jericho to Ramallah . At the moment it may take me three hours to make the same trip , owing to military and police controls .
Ladies and gentlemen , I believe that the European Union is doing all it can to try to bring a little hope to this process .
I believe that the European Union must continue to work in conjunction with our friends in the United States , as well as the King of Jordan and President Mubarak .
A few hours ago I was with the King of Jordan , I also spoke a few hours ago with President Mubarak on the telephone and I have spoken to President Arafat this morning , and there is , as I have said , a little hope .
I cannot say that there is a lot . We still have the rest of the week to carry on working .
At the weekend , as you know , the Foreign Affairs Ministers will meet at Gymnich to deal almost exclusively with the issue of the Middle East .
What political initiatives can we bring to the table ?
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like you to participate in what I believe should now be our course of action : to help , to contribute to the successful outcome of the process of dialogue which has begun between the President of the Parliament of the Palestinian Authority and the Foreign Affairs Minister , Simon Peres .
As you know , the negotiation mechanism which has now begun is as follows : to try , as soon as possible , to have the Palestinian State recognised , before the definitive borders are recognised .
The idea is that the bases of the negotiation should be the 1967 borders , with exchange of territories if necessary , in order to compensate for some of the possible difficulties .
To try not to enter at this point into a discussion of the more difficult issues : Jerusalem and the return of the refugees ; and to begin to work with the mutual trust of two States which already recognise each other , although the second is not complete .
This is the idea we are working on .
I cannot guarantee success .
I must also tell you , very frankly , that Prime Minister Sharon told me that for him that was not the perfect solution but that he was going to let the Foreign Affairs Minister continue with the negotiation .
That is to say that we cannot be sure that in the end the government of Prime Minister Sharon is going to accept it .
But I believe we must continue working in that direction .
If there is no change , even the slightest change , in the current situation , the violence will continue to dominate the centre of the debate .
And we must be able to prevent violence being at the centre of the debate , since politics must be there .
I insist once again : this problem can only be resolved politically , by means of dialogue , and , therefore , sooner or later - let us hope that it is as soon as possible - arms and violence must disappear so that politics can prevail .
There is no other solution .
Ladies and gentlemen , just a few days ago , Simon Peres spoke in a restricted sitting of the General Affairs Council to the fifteen ministers and told them something which meant a lot to me , due to the way he expressed himself and the emotion with which he said it .
He said more or less as follows : " I will never be in a government which does not have the objective of two States : Palestine and Israel .
For a dreamer such as I , Simon Peres , who is very old and has always worked to achieve peace , it is impossible to imagine a situation in which there are not two States .
If there are not two States , two negative things will happen , which I could not accept : one , Israel would not be a democratic State because we would be imposing ourselves on the Palestinians , or , on the other hand , Palestinian demography would win out and the State would not be a Jewish State " .
For all of these fundamental and profound reasons , which he expressed with great emotion , we must carry on fighting for two States , quickly , on the basis of the agreements of the United Nations Security Council , the two resolutions , and on the basis of those approaches which I referred to earlier .
Will we have success immediately ?
There is no guarantee of that .
Is there the will to make every effort to do so ? Yes .
I can assure you that there is .
However , ladies and gentlemen , neither the European Union nor anybody has a miraculous solution .
To carry on working with the United Nations , with the United States , with Egypt , with Jordan , is - I believe - the best way to try to make progress in that direction .
Therefore , ladies and gentlemen , this is what we are doing .
You can rest assured that both Miguel Ángel Moratinos and I will be working 24 hours a day , whenever necessary , to try to resolve this conflict , which is of profound concern to the Europeans .
We are not talking about a distant problem , but a problem which is physically , geographically , close and which we feel in our hearts and in our heads .
It is therefore our obligation to continue doing it .
Ladies and gentlemen , Mr President , please allow me very briefly to mention two issues which I had been asked to mention .
The first is Afghanistan .
Commissioner Patten will have more information to offer you , because it is he who has represented the European Union at the Tokyo meeting in a most dignified manner .
I just wanted to say that we have a personal representative of mine in Kabul , and I am also rather proud to say something that we are not always able to acknowledge : the military forces defending Kabul at the moment , supporting the government which was approved at the Bonn Conference - also a European city - are mostly European forces .
Thirteen European Union countries have forces deployed there .
I believe we have to say this very clearly : we must be proud that the people who are carrying out the peace and stabilisation process in Kabul are basically citizens of our countries .
Secondly , I will tell you that we have to work , and that we will do so in very difficult political circumstances during the remaining time between now and June , when , as you know , the Assembly will once again have to name the Grand Assembly which will have to meet to elect another government , which will not be easy .
The present government has a certain degree of balance .
To change those balances will not be easy , but it will certainly have to be done .
Therefore , between now and June we will have to work very intensively with the representatives of Afghanistan and also the other three fundamental countries .
Firstly , Pakistan .
Yesterday , both Chris Patten and I were with the Pakistani Foreign Affairs Minister .
I believe that they are doing a fantastic job and we should congratulate them on it .
Secondly , Iran , the other key country for the stability of the region .
We must recognise that , regardless of what is said or what can be said about Iran , its representatives behaved constructively in both the meeting in Bonn and the meeting in Tokyo .
I believe that we must work with them .
And thirdly , Russia .
These three countries are crucial to the external stability of Afghanistan .
We are doing so and we are going to continue to do so , in order to try to ensure that this process , which will begin in June , and which was launched at the Bonn meeting , yields results .
The other issue I wanted to mention , very briefly , Mr President , is that of the Balkans .
I would like to focus on three points , which in my judgment are the hottest , or potentially the hottest issues .
The first relates to the FYROM , Macedonia and Skopje .
I believe that , after the agreements signed in Ohrid , we are in an ideal situation , from a political point of view .
The whole Constitution was changed and a few days ago the Law on Local Governments was approved , which was a fundamental element in terms of being able to implement the return and entry of police into areas they had been expelled from some months ago .
We are therefore moving in the right direction .
The situation is still not perfect , but I believe we will be able to spend the Spring in peace and calm .
At this moment , NATO military forces , led by Germany , are still there .
The government has accepted an extension for another three months , which may become six .
The European Union is considering the possibility of treating them as an actual European Union responsibility in the future .
No decision has been taken , but it is being considered and therefore , in relation to Skopje , although this is not a time for great celebrations , I believe that things are moving in the right direction .
The Conference of Donors , which Chris Patten will refer to , may work and may be a considerable help from an economic point of view .
Secondly , in Kosovo , as you know , there were elections which we should all be satisfied with .
The elections took place very calmly , with no violence , and the Serbian minority also participated in them .
They are now the second largest force in the Assembly .
What is happening now , at the beginning of February , is that they have not yet been able to reach agreement , and remember that the elections took place in November .
They have not yet agreed either on electing the President , which really should be President Rugova , or on forming the government .
It also happens that the representative of a European MIC , which will continue to be European , had to leave for personal reasons and we have had a few weeks of vacuum .
I was there trying to give a little impetus to the negotiations , which are absolutely essential , so that Rugova , who does not have the majority to govern , can do so with the others .
Let us hope that over the next few days we will have an Assembly with a government in place , with the Presidency elected which has the ability to confront the real problems that that government will have to deal with .
The last point I would like to make relates to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia .
As you know , the talks between Podgorica ( Montenegro ) and Belgrade broke down on 24 October .
I was called by Kostunica and by Yukanovic , to see whether we were able to keep those talks alive .
We have managed it and we are continuing to work , to negotiate and to facilitate those talks as the European Union .
I am going there as often as I can to talk to each of them .
We will meet again on Sunday , when we will have another meeting to see whether it is possible , by means of constitutional reform , to prevent the referendum and the separation of Montenegro from Belgrade .
We are working very intensely on that : there is total consensus between the Member States of the European Union that we should make every effort to achieve that objective .
There were certain doubts over whether the United States would take the same approach or not .
After spending this week dealing with their leaders , I can tell you that they are taking the same approach and they are prepared to help us to achieve this reform of the Federation ' s Constitution .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to end - and I believe , Mr President , that I have almost exceeded my speaking time , since I was told 30 minutes and this is my twenty-seventh minute - by referring once again to my first point : the Middle East .
There is no doubt that it is , and must continue to be , our main concern .
The European Union has great responsibilities and we must continue to work in that direction .
It will not be easy , but we must not throw in the towel and we must continue to be resolute and determined .
We will win this battle .
( Applause )
Mr President , this is the first time I have spoken in a debate with you presiding .
It is not just the half of me that is Irish which welcomes your presence in the Chair - all of me welcomes your presence in the Chair .
I wish you well for a very successful presidency .
I am sure we can count on it being not only successful but also remarkably eloquent .
I have one potential confession : If I have to slip away for a couple of minutes during the course of the debate , it will be just to do my democratic duty in another place , where one of the Union 's great institutions is meeting and discussing important matters relating to competition policy and other things .
I will only do that if I have to and will return straight away to the debate .
The whole Parliament knows how tirelessly my friend and colleague , Mr Solana , has worked to restore some semblance of hope in the bloody shambles of the Middle East peace process , and to sustain the progress that the Union has undoubtedly made in bringing stability and hope to south-east Europe , and to the western Balkans in particular .
I have an admirable speech , which goes over all the issues which the High Representative covered so extraordinarily well .
In order not to offend the intelligence of Parliament and to ensure that as many Members can take part in the debate as possible , I will not simply cover the issues which Mr Solana has covered with such knowledge and passion .
I will just underline the strength of my agreement with everything the High Representative has said .
He has pointed out the missed opportunities - one after another - which have brought so much savagery and violence to the region , beginning with the failure to implement the Mitchell report , and going on to the failure to respond with adequate generosity of spirit to the speech made by Mr Arafat on 16 September .
He has touched on some of the appalling errors which have disfigured the history of the region , including the Karine shipment . What we have seen is a descent into violence : killings provoking more killings , violence , repression , senseless destruction .
As the High Representative said , we do not have a Middle East peace process any more but - to use a phrase from a New York magazine a few weeks ago - a bloody feud .
We have to remain engaged in order to try to restore some hope , and the High Representative set out some of the things the European Union is doing to press the case for peace and for a political settlement .
There is one thing on which I should like to focus - which the European Union has been doing and which is sometimes decried . We have been supporting the Palestinian Authority , and our support for the Palestinian Authority has first of all made certain that there is still a viable negotiating partner for the Israeli government .
Secondly , it has made sure that there has not been a descent into anarchy in the Palestinian territories - because let us be clear that the alternative to a Palestinian authority is Palestinian anarchy .
What is the alternative to the substantial commitment we have made ?
In the last two years , we have spent about EUR 400m from the Community budget in the Palestinian territories , and that money has been carefully vetted month by month , in particular the contributions we make to the Palestinian Authority , to ensure that it is not spent on purposes of which this Parliament would not approve .
It must be said that if the accountants of Enron had been one-hundredth as diligent as the IMF is , month by month , in looking at how our money is spent in the Palestinian territories , a lot more people would still have jobs and pensions to look forward to .
When one looks at that commitment and sees the extent to which projects we have started and others in which we have invested money have been destroyed , wilfully and purposefully , it is enough to make one literally weep .
We have seen the destruction of projects worth about EUR 17m in which the European Union has invested - that is , just over a tenth of the total destruction of infrastructure which has been identified by the World Bank .
And the World Bank argues , though this must be a very rule-of-thumb figure , that the Palestinian national income has been reduced by about USD 2.4bn as a result of what has happened over the last months .
I ask myself , and I ask Parliament : where is the evidence that any of that increases security ?
( Applause )
Where is the evidence that going back twice to destroy the forensic laboratory that we had been asked to provide for the Palestinian security services increases security in the Territories ?
Where is the evidence that destruction of a sewage pump increases the security of Israel and Israeli citizens - something which I wholly understand they are passionately concerned about ?
Where is the evidence that taking bulldozers to the runway in Gaza airport is a contribution to the security of Israel ?
We all know that sort of destruction of infrastructure , health and education services , people 's livelihood and jobs destroys hope and any prospect of political stability and security .
The High Representative referred to what we are doing in Afghanistan and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
Why is Europe spending EUR 600m this year in Afghanistan - EUR 200m from the Community budget ?
We are doing that not just out of humanitarian motives , but also to try to ensure a more stable and secure future for the people of Afghanistan .
We know that economic development and social progress help contribute to political stability and to greater security .
That is why we are making that investment in Afghanistan and why , so far , the European Union , the Member States and the Commission have pledged about 45 % of what the World Bank and the UNDP say is going to be needed in Afghanistan over the next five years .
I hope some others - the United States , Japan , Saudi Arabia - will be as generous as we have been in the next few years .
Why are we spending what we spent in the Balkans , in FYROM , for example ?
In the last few months , with the reconstruction agency starting to do as good a job in FYROM as elsewhere in the region , we have already repaired 400 houses , there will be 300 more repaired by April ; electricity has been restored in Aracinovo ; water and electricity are restored in Kumanovo .
We have made a considerable contribution to restoring normality to Macedonia and will keep on doing that .
Again , why ?
Not only because of a humanitarian impulse but also because we know from our experience in Europe that there is a relationship between economic stability and political stability and security .
I do not labour this point as a sort of demented chartered accountant .
I make these arguments because they are so obviously true .
We know they are true from our experience .
If you make people unemployed , if you destroy any infrastructure for people 's social well being , then what you are doing is not only making their lives miserable but also , almost certainly , making sure that everyone 's lives become more violent .
I hope that even now in the Palestinian Territories and in Israel more people will be prepared to listen to the moderates , to those who made their views about the future so bravely known at Kalandria checkpoint before Christmas .
I hope that the Voice of Peace movement will be listened to because the people who argue in that brave way for peace are the only ones who really chart a way forward for the Middle East , for the Palestinian State in the future , and for Israel .
Anybody who does not believe that should ask Members of this Parliament ; should ask somebody like Mr Hume what helped to produce peace in Northern Ireland .
It was moderates being prepared to stand up for their beliefs , it was moderates having the courage and decency to go out there and argue for what we all know is the only way in which you turn off the violence and turn on the peace and security .
Look at what has happened in South Africa , which the Voice of Peace Movement from the Middle East has recently been visiting - exactly the same process occurred there .
So in endorsing everything which the High Representative has said , I just wanted to ask this question : how many more people have to die before the voices of the moderates who are left in the Palestinian Territories and Israel are actually listened to by the citizens of those communities ?
( Applause )
Mr President , High Representative , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the events of 11 September and subsequent action taken in Afghanistan and the current situation in the Middle East , have pushed into the background a matter that both Mr Solana and Mr Patten have mentioned , namely a peaceful settlement in Macedonia .

I wish to say a word of thanks to Mr Solana , the High Representative and also to Commissioner Patten , but also to all the others who have played their part there in making Macedonia peaceful today .

This is a gigantic success for the European Union , for which our Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats thanks you .
In these days and weeks , we are looking eastwards .
We expect there to be new countries in the European Union in the next few years .
I will , though , say quite emphatically and underline what the High Representative said , that it is important to our security in Europe that we achieve peace in the Middle East and that we , as Europeans , cooperate peacefully and well with all the countries of the Mediterranean region .
We will also state that , when these problems are under discussion , we must first just put people on centre stage .
We state quite clearly that the life and human dignity of a Christian and a non-Christian in Europe , the life of a Jew , an Israeli in Jerusalem or Tel Aviv and the life of a Palestinian , of a Muslim in Ramallah or the Gaza Strip are of the same value , and no distinction must be made between human rights in Europe , in the Islamic world or anywhere else on this earth .
( Applause )

We wholeheartedly agree with both Mr Solana and also Mr Patten in declaring our need of dialogue and of partnership .
These involve us telling the truth and not going along with irresponsible language .
When , for example , the Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon says , in Thursday 's issue of ' Maariv ' - and I am quoting him verbatim : ' In Lebanon ' - that is , in 1982 - ' it was agreed that Arafat was not to be eliminated .
To tell the truth , I regret that we did not eliminate him . ' - that is irresponsible language .
That is the sort of language that leads to war ; it is not the sort of language that brings about reconciliation .
( Applause ) I find it difficult , even in view of my nationality - and I was born after the war - to say this here .
I find it cynical of the Israeli Prime Minister to respond to our criticism of his attitude by speaking of a resurgence of anti-Semitism in Europe .
No , we are not anti-Semitic .
We want Israel to live in peace within secure borders .
In that , we stand alongside all Israelis .
This has absolutely nothing to do with anti-Semitism .
We reject that appellation with all the decisiveness we have .
( Applause )
We have , of course , demands to make of Yasser Arafat .
He wrote a remarkable article in the ' New York Times ' a few days ago .
In it he says that he intends to redouble his efforts against terrorism from the Palestinian side , thus expressing the possibility that he might not have previously done all that was necessary .
So we also call on Yasser Arafat to do more in this respect in the places where he has influence , knowing as we do that he does not have all the Palestinian groupings under his control .
Mr Solana also mentioned the weapons shipments on the Karine-A .
We too want to have information on who they were intended for .
We urge Arafat to provide information on this .
I believe that we Europeans have , along with the Americans , a great task ahead of us .
The Americans , though , must also understand that they have to give Israel and Palestine equal treatment , and that both sides have the same dignity .
Secretary of State Powell , in an interview a few days ago , spoke of Palestine 's right to exist , its right to be a state .
All this we welcome .
I think that we , Europeans and Americans together , now have a common task , to contribute to peace in that region .
Yasser Arafat is , of course , the elected President of Palestine .
If we do not accept him as a partner in dialogue , then there can be no peace and no dialogue .
We therefore call on Ariel Sharon and Yasser Arafat to make a start on peace by talking to each other so that people in the region , in the Middle East , can have a future worthy of human beings .
All those who promote that , such as Javier Solana , Chris Patten and others , have the full support of our group .
( Applause )
Mr President , High Representative , I too want to welcome the Commissioner , who will shortly be returning to the Chamber .
I wish to start by joining with Mr Poettering in what he said on behalf of his group , and also , on behalf of our group , express our thanks for the success of the policy on the Macedonian issue which the High Representative and the Commissioner conducted last summer .
The press is , unfortunately , always full of the things that are not going well in Europe , but when a policy is successful , it is virtually ignored .
I want to focus my remarks on the Middle East .
I am dismayed by the figures the Commission has published on the destruction recently meted out to projects funded by the European Union .
The point here is not the fact that something is being destroyed , but rather the reason why it is being destroyed .
The Israeli government is attempting to wreck whatever might become the infrastructure of a future Palestinian state , and that is something we cannot accept .
You were saying today , Mr Solana , that what is going on there is not a peace process .
I agree with you wholeheartedly .
I have been saying in this House for a year and a half that we should no longer use the word ' peace process ' .
It is a low-intensity war , but a war all the same , and our task is to put a stop to it and attempt to restart what will become a peace process .
We are , though , still a long way from doing that .
Mr Solana , I fully support your statement that the EU must carry on , for we have no alternative .
As has repeatedly been said , though , Israel does not want us as mediators .
Perhaps you will again be accepted and welcomed there , with an opportunity we are rarely given to present our policies and our proposals .
Are we then to finance projects only to see the Israeli government 's tanks destroy them ?
I also consider the recognition of a Palestinian state to be very important , indeed , as Mr Poettering has said , the only possibility .
A President has been elected for this Palestinian state , and that is something Mr Sharon cannot ignore any more than we can .
He is the only person we can negotiate with .
I do not believe there are many other potential partners in dialogue on the Palestinian side .
I regret , Mr Solana , my inability to share even in your modest optimism .
For one and a half years , we have been looking on while two utterly unequal opponents wage war on each other .
We look on while Israeli tanks destroy Palestinian homes and kill Palestinian civilians and we also watch as Palestinians kill themselves and take equally innocent Israeli citizens with them .
It goes without saying that we condemn all violence and every terrorist act without ' ifs ' and ' buts ' .
Where , though , does it get us ?
We achieve no progress by it , and so , Mr Solana , we and the Commission as well , have to think in terms of using the powers we have by reason of the association agreement with Israel , even to the extent of suspending it .
High Representative , Commissioner , you have the dubious fortune to live in interesting times , as the Chinese might say .
You may be the architects of the Union 's awakening in foreign policy .
I welcome the meetings that Mr Sharon had last week with Palestinian leaders .
I regret that it is the first time since he came to power that he has directly engaged with the Palestinians and I hope it is not mere coincidence that the talks come just before his trip to Washington DC .
But it will not be enough to talk about a cease-fire .
We need to be talking about an Israeli pullback and an end to the destruction of EUR 17 million worth of EU-funded Palestinian infrastructure .
I recommend , High Representative , that if we want peace we do not define any starting date .
Nonetheless , the news that some Israeli reservists are reportedly refusing to serve outside the 1967 frontiers is a welcome development .
After all it was similar pressure from reservists that led to Israel 's withdrawal from Lebanon and , taken together with Arafat 's expression of willingness of the Palestinians to end the conflict and the need to find creative solutions , these green shoots of optimism need to be nurtured and encouraged to grow .
High Representative , you spoke of the Mitchell report and light at the end of the tunnel .
I hope this is not the headlamp of an oncoming train .
Sometimes America 's friends - or so-called friends - in the Middle East have been about as helpful to the peace process as the so-called loyalists in Northern Ireland have proven loyal to the UK Government .
The Union has a serious dilemma if it believes that US policy on the Middle East is damaging the entirety of Western interests .
I wish you wisdom and courage in your discussions with our friends on the other side of the Atlantic .
High Representative , you spoke also about Afghanistan .
My group is concerned about reports of interfactional fighting in Northern and Eastern Afghanistan , leading to thousands of Pashtuns fleeing villages , reports of 50 or more people being killed in Gardez .
Such reports are an ominous sign and strengthen the case for an international stabilisation force to prevent any possibility of a slide to civil war .
Our priority would be to complete the elimination of terrorist networks but in this regard we believe that whatever questions there are over the status of combatants held by the US in Afghanistan and in Guantanamo Bay , they should be treated consistently with the 1949 Geneva Convention .
( Applause )
That Convention was the fourth such to establish principles for the treatment of enemy soldiers and civilians in wartime .
I hope that you will support my call for a United Nations committee to review it , to determine whether further changes are needed concerning armed insurgents and terrorists who do not fall within the traditional definitions and , if not , at least call on the Americans to sign the 1977 amendments to extend protection to guerrillas and combatants , amendments which the US has refused thus far to sign .
In his state of the union address , President Bush displayed a shocking belligerence .
Just as his environmental policies lead to global warming , so his diplomatic and military policies are pushing the world towards a new cold war .
In this century every shot the US fires will indeed , in the words of the poet Emerson , " ring round the world " and unless you can appeal to , and nurture , a wider concept of American self-interest , then we risk the menace of a new military millennium .
( Applause )
Mr President , High Representative , we are being haunted by the chronicle of long-expected and mindless acts of violence in the Middle East .
You said that politicians feel a sense of frustration , not to mention cynicism .
This translates as melancholy , sadness , distress , fear , anxiety and despair for the people .
We could continue by saying that the Israelis certainly have not done what was necessary .
Mr Sharon ' s strategy consists of destroying Palestinian infrastructures , because he does not believe in the Palestinian State , he does not want a Palestinian State .
He has spent his whole life fighting a Palestinian State .
We must therefore make him understand that he will only achieve peace and security in his country if there is a Palestinian State .
And , to do this , we must enter into a dialogue of political interference in Israel .
It is the Israeli people that must be made to understand that they can only have security if there is the Palestinian State .
The only possibility of security for Israel is if there is a Palestinian State .
As far back as 1972 , I defended this thesis and I was almost beaten up during an important meeting at the University of Jerusalem .
I know what fighting for this issue means in Israel , but there is no other solution .
Similarly , there is no other solution than saying that , in the Palestinian territories , there will be no return of all Palestinians to the State of Israel .
The numbers of those returning will be limited , we must have the courage to say this , but a State of Israel is a State of Israel , a Palestinian State is a Palestinian State and the two must remain separate .
The price of this is that there will be a European intervention force between the Palestinians , maintaining security in Jerusalem , Tel Aviv and Jaffa , but which also maintains security in Ramallah , Gaza and in other Palestinian towns .
You will say to me ' But who are we to do this ? '
Mr Sakellariou will say ' Europe means nothing .
No one listens to us . '
First of all , we must want to be heard , we must want to speak out , we must want to say ' No , it is not up to the Americans to run global politics ! '
We , the European Union , know that the Middle East conflict is a result of a fundamental European crisis .
It is our responsibility , the responsibility of Germany , the responsibility of others who created the situation that we now have in the Middle East .
This is why we must not give up .
This means that today , we must break down the barriers that are isolating President Arafat .
This does not mean that I believe President Arafat is absolved of all responsibility .
He is as hypocritical as Mr Sharon .
They are two old gentlemen who have been fighting for decades in this region and we know that hypocrisy is one of their common weapons .
They know one another very well , they do the same thing .
That is not the problem .
It is not a question of moral standards .
As one speaker said today , there is an elected president - Mr Arafat .
There is a second - Mr Sharon .
I can do nothing , even though , in any case , I would not have voted for Mr Arafat or for Mr Sharon .
Democracy is not what I decide , it is what the majority decides .
Nothing can be done .
We have to put up with the situation .
I shall therefore come back to the point that we must break down the barriers that are isolating Mr Arafat .
This is why our group is asking the European Parliament to invite Mr Arafat and Mr Perez to have a discussion with us .
They both hold the Nobel Peace Prize , therefore they know what is meant by peace .
Well , let us invite two holders of the Nobel Peace Prize to discuss the subject of peace with us here in Strasbourg .
And let us put pressure on Mr Perez to allow Mr Arafat to leave .
It is scandalous that it is Mr Sharon who decides whether Mr Arafat has the right to take part in a meeting in Brussels or in Strasbourg or wherever .
It is up to us to intervene politically to break down the barriers isolating Mr Arafat .
We must fund , organise and support all the NGOs that are fighting at civil society level for new relations to be forged and so that everything between the Israelis and Palestinians will not collapse , as there are some wonderful things being done in this region .
Those who have often visited Palestine and Israel know this .
This is why we have a fundamental responsibility to contradict the key phrase that you hear in Israel , which is ' there is no other solution ' .
This is not true ; there is always another solution .
I know that today , as Mr Patten said , those who speak of peace are not listened to , but if we manage to show that the other side can hear the initiatives we are proposing , then there will be many more initiatives , like those by the soldiers who are saying that they want to defend the security of Israel , but do not want to occupy Palestinian territories and the Palestinians .
This is why I hope that Parliament will have the courage to make a determined effort in its attempt to influence the Israeli and Palestinian civil societies and make a strong gesture by inviting Mr Arafat and Mr Peres to Strasbourg , in order to break down the barriers isolating Yasser Arafat .

Mr President , High Representative , I welcome many of the positions that you have clearly outlined , Mr Solana , particularly regarding the Palestinian Authority and its president .
I also know that you are working in a creative and worthwhile manner with your many counterparts in order to encourage the prospect of a breakthrough in the situation .
I also thank Mr Patten for his fair and forceful words on the subject of the destruction of infrastructures which symbolise the heart of the Palestinian State .
I think , however , that the general attitude of the Fifteen is still greatly out of touch with the extreme seriousness of the situation in the Middle East .
In my view , there is a great danger of seeing the majority of Palestinians lose their last hope for peace out of dignity .
A nation that is submitted to this sort of daily humiliation by the occupying forces must never feel that the whole world does not care .
We must therefore make ourselves heard .
As Mr Poettering rightly pointed out , it is not normal for the head of a government to express regret that a man , recognised by the whole international community as the leader of a people and a nation , was not killed 20 years ago .
What do we think of this ?
And how has Europe reacted to the dangerous green light given by President Bush to Mr Sharon ' s policy under which he makes things worse in order to further his own ends ?
The rapport between them is as threatening as a violent storm cloud .
Conversely , how are we interpreting the signs , a growing number of which is evident amongst the Israeli population , of a deep-rooted opposition to Mr Sharon ' s policy on the basis of the fundamental requirement that the military occupation of the Palestinian territories must be brought to an end ?
I am thinking of the courageous statements made by Mr Avraham Burg , Speaker of the Knesset , who believes that a nation of occupants will end up being disfigured by the crimes of occupation .
I am thinking of the 300 men and women who travelled from Israel to Ramallah this weekend to deliver a message of peace to Mr Arafat .
I am thinking of the appeal launched by 52 Israeli officers and soldiers to no longer agree to fight in order to occupy , deport , destroy , blockade , kill , starve and humiliate a whole nation of people .
The latest opinion polls reveal a profound distrust of Mr Sharon ' s security policy and almost an absolute majority in favour of peace with the Palestinians .
Do such facts not give us more room to manoeuvre than those that we use to significantly heighten the tone when faced with the irresponsible attitude of the current head of the Israeli government ?
What are you intending to do , Mr Solana , in this area , to support the forces of peace in Israel ?
Lastly , practical measures are as important as fair words in diplomacy and these measures are now expected from Europe .
One of the very significant initiatives , such as the one I proposed to you in an open letter that I sent last week , and the essence of which Mr Cohn-Bendit has just partly taken up , could be to invite President Arafat , and possibly Shimon Peres , to the European Council and to the European Parliament and , if Mr Sharon dared to defy the European Union by using force to prevent our guest from travelling , to organise a joint visit by the 15 Foreign Affairs Ministers to Ramallah and to clearly express an opinion on the conditions that , in Europe ' s view , would secure a return to peace .
I believe that it is of utmost urgency to give , in one way or another , those who support dialogue and peace on both sides the prospect of a breakthrough , which they vitally need .
Simply by doing this , you will present - and I know that this is your desire - Europe with a task that rivals its greatest ambitions .
Welcome
I have the pleasure of informing Parliament that Mr Rodrigo Samayo Rivas , President of the Central American Parliament , and Mr Manuel Gamero Durón , Vice-President , have taken their seats in the gallery of official visitors .
I extend a very warm welcome to them on our debate on the Middle East .
Situation in the Middle East ( continued )
Mr President , like previous speakers I , too , am gravely concerned that since last December the situation in the Middle East has deteriorated to a new low .
There has been an appalling loss of life , the conflict in the region between the Israeli and the Palestinian people has deepened and the hopes of restarting the peace process regrettably have receded .
Between 15 January and 25 January last , over 45 people were injured from bomb attacks alone , while ten people were killed during the same period .
This is a staggering level of violence and hatred by any standards .
Hundreds of Palestinians have been left homeless as a result of the demolition of nearly 100 houses by the Israeli forces at the refugee camp in the Gaza Strip .
I very much welcome the fact that the Spanish Presidency has written to the Israeli Foreign Minister expressing our deepest concern at the damage that has been done to projects funded by the European Union as a direct result of Israeli attacks against the Palestinian institutions .
Mr President , violence has brought neither greater freedom to the Palestinian people , nor greater security for the Israeli people .
In both cases the result of violence over the last few months has achieved the opposite to what was originally intended .
Violence has only resulted in an intensification of hatred and recriminations between the Israeli and the Palestinian peoples .
The Israelis and Palestinians must resume the search for peace and the two sides must act together and they must act in tandem .
The Mitchell principles have clearly laid down the broad parameters for an overall peace agreement .
Any future agreement must both recognise Israel 's right to live in peace and security and ensure that the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people are protected and promoted .
This means the establishment of a viable and democratic Palestinian state and an end to the occupation of the Palestinian territories .
Israeli and Palestinian authorities are going to have to move to renew some level of security cooperation with the aim of ending this awful present cycle of violence .
Persons involved in perpetrating any of these awful terrorist attacks which have taken place must be arrested and must be brought to justice , including terrorists operating in the Hamas and Islamic Jihad organisations .
Recent discussions between representatives of the Palestinian authority and Prime Minister Sharon must be seen as a somewhat positive move , but negotiations must surely be meaningful and cannot be seen as a cosmetic exercise under any circumstances .
We must all remember that Yasser Arafat is the democratically elected leader of the Palestinian people and he has the political authority and the political mandate to represent the concerns and the needs of the Palestinian people at this time .
Yasser Arafat is a viable peace partner for Israel and he commands the support not only of his people , but of the broader international community .
I welcome the recent article written by him in the New York Times in which he stated that the Palestinians were ready to end the conflict with Israel .
This call for reconciliation and coexistence must be welcomed by all interested parties .
I strongly believe that the EU must continue to play as active a role as possible in brokering a peace between both sides .
President Bush and Prime Minister Sharon are meeting this week and I hope that this will signal a more willing involvement on the part of the United States to re-intensify its efforts to reach a political agreement in the region .
I strongly believe that the European Union and the American government have mutually important roles to play in ending the violence in the region and restarting meaningful peace talks .
Finally , the Israelis and the Palestinians must also calm the situation and de-escalate the conflict .
Sustained attacks by Israel on the Palestinian Authority and its security forces and facilities are wholly misguided .
Incursions by the Israeli military forces into Palestinian territories must be halted immediately and there must also be a lifting of restrictions that are imposed on the Palestinian people .
Let us all remember , as was said by previous speakers , that the alternative to the Palestinian Authority is Palestinian anarchy .
Thank you , Mr President , there is , once again , a glimmer of hope in the Middle East .
There are two indications of this .
First of all , there was the discussion between Prime Minister Sharon and prominent representatives of the Palestinian Authority that was held in the middle of last week .
Furthermore , a regular follow-up every couple of weeks has been announced .
In addition , there is the public assurance by Mr Arafat in the American press that he wants to call an end to the terrorist attacks on Israeli citizens .
I sincerely hope that the meeting between President Bush and Prime Minister Sharon next Thursday will help these developments move towards a de-escalation of the extremely bloody Palestinian-Israeli conflict .
Just consider the extent of the killings and destruction on both sides .
And suffering , certainly personal suffering , cannot be captured in cold statistics or weighed up on a merely rational level .
Meanwhile , a consistent rejection of , and fight against , terrorism do remain the conditions par excellence for creating any political compromise between the State of Israel and its neighbours .
This is of direct interest to various countries in the region , for they fan the Palestinian and Lebanese flames of terrorism willingly and knowingly .
This is why the clear warning by President Bush addressed to them in last Wednesday ' s State of the Union speech deserves full support from the EU Member States .
However , this political realism is lacking on our Continent , precisely at a time when European shortcomings have come to light in NATO in such a poignant way .
The EU Member States support efforts to bring peace to the Middle East , especially by making a credible and effective contribution to the current fight against terrorist networks in that region .
This will benefit the Israelis and Palestinians alike .
I would therefore call on the Member States in the person of their High Representative , Mr Solana , to make this contribution .
Last week , a young person from my town , Apeldoorn , sent a touching e-mail about peace in the Middle East .
His appeal was not for a spiral of violence but a spiral of prayer .
Along with the psalmist , I would say indeed : pray for the peace of Jerusalem .
Mr President , Commissioner , I think that Mr Patten ' s comments - and I am sorry that he is not here at the moment - are absolutely unacceptable .
In my view , to speak of the senseless destruction - and this is a point on which we obviously agree with him - of the Palestinian infrastructure and to speak of the selective killings of Palestinians without mentioning the Israeli victims is absolutely intolerable .
But this is also symptomatic of the policy that Commissioner Patten has , for many months , been conducting towards Israel .
I am pleased that the High Representative , Mr Solana , is here with us , because at least he can raise the quality of our debate slightly above the level we are used to in this House .
Having said that , I do not think , Mr Cohn-Bendit , that we can resolve the conflict between Israel and Palestine by simply asking both sides to make a little effort , or even asking both to make a great effort .
Mr Barak made some proposals with which we are all familiar and these proposals were not accepted .
The Palestinian Authority existed and the Palestinian Authority has sanctioned the suicide attacks that were and still are carried out every day against Israel .
That is the reality today .
I think that the European Union has an opportunity to show true generosity , but not by means of the tourist trips that Mr Wurtz is suggesting .
The European Union could show its true generosity by saying to the public , to the people of Europe , that they must have the courage to fully integrate Israel into the European Union , that this is the only way to guarantee security in Israel , to finally give five million Israelis the feeling that they can live in peace alongside the Palestinians , but within the European Union .
This proposal has been put forward .
Ladies and gentlemen , we must urgently begin to reflect on this in slightly more depth .
Mr President , I have the feeling that , recently , in each debate in this Parliament on the Middle East , we basically go over the same ground .
The only thing that changes is the state of the crisis , which , unfortunately , is increasingly worse in that region .
Since the last resolution we approved in the European Parliament , with the majority support of the parliamentary groups , there have evidently been more terrorist attacks against Israeli civilians .
I think there have been five in the last ten days .
We have also , however , seen the siege by the Israeli army increasingly close in on the Palestinian population and its institutions .
There has been very considerable material and personal damage which I consider to be completely unjustifiable .
Within the landscape of violence , which is very controversial both inside and outside the region and also here in the European Parliament , we should be able to agree on certain things .
The first is that nothing can justify acts of terrorism , which reduce the chances of peace and produce nothing but pain and indignation .
The second is that it seems clear that the Palestinian National Authority does not have the capacity to restrain this wave of violence .
The third is that not everything is permissible in the fight against terrorism : when we have the Rule of Law , we must always act within the parameters of the law and with scrupulous respect for human rights .
The fourth is that the parties in conflict must understand that no act of violence is going to improve their position .
And the fifth is that we cannot stand on the sidelines ; on the contrary , the European Union must maintain its political pressure and its permanent presence in the region .
I am happy to see the efforts the Council and the Commission are making , but I am even happier to hear that there is a glimmer of light on the horizon .
I agree with the Council declaration , which says that our first priority must be to put an end to the suffering of both peoples .
And it seems to me completely pointless for us to try to find somebody to blame .
On the contrary , I believe that we must seek solutions and , for example , the European Parliament should promote and sponsor an international conference for peace in the Middle East , a second instalment of the one held in Madrid ten years ago , from which Mr Solana could no doubt recount many experiences .
Let us hope that amongst all of us we can contribute to peace , because I believe that that is the only truly important thing at the moment .
Mr President , High Representative , today ' s debate seems to me to be a proper debate .
I appreciate the Presidency ' s flexibility as regards time : if the President wants to make this a genuine political debating chamber once again , it may be no bad thing that he is showing some flexibility towards us .
I would like to say that we are caught up in an appalling , absurd situation : when the Israelis elected Ariel Sharon to power they thought he would bring them more security , but they are now in a terrible situation .
When President Bush was giving his assessment of the tragic situation after the attacks on the Twin Towers , he gave the impression of intending to eradicate the sources of hatred and to genuinely do something about this tragic affair .
However , if the United States now backs Ariel Sharon , there is a danger that it will no longer be able to play the mediating role it had even under Bill Clinton .
At present , it would appear that Yasser Arafat is not in control of the situation , for the terrorism of Hamas is still gathering momentum , but if Mr Arafat were to lose all support , the consequences for Palestine would not bear thinking about .
Therefore , it is up to us , to Europe to do something .
I do not want to shock anybody , but I believe that the only way to give Israel security - as many Members have said - is to establish a Palestinian State .
Therefore , we must start to declare right now that we are prepared to recognise such a State and also that we need to have a special relationship with both the Israeli State and the Palestinian State .
I will not go so far as to mention accession to the Union , as Mr Dupuis did , for fear of causing offence , but if Europe wants to genuinely lay the history of the twentieth century to rest , it cannot confine itself to enlargement and refuse to assume full responsibility for the consequences of European history .
Mr President , the recent Palestinian suicide attacks , Israel ' s tough reaction to them and , to some extent , the statements by Prime Minister Sharon about Mr Arafat , have once again brought the Israeli-Palestinian conflict to a head .
This spiral of violence must now be broken as a matter of urgency .
The international community must urge both parties to reach a permanent settlement and cease the terror .
One glimmer of hope is at any rate the consultation between Prime Minister Sharon and some Palestinian official representatives that was held last weekend .
As far as the European Union is concerned , a tougher stance would be welcome .
We must strengthen our position in the peace talks , given the exceptional interests - and first and foremost the humanitarian interests - that are at stake .
European leaders can no longer afford to look on from the sidelines , at the risk of a much greater and more extensive conflict emerging in the Middle East .
The peace process will be a lengthy and tiresome process , but I remain convinced that with the necessary trust , the indispensable political will and the necessary perseverance , we can attain our common goal , namely a peaceful and prosperous Middle East .
I too nurture some small hope .
In actual fact , there seems to be greater awareness within Parliament of the tragedy taking place and also of where responsibility lies for this situation , not least our own responsibility .
As Mr Solana has said on a number of occasions : we have wasted many opportunities .
I fear we will waste others too , but I do feel it is important that we have gained this awareness .
I find Mr Bush ' s support of Ariel Sharon ' s policy truly irresponsible , opportunist and inhumane , for it is not that the two sides lack confidence in each other : this is a specific policy , a specific decision - Ariel Sharon has made this explicitly clear in his speeches in the Knesset - not to allow a Palestinian State to exist , apart from ' Bantustan ' territories , and not to give back the Occupied Territories .
I do not understand why we do not realise that this is his policy and take appropriate action .
At the same time , some responsibility certainly lies with Yasser Arafat , and it is an appalling tragedy for both Palestinians and Israelis that terrorist acts are taking place .
However , my hope lies in Commissioner Patten ' s words , in Mr Solana ' s words , in actions and signs , and I would like to tell you of the great hope that I have in Israeli society .
On Saturday , together with 300 Israelis - young people , coloured people , young lads who have refused to serve in the Occupied Territories , women , university professors - we crossed the Kalandia checkpoint , running serious risks for the Israelis who crossed it were told they were not allowed to enter the Occupied Territories .
Three hundred of us crossed the Kalandia checkpoint to go to meet Yasser Arafat .
The young Israelis said : ' We want peace .
We are the other Israel ' .
And Mr Arafat embraced them .
However , the most important part was in the afternoon when we met the Palestinians and Palestinian organisations , and they too displayed their desire for peace .
I therefore feel that it is imperative that we believe in these organisations and act to support them .
I too , like Mr Cohn-Bendit , want to issue a challenge .
If Mr Arafat leaves the territories , there is a danger that we will not be able to get him back in again .
It is important that we work to support this operation , to bring Abu Ala and Avraham Burg here .
International protection is vital for the Palestinian people ; moreover - and here I agree with Mr Sakellariou - it is vital that we take practical action , even suspending the association agreement , for Israel must respect human rights .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the tragic situation of Palestine illustrates two political truths , which are only bitter for utopians .
First of all , each nation necessarily aspires to sovereignty , in other words , to have the full reign of a territory that is its own and which it can organise as it wishes .
Secondly , it is not , therefore , borders which create conflicts , but the lack of safe and recognised borders .
It is not the division of nations which engenders war , it is when the nations are thrown together .
Throughout the world , multi-ethnic and multi-cultural societies have failed , causing bloodshed , and yet there are many utopians even in this House who would like to conduct such experiments on our European societies .
I greatly admire Mr Cohn-Bendit ' s realistic attitude towards the Middle East , an attitude that totally contradicts the hare-brained ideas of his friends and his own colleagues , regarding the situation in France for example .
That said , the tragic but fragmented events - bloody attacks , arms trafficking , the mutual accusations of murder , terrorism , the repeated failures at maintaining a truce , the unacceptable destruction - are sad consequences , which must not , however , be confused with the profound causes of the situation .
The fundamental problem is that there will only be peace if the Israelis and the Palestinians each have a territory that is marked by recognised borders and , within this territory , they have the opportunity to govern their country freely , without threats or interference .
The State of Israel now possesses three quarters of Palestine ' s former territory under the British mandate .
The Palestinians must be permitted to live freely , in peace , in the other quarter .
As sensitive as some places are for the Jewish people and for other believers , places which have great religious significance , we must bring an end to the colonisation of the occupied territories which stems from 1967 .
We must observe the United Nations Security Council resolutions and we must also bring an end to a military occupation that has lasted for almost 35 years now and which is an outright record in history .
Of course , Israel has a right to secure serious guarantees in exchange for its withdrawal .
These guarantees can be granted within the framework of the United Nations Organisation , and , in particular , by the United States of America .
They must be more serious than those that failed to prevent the 1967 conflict . However , this is no longer 1967 .
Israel must thus have the courage to appreciate its victories , to withdraw from the occupied territories .
Only then can peace return to the Middle East .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Solana , one victim of the recent bombings in the Middle East , in which Israeli civilians were targeted , has been the willingness of moderates to form coalitions .
I think one has to distinguish between murdering civilians willy-nilly , pursuing possible terrorists or , on the other hand , setting a 7-day deadline and positively inviting the radicals to promptly wreck the possibilities for dialogue .
Israeli settlement policy , which is to be continued , provides us with examples of this sort of thing , as does the hopeless existence which drives Arab Palestinian refugees to turn themselves into weapons , and the consideration of the idea that they should return to their original homes and thereby put a question mark against the State of Israel 's long-term viability .
We also see it in the destruction of infrastructure on Palestinian territory , and that in areas that have nothing to do with counter-terrorism , but - as Commissioner Patten rightly said - destroy prospects for development .
It is for these reasons that we have to make it clear that we , the European Union , have to make a fresh start , and it is perhaps not right that you , Mr Solana , are going there to play for high stakes in a week 's time , followed by the American representative the week after .
So we shuttle hither and thither and get nowhere .
Why do you not , for once , go there together in the same week in order to make clear that this is a joint European and American initiative to hammer the point home that we will no longer allow things to go on the way they are .
Both of you must go there together and take funds with you in order simultaneously to give hope and guarantees of security .

We must find a new point of departure , and we will not do it in the ways we have used so far , nor - and this remark I address to Mr Sakellariou and others - by adopting resolutions apportioning guilt in a one-sided way , because then we are destroying the opportunity to be intermediaries .
Mr President , Mr Solana , Commissioner , the reports you have presented today may not have been positive or optimistic , but they sketched a realistic picture .
I am very glad that , after a short , perhaps terrifying moment , the European Union has clearly demonstrated that it is not willing to sit back and let the Palestinian structures , supported moreover by funds raised by the European Union , be destroyed .
This is not about denying Israel the right to defend itself against terrorism , but about our strongest condemnation and rejection of excessive courses of action that really have nothing to do with counter-terrorism .
I am very pleased that this is what both representatives have done , clearly and unmistakably , and that they have made their position clear without falling prey to emotionalism .
That is important because the pro-peace groupings that are present both in Israel and in Palestine are waiting for Europe 's voice to be heard .
I support all the efforts at joint action with the USA , but where this is not possible , we must be an identifiable , and indeed , readily recognisable , European voice .
My second observation , on the Balkans , may well be taken as underlining all of what has been said here .
I would only ask that particular additional attention be given to the situation in Albania , where things are not at present developing very well .
I wish to make it very clear that I cannot see us going down the road towards an association agreement with Albania if Albania does not concern itself with the country 's stabilisation .
What has happened in the past weeks is , alas , no contribution to stability .
We want stability in the Balkans , we have done much , and with great effort , to achieve it , and let no power in the Balkans cause this stability to collapse again .
I would therefore ask you both to follow events in Albania , in particular , very closely , and represent our positions there with a great deal of clarity .
Thank you , Mr President .
After months of heartrending and meaningless violence in the Middle East , we must now nurse and foster each and every glimmer of hope .
President Arafat has indicated that he is prepared to negotiate with any Israeli party and to help search for a creative solution for the return of the refugees .
These are two courageous steps forward which deserve our support and should be immediately responded to by an equally generous offer by Prime Minister Sharon .
In addition , we have noticed that , in Israel , a shift has emerged in public opinion with regard to one of the key issues of the conflict , namely the illegal occupation of the Palestinian regions .
There are now 110 reservists of the Israeli army who have signed a petition in which they refuse to take part in the occupation any longer .
These brave soldiers deserve the open and emphatic support of the European Union because they are choosing international law and human rights , rather than choosing to obey their orders and to follow the path of least resistance .
They are , in fact , choosing the road of peace , away from occupation , away from terror and state terror , and towards the negotiating table and , hopefully , peace eventually .

I would be interested to hear from Messrs Solana and Patten whether they are prepared to express this support .
It is with considerable sadness , and with full sympathy for your frustration , High Representative Solana , that we have seen the ongoing deterioration of the situation in the Middle East over the past few months , especially when we were convinced , after 11 September , of the urgent need to find a political solution to the problem .
I should simply like to recall the closing statement of the special session of the Mediterranean Forum , held in Brussels in November , before the vote on 13 December on our recommendations preceding the formal declaration by the Laeken Council .
I would remind you that this statement called for the immediate and unconditional implementation of the Tenet plan and of the recommendations of the Mitchell committee , and reiterated our conviction , Mr Cohn-Bendit , that establishing an impartial monitoring mechanism would serve the interests of both parties .
It has to be said that all of this has come to nothing and that , in fact , recent events seem to have closed the door on any serious attempt to restart negotiations .
Although , like William of Orange , I believe that it is neither necessary to have hope in order to embark on a course of action nor is it necessary to succeed in order to persevere , I feel that we must welcome the fact , Mr Solana , that you are ceaseless , as you have just demonstrated , in making every possible effort to give renewed hope , which is so badly needed in that part of the world , to the Israeli and Palestinian peoples .
We can only encourage you to pursue all initiatives for cooperation between the United Nations , the United States and the most directly involved Arab States , in order to put forward proposals , in conjunction with them , on actions that are crucial to restoring mutual trust and respect , without which the current downward spiral of violence can never be halted .
This is why I am not in favour of our Parliament today playing the role of excommunicator .
As Commissioner Patten said in his last speech to this House , ' What is past , is past ' .
What we are interested in is the future and the immediate future .
I also feel that I am summing up the opinion of the majority of Members when I repeat that we in Parliament are ready and willing to fulfil our mandate to take the initiative by issuing another invitation - why not President Cox ? - to the representatives of the two States at the highest level , perhaps even Mr Arafat himself , to come and explain their intentions to us , as the speakers of the Palestinian Legislative Council and the Knesset did in September 2000 .
By the same token , we would like to encourage you to give positive consideration , in conjunction with the Presidency-in-Office of the Council , to the possibility of holding an ambitious peace conference along the lines of the conference held in Madrid , in which , Mr Solana , you played such an important part , as you reminded us .
In our own interests and for the sake of coherence with the spirit of our unreserved commitment to the fight against terrorism , we must play as active a role as possible in saving the peace process , while respecting the legitimate rights of the region ' s peoples .
Mr President , the European reaction , which has been somewhat more coherent than usual , has come at the right time .
It has now become quite clear that Mr Sharon ' s policy is leading nowhere .
When there are no political prospects on the horizon , the Old Testament prescription of ' an eye for an eye , a tooth for a tooth ' leads directly to horror and to chaos .
Bloodshed leads to further bloodshed .
This is a return to the Middle Ages , even to prehistoric times .
It is therefore high time that the Council of the European Union , the Commission and all our governments spoke up , loudly and clearly , whatever the President of the United States might think .
It is Mr Sharon , and not Mr Arafat , who has the power to end the conflict .
How can he do this ?
Simply by complying with international law , by ending the repressive occupation of Palestine and by withdrawing behind Israel ' s internationally recognised borders .
The best way to protect both Israeli and Palestinian citizens is to re-establish a proper border between the two peoples .
The way out of the deadlock of hatred does not lie in the humiliation and the destabilisation of Mr Arafat .
It lies in land distribution and in acknowledging Palestinian nationhood , not in the medium term , but immediately .
Mr Solana , Mr Patten , you must state this quite clearly .
This is the urgent message that all of Europe ' s representatives should be conveying .
Mr President , I too congratulate the High Representative , Mr Solana , and Commissioner Patten for their untiring work .
We share your frustration at the lack of outcomes .
Has the time come now for us to move on from dialogue and move into shared partnerships , overcoming perceived religious differences to tackle common human evils of poverty , ill health and illiteracy ?
Surely the place today for dialogue is within Islam , between Muslim and Muslim , to work out ways of discarding false jihads , rejecting distorted interpretations of the Koran that lead inevitably to misguided martyrdoms and terrorist assaults .
Islam is a faith that promotes peace , equality and a secure life .
Meanwhile we should tackle the lack of democracy in the oil-rich states .
Here we can assist through building civil society and use means such as our association agreement with Egypt to exert undoubted influence .
High Representative Solana mentioned the Islamic Republic of Iran .
My view is his as well .
I believe we should open a Commission office in Tehran as soon as possible .
This is an Islamic state , and yet a democracy ; it has Sharia law , and yet a parliament .
Surely Iran is part of the solution rather than part of the problem - a peaceful society in a violent region .
I thank our Commissioner and our High Representative and their staff for all their work .
Mr President , Israeli Premier Ariel Sharon 's recent remark that he regrets not having killed Yasser Arafat in Lebanon in 1982 is unforgivable .
But I suppose we should not be surprised : Mr Sharon 's own terrorist behaviour in Lebanon , when he permitted the massacres in the Sabra and Shatila refugee camps , was subsequently condemned by Israel 's Kahane Commission of Inquiry .
Given this fact , it is regrettable that he was subsequently elected as Prime Minster of Israel , this being the root of many of the current problems .
Current Israeli policy is ludicrous and counterproductive .
How can they make demands on Arafat to behave as if he was the leader of a normal state , while at one and the same time they make him a virtual prisoner in his own home , destroy his airport and his broadcasting station and humiliate him ?
Who do they want to replace him with ?
In the post-11 September situation , the European Union has been oversensitive in its approach to the Middle East .
We are indeed an honest broker and we should be vigorous in that approach .
The fact that the Americans are indebted to us for the solidarity and the support that we provided when they needed it should mean that we are entitled to a reciprocal response from them .
And instead of being the puppet of Israel , they should join with us in an even-handed policy approach to the tragedy in the Middle East .
If that is not forthcoming , then we should act on our own .
It is frustrating that the United States through its present stance is becoming much more part of the problem than part of the solution .

Mr President , I thank Mr Solana and Mr Patten for continuing , in spite of everything , with their already excessively longstanding efforts to achieve peace in the Middle East .
We are clearly facing a frustrating , cruel and , if I may say so , surreal , situation .
It is surreal because we are facing a situation in which the Prime Minister of Israel does not support the constructive conclusions of his Foreign Affairs Minister .
It is also surreal because Mr Sharon - who regrets not having destroyed Mr Arafat , who he describes as irrelevant , in Beirut in 1982 , and who calls the Palestinian Authority a terrorist organisation - is meeting with three notable members of this so-called terrorist organisation .
It is surreal because Mr Arafat is under great pressure to combat terrorism but , at the same time , Israel - and we are allowing it - is bombing and thereby destroying the resources available to the Palestinian Authority for combating that terrorism .
This surrealism , however , is welcome if it can bring us closer to peace and development in the region , not only for Palestine .
I would like to say however - and I hope I am wrong - that I hope these talks by Mr Sharon with these supposed terrorists from a supposed terrorist organisation , are not simply another attempt to gain time before his meeting with President Bush in Washington tomorrow .
I would like to ask the High Representative , Mr Solana , a question relating to the famous seized vessel , the Karim-A : it appears that the people who are trying to ascertain whether the evidence of Iran ' s involvement is reliable are working on the basis of stronger evidence than the appearance of arms which are ' made in Iran ' , because we all know that the fact that arms are manufactured in a particular country does not necessarily mean that they are supplied by the government of that country .
Mr President , I say this - and I will end here - because , in this era of trilateral evil , and the demonisation of the situation and the desire to spread suspicions all over the place , it could be a fatal error to encourage suspicions of this type in relation to those invisible enemies which Mr Bush is currently dealing with .
Mr President , this debate has focused largely on the situation in the Middle East .
I am not sure that the largely one-sided tone of this Chamber is at all helpful .
I endorse Mr Brok 's call for a more balanced approach but as requested I also want to take the opportunity briefly to touch on another area of crisis which is of increasing concern at the moment and where the European Union has the capacity to exert some influence .
I am referring to Zimbabwe .
Even if electoral observers are allowed in , we must maintain the pressure on Mr Mugabe to deliver free and fair elections .
We do not want to be in a position of merely recording that the election was fixed and standing back and wringing our hands afterwards .
We want the presence of observers to deter violence and electoral fraud so that the Zimbabwean people can make a genuinely free choice .
Many of us continue to be alarmed by reports from inside Zimbabwe about the situation on the ground .
I am referring to the fact that five MDC supporters have been killed in the past week , that MDC demonstrations and rallies have been disrupted by the police , that the independent press is restricted , the Independent correspondent , Basildon Peta , was earlier today arrested under the Public Order and Security Act and the Australian journalist Sally Sara has been refused admission .
Taken together one might think that these matters already constitute a breach of EU conditions .
I have some questions for Mr Solana .
What representations are being made to the Government of South Africa to apply greater regional pressure on the Mugabe government ?
Are the measures for the implementation of smart sanctions now in place ?
What level of deterioration in the situation will trigger these sanctions ?
Is the European Union 's response being fully coordinated with that of the United States ?
Thank you , Mr President , talking about the conflict in the Middle East means being faced with the substantial dilemma of striking a balance between Israel ' s right to safe borders and a viable Palestinian state .
We are further from this goal than ever before , or so it seems .
Nobody feels safe anymore , either in Israel or in the Palestinian state .
Nobody appears to be able to play an objective role in getting the peace process back on track .
The extremists set the agenda , and the Americans seem to tolerate the tough stance adopted by Prime Minister Sharon .
Whichever way one defines the position of President Arafat , it seems to me that , without him , chaos would descend on the Palestinian Regions .
What can the European Union do ?
In my view , we should mainly keep the channels of communication open .
I back those fellow MEPs who say that we must continue talks with both parties and exert pressure on Israel to accept the Palestinian Authority as the only significant interlocutor , and so find the way back to consultation .
However , we must also continue to ask Mr Arafat to tackle the terrorists on his own home turf .
The European Union should be prepared to postpone a certain form of cooperation with Israel in this context , but not to rule such postponement out in respect of the Palestinian Authority either , should it transpire that the fight against terrorism is not being taken seriously .
This brings me to yet another point which I should like to put to Mr Solana .
The conflict in the Middle East is also tied in with the relationship between the EU and the United States , and this issue is also important in the fight against terrorism .
In addition , I should like to find out his reaction to the statements by President Bush who talks about the axis of evil and the three countries he refers to by this .
What is the EU ' s reaction to this ?
Is he driving a new wedge between the European Union and the United States ?
I would particularly like to know what implications these statements by President Bush have for the policy of the European Union , particularly with regard to Iran .
I am interested to know how the Council assesses Iran , but also the other countries which are being accused by the Americans of state support for terrorism .
In my opinion , this will be an important issue in the time to come , also in connection with the fresh debate on the military superiority of the United States and the military weakness of the European Union .
Mr President , as the last Member to speak in today 's debate , it appears to me that there has been an unusual degree of unanimity , accompanied both by concern and a determination to bring about some sort of happy ending .
Are we really in the worst stage of the Palestinian crisis or has the tragedy risen to its climax , to be followed by catharsis and a way out ?
Without wishing to judge , we must admit that Sharon 's policy has even made victims of the Israelis : he has painted himself into a corner with a no-win policy .
Perhaps Sharon dreams of a final solution to the Palestine problem , to complete the circle of one of the darkest periods in the history of Europe .
But America must take its share of the blame for failing to understand that supporting no-win policies basically undermines its own policy and role .
Are we Europeans merely bystanders here ?
No , we are not .
I believe that the proposals made by both Commissioner Pattern and the High Representative , Mr Solana , and everything else said during the debate , are very serious proposals with the potential to become practical policy .
Nor do I think that we , the European Union , are mere bystanders doomed , like Sisyphus , to roll the boulder to the top of the mountain and then watch others toss it back over the edge .
We must , however , also turn our attention to other matters because now we have a crisis in the Middle East and tension on the borders of the European Union .
And then we have another crisis within Europe .
The Balkan crisis .
In this sense , Mr Solana was right to comment on the state of flux around Albania , around Kosovo , around Montenegro and the area in general , where there is not so much a fragile equilibrium as an unstable equilibrium , which is far worse .
The success of any endeavour which , in the Balkans in particular , has been undertaken mainly by the European Union , must be based on - and we must insist on - a fundamentally political solution , because that is where , in the final analysis , we shall be judged on our ability to manage crises peaceably and bring about political results .
I should just like to place on record our gratitude to the Spanish President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Ramón de Miguel , for being here for the entire afternoon to listen to this debate .
Frequently that is not the case in these debates .
Mr President , I will try to be brief and to start by thanking you all - those who are here , those who have left - very much for your support for our efforts to bring peace to an area which , as I said at the very beginning , is geographically close to us and also very close to our hearts , minds and values .
I would stress once again that the difficulty of the problem is not the absence of a mechanism to provide a solution to the crisis .
We already have the Mitchell report , which contains the steps to be followed , and it has been accepted by both sides .
The problem is not that we do not have rails on which the train should be travelling but that we have not been able to get the train out of the station .
The train cannot leave the station until the requirement of a seven-day period of complete calm has been fulfilled .
But what happens ?
When you set seven days of complete calm as a precondition , you can always find somebody who is not for the peace process and who , at the last minute , can engineer a catastrophe .
Therefore , you are back to square one .
That has happened on a couple of occasions .
This manner of doing things hands the initiative to the most radical people and takes it away from the moderates .
That is the problem we have at this point in time .
Let us hope that the modest beginnings of conversations - I would not call them negotiations between the two sides - held right now , yesterday , tomorrow , maybe the day after tomorrow , maybe at the beginning of the week , will produce at least a change in the way they handle the crisis , by not placing the solution in the hands of those who do not want the process to move forward .
I have not received many questions .
Therefore I am not going to respond to the very interesting remarks you have made .
At least 90 % of your statements have been supportive .
Two questions have been put very clearly and I would like to answer them before I make my final remarks .
On the question by Mr Menéndez del Valle regarding Karine-A , I do not have the intelligence on which several countries have based their statements .
Several countries - some are members of the European Union - state that their intelligence has established a link .
Whether it is a state-to-state or state-group-to-state-group link is an open question .
But there is no doubt that some kind of link exists between the Iranian people and some Palestinians .
The second question I would like to answer is from Mr Brok , although he is not here .
This joint effort is being carried out every day on the ground by representatives of the European Union , of the United States , of the Secretary-General of the UN and of the Russian Federation .
They work together every day .
I would remind you also that we - that is , I , Mr Powell , Mr Ivanov , Mr Koffi Annan - meet regularly to deal with this issue collectively .
We need to be tenacious and persevering .
We also need a change in both societies , and not only in the authorities that lead the countries .
Those societies have indeed changed very profoundly in the last few years .
Israel has changed .
The strong , broad-based peace camp there has not disappeared , but it has been reduced .
The same thing has happened on the other side .
Frustration has created a sentiment that the peace camp cannot bring about peace in a reasonable period of time .
That lack of trust and of confidence between both sides was not present before .
I remember very well the relative friendship in Oslo between Arafat and Peres and between Rabin and Arafat .
That has disappeared .
We have to do something to reconstruct society vis-à-vis society and we , as Europeans , have a tremendous amount of work to do there , to bring these societies together , because they will have to live together .
Whatever we can do through this Parliament , through the institutions , through the NGOs , we must do .
I would like to tell you two little anecdotes , one from a very good friend of mine who was in the peace camp in Jerusalem .
The other day he told me that he would not dare send his daughter and his son to school in the same bus .
That is a dramatic and profound change in the heart and in the mind of somebody who would otherwise be a fighter for peace .
On the other side , on the Palestinian side , you go to a hospital , you talk to a paediatrician and he tells you how a little boy has been killed .
This is a terrible blow to trust and confidence among people .
Therefore we have to work also with societies .
We have to engage societies , universities , schools , doctors , etc. to impress upon them that they have to live together and that Europe will be behind that sentiment of reconciliation .
That is something we have to do .
I will conclude by recalling a beautiful phrase from Yitzhak Rabin who , without any doubt , was the architect of the Oslo process , together with Shimon Peres .
He used to say something that is still valid .
We have to fight against terrorism , as if there were no negotiations , and we have to negotiate as if there were no terrorism .
That is the approach we have to rally around today .
It is necessary to continue the negotiations , to continue talking , to continue moving the political scene - the centre of gravity has to be politics .
Until they put politics at the centre of gravity , it will be very difficult to move the process forwards .
We can be proud of what we as Europeans are doing .
We do not have the capacity to solve the problem , but we can move in the right direction as soon as possible and aim for peace .
This is not a question only of values .
It is part of our history , no doubt about that , but it is also part of our future , the future of this European Union , of the countries in an enlarged European Union and of the countries of the Mediterranean and the Middle East , which are part of our family .
Pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) I have received seven motions for resolution to wind up the debate .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday .
Several colleagues - Mr Cohn-Bendit , General Morillon and some others - made a number of suggestions as to initiatives Parliament might take .
I am very open to working with the Conference of Presidents and colleagues on those .
Last week I had a very productive private meeting with Ambassador Moratinos to seek his advice as to how best to move some of these ideas forward .
We will talk about that in the appropriate forum .
Vertical agreements and concerted practices in the automobile industry
The next item is the Commission communication on vertical agreements and concerted practices in the automobile industry .
Mr President , it is my pleasure to make this - albeit brief - presentation of the draft motor vehicle Block Exemption Regulation , which the Commission adopted this morning .
Parliament is aware of the relatively severe practical limitations of the current Block Exemption Regulation , which is due to expire next September .
It is not sufficiently beneficial for consumers , particularly where they wish to exercise their right to a single market .
Moreover , the rules currently in force hinder the development of new methods , including Internet distribution ; lastly , access to technical information for independent repairers needs to be improved too .
We have therefore put together this Block Exemption Regulation , which the Commission has adopted today , and I would like briefly to outline its main points .
The basic line underpinning the regulation is that the new system must be more stringent than the existing regulations and must allow greater competition on the sales and after-sales markets .
What are the main characteristics ?
Firstly , as regards the sale of new vehicles , flexibility and freedom to choose are the draft ' s key points .
When they select their distributors , vehicle manufacturers can choose between a selective distribution system and a distribution based on territorial exclusivity , but they can no longer combine the two systems .
Both systems allow a vehicle manufacturer to guarantee that the members of its distribution network are qualified and that its distribution network covers all the areas of Europe , thus ensuring total coverage of the territory .
In both cases , the rights linked to the single market will be much , much better safeguarded than at present .
In an exclusive distribution system , distributors will be assigned to a specific geographical area such as a city , within which no other distributor will be permitted to open a showroom or carry out sales activities .
An exclusive dealership may , however , sell to any potential buyer that approaches its showroom .
This also applies to independent resellers , to those known as grey resellers .
These resellers could be supermarkets , for example , and they would exploit the price differentials to buy vehicles in countries where the prices are lower and then sell them in Member States where prices are higher , thus helping to create a genuine single market .
If , on the other hand , manufacturers opt for selective distribution , the distributors can advertise and send out customised mail shots and e-mails to consumers throughout Europe , even visiting them in person .
Consumers could , however , still encounter difficulties in dealing with a dealership from another Member State , particularly as regards simple , direct contact with the foreign dealership , payment of invoices and agreements regarding the delivery of the vehicle .
We therefore deemed it necessary to adopt a more radical approach in order to bring about greater integration of the markets , making it genuinely possible for consumers to buy vehicles abroad .
A vehicle distributor must be able to open sales or delivery outlets closer to consumers ' places of residence , including in other Member States .
On a practical level , this means , for example , that an Amsterdam Volkswagen dealer could open a showroom in the United Kingdom and sell Volkswagen Golfs there at the Dutch retail price , which is 23 % lower than the British price .
This , of course , would create the necessary market conditions for reducing the currently considerable price differentials of motor vehicles in the European Union .
Then consumers are demanding multi-brand dealerships .
The draft regulation makes multi-brand selling much more simple .
The only permissible constraint is that the different brand models are displayed in different areas of a showroom so as to avoid confusion between brands .
This display method is already used in car showrooms and has proved universally satisfactory .
Moreover , the draft regulation seeks to reorganise the existing relationship between sales and after-sales services , allowing specialisation .
Distributors will be able to opt to provide after-sales services themselves , as dealerships currently do , or they will be able to subcontract to one or more authorised repairers .
These repairers must observe all the quality requirements set by the vehicle manufacturers .
In addition , block exemption makes intermediaries ' work much easier : one example is that of Virgin Cars , which buys vehicles on behalf of consumers and will now be able to find the best deal for consumers more easily .
All these factors give distributors more room for manoeuvre to organise their activities on the basis of market conditions , exploiting new sales opportunities and thus consolidating their independence from manufacturers .
Another way to reduce dealers ' dependence on manufacturers is by laying down the obligation for manufacturers to give sufficient grounds for deciding to cancel distribution contracts .
If the distributor does not agree with the grounds given , it can have recourse to a mediator or a court .
Moreover , the Commission has decreed , through this draft regulation , that a reasonable period of notice must be given before the cancellation of a contract , in most cases two years .
All these measures ensure that distributors can make full use of the new opportunities offered to them by this draft regulation .
I would now like to say a few words on after-sales services , which are also extremely important .
The new draft regulation seeks to ensure that consumers have a genuine choice and that they can have recourse to both authorised repairers and independent operators .
In the interests of the safety and reliability of all vehicles - we have placed great emphasis on this objective - we have to ensure that all operators can compete with each other in all sectors without this affecting the quality of the service provided , which must continue to be of the highest level .
The new regulation allows all vehicle manufacturers to set quality requirements which must be respected by all repairers who wish to be authorised repairers .
Manufacturers can therefore guarantee that the members of their network comply with high quality standards .
This avoids foreclosure of these markets as new operators could now be designated authorised repairers , provided , of course , that they are prepared to observe the requirements set by the vehicle manufacturers .
The proposal also lays down the benefit for dealerships whose contract has come to an end of being able to continue to operate as official dealerships of their brand for as long as they satisfy the quality requirements .
The general level of technical skill on the market is thus increased and a substantial Europe-wide network of official repairers is maintained . This will help to bring higher quality of service and greater road safety .
Moreover , we can expect the proposal to have a positive impact on employment and small and medium-sized businesses .
The proposal seeks to make it easier for independent operators on the after-sales market to compete .
In view of the increasing complexity of motor vehicles , it is important for independent repairers to have better access to all the necessary technical information , including diagnosis devices , equipment and training .
Any discrimination between official repairers which are part of the network and independent repairers is therefore unacceptable .
The proposed changes also encourage the use of spare parts which are cheaper but of equivalent quality , making repair work less costly .
I would like to end , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , by focusing on the procedure .
The next stage in the procedure is consultation with the European Parliament and the Member States and the publication of the draft regulation in the Official Journal .
This will allow the Commission to receive comments from all the interested parties before adopting the final regulation .
The whole process should be concluded before next summer .
I am especially looking forward to giving a more detailed presentation of the draft regulation to the Parliamentary Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on 19 February and to continuing the fruitful dialogue already underway between the Commission and Members of Parliament , particularly Mr Konrad , who is your rapporteur for the subject , and the Chairman , Mrs Randzio-Plath .
Mr President , we have addressed a complex subject : a subject which is also extremely important , practical in nature and has wider significance .
If we want the European citizens genuinely to identify with European integration , we cannot afford to let such a key element of the single market as that in motor vehicles to continue not to be a single market , for it would be unfair to the consumer .
Mr President , Commissioner Monti , ladies and gentlemen , many thanks to you first of all , Mr Monti , for setting this proposal before Parliament .
We very much welcome the fact that this proposal 's first outing has brought you to Strasbourg , and this is much appreciated .
As became clear during discussions in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , I welcome many points of this proposal , including those on the sale of more than one make of car , original spare parts , access to technical information , and liberalisation as regards the separation of service and sales , but I have a query about how freedom of establishment within the internal market is to be regulated .
We in Germany have a regulation entitled the Group Exemption Regulation , which states that a regulatory framework should continue to exist , subject to a time limit .
That is something I welcome .
The content , though , amounts to liberalisation if all it says is that individual dealers may be restricted at national level but entitled to set up as many subsidiaries as they like within the EU internal market .
This modifies these rules and makes a nonsense of them .
It will create problems for us and we must discuss this .
Such is my first important question in this context .
Mr President , there is much to be welcomed in the Commissioner 's statement , in particular its acknowledgement of the role of the grey market in bringing prices down , the use of the Internet , car supermarkets in the proper trade in spare parts and servicing .
There is one question I have to ask .
It looks as if in different national markets exclusivity can be maintained in a position which could be anti-competitive .
How wide , in a given national market , could these exclusive deals with the dealer networks remain ?
Mr President , I should also like to thank Mr Monti for coming to Parliament today and making a very clear statement on a very complex issue .
It would have been very helpful if we could have had the text in advance , but I understand and hope it will be available very quickly .
I should like to raise two points with him .
What concerns British consumers - and much of it is addressed in his proposal - is clearly the question of price .
Does the Commissioner see a role for putting price bans and price guarantees in the regulation so it is reviewed after a certain period to ensure that prices are converging ?
That would give a clear signal about the direction he wants to go .
The second issue concerns freedom of dealers and their ability to invest .
He has moved substantially in the right direction but I am concerned , in the example he gave , about the ability of a dealer to Holland to go and invest and set up a dealership in the UK .
How is that going to protect dealers who already have a substantial investment ?
Would it not be much better for them to be able to go and buy cars in Holland and sell them to consumers there , rather than have what could be a random solution which would actually dissipate the impact of the dealers ' independence that he wants to give them ?
I hope there will be further occasions , in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , for example , to go more into the detail .
What seems to me links the first two speeches is a concern that indeed would be there if a location clause could exist .
One distinctive feature of today 's Commission decision on the draft regulation is that the location clause is not there at any percentage level .
This should go a long way towards alleviating those concerns .
As regards making sure that prices converge , this is one of the objectives of the overall proposal .
As you know , we keep regular track of the convergence or non-convergence of prices .
We produce a report twice a year on the price of different models in the different Member States .
That will be a powerful means of gauging the consequences , among other things , of this new regulation .
We have resisted the temptation to become price regulators and to link specific competition arrangements for distribution to the size of the price differentials .
It is not for us to say that this price differential is acceptable , but that this plus one is not .
We are working on the roots of the phenomena , so that price convergence should develop .
As for the Anglo-Dutch example , my answer briefly is that both modalities would be allowed , namely the setting up of dealers ' outlets in the other countries and unrestricted trade without changing the location of the dealers .
Mr President , on a point of order : before you ask the first speaker to make a contribution , I indicated that I wished to be added to the list .
Mr President , I have a short question for the Commissioner .
I was the rapporteur seven and a half years ago when we first discussed this project .
I am pleased to see that the Commission has moved so far , but I still have a question .
Maybe I am too cynical and too liberal , but why do we need to have rules ?
Why cannot we just use the Treaty as it is ?
Why do we need to have special rules for car dealers and for car sales ?
So far as I am concerned we could use the normal competition rules .
Mr President , I support Commissioner Monti 's initiative and I am pleased that his Commission colleagues are also supporting him .
Certainly the current rules benefit car manufacturers and dealers and disadvantage consumers .
I see this particular proposal as upholding the principles of the single market , and I am convinced that it will lead to cheaper cars for EU citizens .
I have one major concern and that concerns my own country .
Is the Commissioner aware that the vehicle registration tax in Ireland will add anything between 50 % and 100 % to the price of cars ?
So an initiative like this will be virtually meaningless unless the Commission is able to persuade the Irish authorities to reduce the vehicle registration tax .
I know tax is a national competence , but we are moving towards harmonisation of tax and I would therefore humbly request that the Commissioner approach the Irish authorities to seek a reduction in the vehicle registration tax , so that Irish citizens can enjoy the same benefit as their continental counterparts .
I should like to congratulate the Commissioner on steering this package , which was not entirely unanimous , through the Commission so skilfully .
The same problems exist in the UK : 52 models examined in the UK are still more expensive .
My question is the same as Mrs Riis-Jørgensen 's .
If we have the partial reforms that the Commissioner is proposing here today , and we carry those out in opening up the market to grey trade supermarkets , in particular Internet sales , is it not the case that the block exemption becomes obsolete , and when will the day be when we actually get rid of these rules ?
Finally , Commissioner , in 1999 I asked you a question in response to which you told me that cars in Britain would be cheaper if Britain joined the euro .
Is that still your position , and what difference do you think that would make in terms of price differentials ?
I realise , not without relief , that I am not the Commissioner responsible either for taxation or for monetary union , but merely the Commissioner for humble competition policy which , nevertheless , has a role to play and tries to play it vigorously - with the support of Parliament , which is apparent once again today .
On competition proper , why not be even more liberal and refrain from applying sector-specific rules ?
Well , we have looked into this and a detailed analysis has brought us to the following conclusion . If we did not have specific rules for this industry competition-wise , the industry would fall under the application of the block-exemption regulation on vertical restrictions .
That would have two main drawbacks .
It would allow the industry to use very similar distribution agreements to those permitted at present , on which our evaluation report was pretty negative .
Also applying the general regime would not be a satisfactory means of improving competition on the after-sales market .
Independent repairers could be foreclosed from the market as a result .
This is clearly something which could not be accepted .
Furthermore , all motor vehicles would most likely continue to be distributed through the same type of selective and exclusive distribution systems if no new regulatory regime was introduced .
Last , but not least , the general regime does not offer provisions which are crucial in the car sector to ensure benefits for the consumer .
This is the case with the so-called availability clause , which allows , for instance , a British consumer to buy a right-hand-drive car in a left-hand-drive country .
So , although we are in principle against sector-specific rules , as you have seen with the telecom package with my colleague , Mr Liikanen , we have moved some way towards the adoption of general competition rules .
But here the particular nature of the situation has led us to firmly believe that a sector-specific rule would be more appropriate .
As for supermarkets , for example , I can only say that , during the lengthy consultation process undertaken by the Commission , no supermarket or association speaking on its behalf directly expressed a desire to sell cars on a regular basis .
On the other hand , it would not be true to suggest that the draft regulation adopted today gives no business opportunities to supermarkets .
A supermarket could become a mono- or multi-brand sales dealer if it satisfied the criteria laid down by the manufacturer .
Similarly , it may act as an intermediary for consumers .
Finally , on the two issues which do not relate to competition but have a bearing on prices , tax and the euro , I will not go beyond the answer I gave on the issue of the UK , cars and the euro .
As for taxation , the honourable Member underlined that this is a national responsibility and it is tempting , but perhaps not entirely consistent , to argue that this is to be jealously guarded as a national prerogative and yet ask the Commissioner to lobby actively for harmonisation .
I will , however , pass this message on to my colleague , Mr Bolkestein .
Mr President , Commissioner , everyone knows today that cars are complex and highly sophisticated products .
If you now allow dealers to subcontract maintenance and repairs , an entire continuous chain of responsibility will be broken .
This should cause us to be concerned for the consumer .
How , in your opinion , Commissioner , will car manufacturers be able to honour their guarantees , ensure compliance with quality standards and , if necessary , recall vehicles if they now have only an indirect link with subcontractors ?
Mr President , Commissioner , I believe that the debate does not concern either the Commission ' s final objectives or its principles in relation to this proposal , but rather the possible unwanted consequences which may result from the application of the future regulation of the sector .
Therefore , given the removal of the localisation clause , I would ask you , Commissioner , whether you think there should be a transitional period for small distribution companies , bearing in mind the investments made or under way in this sector , which have a great influence on the level of employment .
Commissioner , I congratulate you on the presentation of this document which is the last of the raft of rules relating to vertical restrictions .
I would like to make some comments .
You have given the example of the distributor in Amsterdam who could open a branch in London .
Let us bear in mind that distributors are dependent - as always , but even more in this case , given the quantity of the investments to be made - on manufacturers , and that contracts do not extend for very long periods .
It is true that , in the event of a resolution , they could go to tribunals , but I believe that , in the majority of EU countries - at least , Commissioner , in yours and in mine - the indefinite extension of cases would lead to the bankruptcy of distributors .
Therefore , given that selective distribution is allowed , I would ask you whether , in order to achieve equality of prices between the different countries , it would not be more sensible , for example , to restrict this prohibition of the selective vendor selling exclusively to the final consumer or to other members of the network .
That would favour parallel importers who would contribute to lowering prices .
I should like to thank the Commissioner for the clear account , and I am of the opinion that what is being proposed can optimise and improve the internal market principles .
To that extent , I am in support of the proposals .
The Anglo-Dutch example which the Commissioner quoted is related , inter alia , to the additional taxes which are being levied in each Member State .
I know that taxes fall within the national competences , but I believe that the Commission is entitled to intervene if competition and internal market regulation are hindered .
You state that you yourself are not responsible for taxation , but it is always the Commission that does the talking .
If I therefore address the Commissioner , I assume that , formally , I am addressing the Commission and not specifically the Commissioner .
I thus assume that you can take this message with you , as my Irish fellow MEP pointed out .
In addition , I should like to ask why it is not possible to take a registered car from another Member State to the country where you live .
In this way , far better use could , in fact , be made of the internal market .
Commissioner , you have already heard many Members who believe that the approximation of prices must also be achieved by means of fiscal harmonisation , possibly more than by means of this regulation .
The current regulation affects 100 % of the distribution contracts .
Nevertheless , you are establishing very tough limitation clauses in relation to the definition of a retailer .
Do you not believe , Commissioner , that this new regulation could create legal uncertainty amongst dealers , which may also endanger the continuity of the investments they are making and , also , to a certain degree , the employment of these dealers throughout the European Union , who number more than one million people ?
Are you not rather afraid that , with this policy of opening up competition , the large-scale distributors may benefit to the detriment of the small dealerships ?
I will be brief .
I want to welcome the announcement by the Commissioner .
We will have to wait and see how it actually works in practice .
The companies we are dealing with here are quite powerful .
Does the Commissioner have an understanding with Member States that they will not top up their vehicle taxation as a means of recovering income lost as a result of lower prices , thereby wiping out the economic benefit to consumers ?
In addition , would it be possible to make displaying or advertising pre-tax prices along with post-tax prices obligatory ?
Generally we have post-tax prices advertised .
Finally , what impact , if any , would this have on guaranteeing on a Europe-wide basis the car which may be bought in another state ?
Mr President , the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy considers it an important question as to what effects this will have on technical legislation , specifically with regard to on-board-diagnostics or the various interfaces .
How , too , are we to ensure actual adherence to working standards and norms ?
Is it envisaged that there will be some sort of third-party certification , with neutral third parties checking that the standards have actually been kept to ?
In this area some action concerning taxation is important .
The Commission has a role to play in this .
I would remind you that the Commission 's position for the Nice IGC was that there should be a shift to qualified-majority voting in those areas of taxation which are crucial for the functioning of the single market .
I would not expect Member States to top up with higher taxes .
They would face constraints in doing so .
Will the new system bring about legal uncertainty for dealers ?
I believe not - on the contrary .
We are also confident of avoiding the sometimes-feared economic consequences for dealers and employment .
The draft regulation offers former dealers the opportunity to become official repayers within the manufacturers ' network and to locate where they wish .
At any rate we already know that , this draft regulation aside , several manufacturers are planning to restructure and reduce the number of official network dealers in their systems .
As to the European warranty , it remains in the proposal .
Networks have to provide warranty , irrespective of where a car is bought .
Thank you very much for your dedication and brevity , Mr Monti .
The debate is closed .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is Questions to the Commission ( B5-0002 / 2002 ) .
We are going to change the order of the first two questions in accordance with the Members and the Commissioners .
Part I
Question No 39 by ( H-0030 / 02 ) :
Subject : Nuclear safety : Bulgaria 's failure to comply with EU partnership agreement and agreements to decommission reactors at Kozloduy With regard to the decommissioning of units 1 and 2 of the nuclear plant at Kozloduy by the end of 2002 , Mr Kovachev , the Bulgarian Energy Minister said on 8 January 2002 that his country will not be honouring its commitments to close down and dismantle the dangerous , old-style reactors , as provided by the revised partnership agreement between the European Union ( EU ) and Bulgaria , and the Sofia Memorandum , which Bulgaria signed with the Commission in 1999 .
How will the Commission ensure that the commitments contained in the partnership agreement to decommission units 3 and 4 will be honoured , and what stage has been reached in the decommissioning of units 1 and 2 , given that all four units are unsafe and cannot be upgraded at reasonable cost ?
Can Bulgaria ask for the opening of negotiations on the energy chapter under the pre-accession process when it refuses to honour its commitments to the EU on nuclear safety and has not drawn up a new energy strategy to bring it into line with free market rules ( production and pricing ) and the opening of the market to competition ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission is unable to confirm the information according to which the Bulgarian government has announced its intention not to abide by the agreements entered into in respect of the decommissioning of the Kozloduy nuclear power station , nor can we attribute such a statement to the Bulgarian Energy Minister , Mr Kovatchiev .
Differing opinions have in fact been expressed in political circles in Bulgaria during the current public debate on the closure of the Kozloduy nuclear power station - specifically of its units 1 to 4 .
Information available to the Commission indicates that , in a statement on 10 January 2002 on the early decommissioning of the four reactor blocks at Kozloduy , the Bulgarian Energy Minister mentioned 2008 or 2010 as possible dates for the closure of Blocks 3 and 4 .
The Bulgarian Energy Minister 's statement did not refer to Blocks 1 and 2 .
The situation is that , in the agreement I reached with the Bulgarian government in 1999 , we agreed on the decommissioning of Blocks 1 and 2 by 2002 , that is this year , and that we would have discussions with the Bulgarian government on the decommissioning of Blocks 3 and 4 in connection with the revision of that country 's energy strategy and that a decision on this would be reached before the date originally envisaged .
The Commission made it clear that it understood this to mean that 3 and 4 would be decommissioned by 2006 at the latest .
I must , though , say quite clearly that Bulgaria has not yet come to a formal decision on this matter .
This means that we cannot , of course , complete the energy chapter of negotiations with Bulgaria as long as we do not have a definite decommissioning date set down for Blocks 3 and 4 .
The agreement I reached with the Bulgarian government at that time constitutes part of the European Union 's common negotiating position in the energy chapter with regard to Kozloduy .
It is clear , therefore , that this chapter cannot be completed without compliance with the content of this agreement .
The matter is clear to that extent , and , on the Commission 's behalf , I now repeat that the decommissioning of Blocks 1 to 4 of the nuclear power station at Kozloduy in accordance with the agreement entered into is an absolutely indispensable requirement for the conclusion of accession negotiations with the Republic of Bulgaria .
Work has begun on the decommissioning of Blocks 1 and 2 and the right administrative and technical conditions are in place .
As an international fund stands ready to finance these operations , I am working on the assumption that everything will go according to plan .
I do not share the concern expressed by some that the decommissioning of reactor Blocks 1 to 4 will result in major economic difficulties , particularly as regards competitiveness .
The Commission has calculated that Bulgaria has considerable over-capacity in energy production , and , as a new nuclear power station of modern design is being built , any loss to Bulgaria will be compensated for , and any problems are , in our view , perfectly capable of being surmounted .
To sum up , we have not the least indication that Bulgaria will pull out of the commitment it has made .
I would also like to expressly underline that the Bulgarian Prime Minister , at my most recent meeting with him , quite expressly confirmed to me that his government stands by the undertaking given by its predecessor .
Commissioner , thank you for your reply confirming that reactors 1 and 2 will be shut down this year , in 2002 , that work has in fact already started , and that reactors 3 and 4 will be shut down by 2006 at the latest , as originally agreed , as the President of the Commission , Mr Prodi , has assured me in writing and as you have stressed repeatedly .
I should like to ask you to keep up the pressure here because there will always be uncertainty about the security of supply . I should like to know exactly what the Commission has done about the single , interconnected operating system which could be used to exchange energy so that we do not have countries wondering what will happen now that reactors 1 to 4 at Kozloduy are to be shut down and whether or not they will be short of energy ?
My second question concerns the loan granted to Bulgaria to bring reactors 5 and 6 up to Western safety standards .
What has been done about reactors 5 and 6 ?
In order to avoid misunderstandings , I have to again tell you , Mr Trakatellis , in the clearest terms that there is as yet no binding promise by the Bulgarian government that Blocks 3 and 4 will be decommissioned by 2006 ; there is , rather , an agreement that the decision on decommissioning these blocks will be taken earlier than the Bulgarian government originally planned .
The Commission stated in this communiqué that it understands that closure will take place by no later than 2006 .
Formal notification by the Bulgarian government is still required , but it is certain that that is on its way .
Moreover , Mr Trakatellis , I have to tell you that energy provision in Bulgaria is a matter for the Bulgarian government .
Nor is the issue of energy efficiency in the Balkans and Bulgaria 's position in the energy market a matter within the immediate remit of the Commission .
I can only reiterate our estimation that the decommissioning of Blocks 1 to 4 will not result in an energy shortage in Bulgaria , where there is , on the contrary , substantial overcapacity .
I entirely agree with you that it is a matter of absolute necessity to inform the Bulgarian public in precise terms of the need for decommissioning and the measures that are to accompany this , as in fact - as you are no doubt well aware - the people of Bulgaria do not , as a whole , understand this requirement by the international community .
We always behave as if these things were self-evident , and so I am grateful to you for addressing this point .
The overwhelming majority of Bulgaria 's population does not see it as at all self-evident that the country 's largest and most important power station should be decommissioned under pressure from the international community .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would be interested to know to which technical norms and standards the Commission actually refers when deciding which blocks are dangerous and have to be closed down .
Mr Rübig , the Commission did nothing of the sort , and indeed it cannot .
This was a political condition for the opening of negotiations with Bulgaria , one that was laid upon us by the Member States .
This political condition was formulated by the Member States in consequence of an assessment carried out by the industrialised States as early as the beginning of the 1990s , in the course of which the safety of nuclear power stations in Eastern Europe was subjected to examination .
This determined which of the nuclear power stations were seen by the Western industrialised States as incapable of being retrofitted at reasonable cost .
I am , at the moment , unaware of what standards the States applied at the time .
If you are interested , though , I would be happy to initiate the relevant research on your behalf .
The Commission did not set any enquiries in motion , but performed its political function of achieving a result with the Bulgarian government as regards compliance with a political condition for the beginning of negotiations .
I congratulate you , Commissioner , on always being allowed to make statements on such scintillating subjects , first Temelin and now Kozloduy .
You must be a very happy man .
May I ask how much a decommissioning of this sort costs ?
What happens to the contaminated materials ?
Who pays for it all ?
How long does such decommissioning take ?
What actually happens if there is some sort of mishap before 2006 ?
Who pays then ?
Who bears the costs ?
Following on from your answer to Mr Rübig 's question , do you not also believe that we are yet again seeing how urgently necessary it is that we should have common European standards rather than always arriving at decommissioning dates by a process of rough estimation ?
Blocks 3 and 4 in 2006 - that is what we have said now .
Should we perhaps not make that 2004 or 2003 ?
What happens then if something goes wrong in 2005 ?
Madam , much as I regret it , the Commission bears no responsibility for the safety standards at nuclear power stations anywhere in the world , not even in Bulgaria .
Even if I were able to answer your technical question , I would not be permitted to .
Responsibility for the operation of the Kozloduy nuclear power station , for any safety problems connected with it and also for any accidents that might occur , is borne exclusively by the operator , that is , in this instance , the Republic of Bulgaria .
I must also make it clear that the Commission is not in a position to take on any responsibility as we are not in a position either to have any influence on how this nuclear power station is operated .
I have no personal view on how safe or dangerous this nuclear power station is .
I am quite happy to give you detailed information on the technical processes involved as soon as such information is available to me .
We have to work on the assumption that the time required to complete a project like the decommissioning of a nuclear power station , is to be reckoned in decades rather than years .
That means that we are dealing here with a very long-term operation , which may , under certain circumstances , also involve long-term commitments or burdens on the Community budget .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
As the author is not present , Question No 38 lapses .
We invite Mr Liikanen to take a seat in the front row .
Part II Questions to Commissioner Liikanen
Question No 41 by ( H-0054 / 02 ) :
Subject : Improving the regulatory environment for SMEs The internal market is an ideal environment in which European undertakings can conduct business .
However , some important obstacles to the free circulation of goods and services continue to hamper their operations .
Given the need highlighted at the Lisbon Summit and in the European Charter for Small Enterprises for an improvement in the regulatory environment , further action in this regard is required .
What steps is the Commission taking to that end ?
Mr President , the internal market has been of huge benefit to companies , but still more can be done .
Progress in this area is being watched within the framework of the Commission ' s Internal Market Strategy for Services , approved in November 1999 .
The Commission examines the Internal Market Strategy each year to evaluate the results achieved and suggest improvements .
The evaluation was last carried out in April .
One of the aims is to improve the operational environment for companies and special attention is paid to helping small enterprises in much of the action that is taken in association with this aim .
The Commission also monitors developments in the business climate for small enterprises with reference to the yearly report on the European Charter for Small Enterprises .
The report for 2002 will be coming out in the next few days and will assess the action to help small businesses that the Member States and the Commission have said they are taking .
The Conference of European Ministers responsible for SME policies to be held on 23 February in Aranjuez , in Spain , will be reporting on the conclusions of the report for 2002 , and they will be submitted to the European Council when it convenes in Barcelona .
At this stage I might say that there has been progress .
Progress has been made , for example , in such areas as access to finance and the exchange of good practice .
In addition , in December , an SME envoy was appointed whose task it will be to step up exchanges with small and medium-sized enterprises and their representative bodies .
He will work in the Enterprise Directorate-General and his job will be to act as liaison officer on issues such as opportunities for SMEs to acquire funding and exploit innovation as well as matters to do with competitiveness , better regulation , implementation of the internal market process , participation in EU programmes and how best to enhance consultation procedures .
Last year the Commission launched an initiative called ' Helping SMEs to go digital ' . The aim is to make SMEs aware of the opportunities offered by information networks .
Six events have been planned for this year in different Member States and there is to be a large-scale conference in Brussels .
The Commission ' s work to improve regulation is also making headway .
There have been a number of proposals to improve the situation , both in a White Paper on Governance in the European Union and in the Laeken communication on improving and simplifying the regulatory environment .
The proposals relate to the whole lifecycle of Community acts .
Under discussion are , for example , the need for more effective consultation with interest groups and civil society , an evaluation of Community action and costs , and a simplification of current laws .
By no later than June the Commission will have put forward a proposal for a straightforward action plan to simplify and improve the regulatory environment , after the Community ' s institutions and other interest groups have been heard .
The Enterprise Directorate-General will be actively involved in drawing up this plan and drawing on the experience gained from the business impact assessment system and the test project connected with it .
The conclusions drawn , as a result of this project , will be ready this month .
Commissioner , you have given me such a complete answer that I have few remaining doubts to ask you about .
Nevertheless , I would like to insist that the measures he says are going to be adopted , above all in relation to the simplification of the regulations , be genuinely implemented and applied as quickly as possible .
Great declarations , great words and great policies are all very well for existing undertakings , but it is essential that those who - inspired by the entrepreneurial spirit which we are so keen to promote - decide to create a new undertaking , are not faced with obstacles and difficulties which prevent them from going ahead .
Furthermore , and in order that this policy may be truly effective , information on actions implemented by the Commission must reach the smaller entrepreneurs , a sector which very much needs it .
Mr President , I agree with the honourable Member that words are words and only actions are important .
When our report appears this week on the SME Charter it will present a picture of what has been done in Member States .
It is very important for the Commission that we are able to present this year a thorough impact analysis of all new legislative proposals and that we know what the genuine costs to companies are , and that we always consider what the most simple solution might be .
I am prepared to go back over this matter with the honourable Member in minute detail .
But I agree : deeds are what is most important , whereas words are only good for a very short while .
I would like to pick up on the Commissioner 's last reply and I am delighted that he is talking about thorough impact assessment .
I would like to put it to him that at the moment impact assessments that we receive attached to Commission proposals in many cases are not thoroughly done , they are not looking at the full implications , they are not necessarily independent .
Would he agree with me that it is vital to have an interinstitutional arrangement for independent impact assessment so that when proposals come through this House and colleagues add burdens on business they are properly costed ?
Also , when the Council adds provisions to Commission proposals in common position , they should be properly costed too ?
Would he not share my view that this is the sort of bold proposal we want to see ?
I have to say that the proposals we have seen so far from the Commission on regulatory assessment are far too timid .
I share Mr Harbour 's view that there is a lot to improve in the impact assessment .
For that reason , when I took office I launched a project to create more solid methodologies for business impact assessment .
The results of this work are ready now in February .
Alongside this , the Commission proposed at the Göteborg Summit the need for sustainable impact assessments , which means impact assessments that include economic , social and environmental factors .
This work is now proceeding inside the Commission and is led by the Secretary-General .
I fully agree that we must have predictable accepted methodologies so that anybody can assess how we have come to these conclusions .
The Commission is ready to open the debate on these issues and to appear before the respective committees , for instance , to discuss what we have learned in our business impact assessments .
The Commission appreciates the importance of both business and sustainable impact assessments and the need to achieve them quickly .
Secondly , of course it does not mean that measures will not be taken if costs are incurred but we should at least try to assess the costs honestly and then an informed decision can be taken .
Mr Crowley arrived immediately before I gave him the floor .
If you wish to ask your question , the Commissioner will reply .
Question No 40 by Brian Crowley ( H-0025 / 02 ) :
Subject : Improving the business environment in 2002 and creating an inclusive eSociety
Will the Commission outline its proposals for 2002 aimed at improving the business environment , including for small and very small businesses , and will it indicate its time-scale for bringing forward the promised new initiatives aimed at consolidating the move towards an inclusive ' eSociety ' ?
The European Commission will publish within a week the annual report on the European Charter for Small Enterprises .
Through the annual report we monitor progress on the environment for small businesses .
The 2002 report evaluates actions reported by the Member States and the Commission in favour of small businesses .
The conclusions of the report will be presented to the Conference of European Ministers responsible for SME policies on 23 February and submitted to the European Council .
As I have already said , the report shows signs of increasing political commitment and major progress has been made in the field of access to finance .
Progress has also been made in exchanges of good practice such as cutting red tape in company creation .
As regards the efforts of SMEs to adapt their business practices to the global knowledge-based economy , the Commission launched last year the GoDigital initiative for SMEs as part of the eEurope Action Plan .
In some countries this report has received a very positive welcome .
We are organising campaigns throughout the European countries at the moment .
Before the end of 2002 a portal to provide SMEs with legal information , guidance and advice will be set up .
The Commission has also just today adopted a Communication on eEurope Benchmarking , where you can follow how SMEs are being connected and how broadly they use eCommerce .
This Commission communication highlights new challenges in relation to Internet usage : broadband is needed to stimulate new services ; schools are connected but the Internet is not yet sufficiently part of the pedagogical process ; governments online have to move towards full electronic transactions .
The indicators include amongst others Internet penetration in business and the percentage of companies selling online .
While good progress has been made , the take-up of eCommerce is not as fast as expected .
This confirms the relevance of actions such as GoDigital , but also indicates the urgent need to identify obstacles to eCommerce amongst especially small companies as well as consumers. eEurope should be continued beyond 2002 and shift its focus towards effective usage and availability of the Internet for all citizens and businesses .
The communication on the impact of the e-Economy on European enterprises contains proposals to deepen cooperation between all relevant stakeholders to develop a policy agenda for maximising the benefits of the e-Economy for European enterprises , taking into account the needs of SMEs .
The Industry Council endorsed this proposal in December 2001 and invited the Commission and the Member States to intensify the debate on the e-Economy .
The Spanish Presidency has decided to launch a policy debate with Member States to agree future priorities for the promotion of the e-Economy in Europe and to address this topic at the Industry Council meeting in early June .
To this end it will be necessary to identify policy changes at national and European level to adapt to the needs of the e-Economy .
These activities will be developed in close cooperation with the reflections and the preparatory work relating to the future of the eEurope Action Plan .
Mr President , Commissioner , this electronic Europe project met with enormous difficulties when spectrum auctions started to be held .
It resulted in bankruptcies , which are still continuing , and unemployment .
What do you intend to do to prevent this from happening in the future , with certain Member States collecting charges against the general intentions of the e-Europe project - at the same time leading the sector into a wild downward spiral - and others not ?
Mr President , last December - thanks to the European Parliament ' s swift action - new legislation was passed on all electronic communication .
For the first time it also contains a legal basis for spectra .
It allows for the creation of what are now new bodies : a committee , to discuss long-term questions , and a working party , to consider the current administration .
Now that we have a common legal basis and joint bodies , it will be possible to discuss common aims beforehand and coordinate action .
This is obviously no guarantee that everyone in the end will choose the same approach , but I hope that we can at least agree together policies in an open and transparent way and that before the first State starts dividing up the spectra the rules will be known to all .
The market will be able to act more wisely when it is known at least how things are moving in different regions of Europe .
I believe that the sort of bedlam we experienced last time will not repeat itself , but it cannot always be guaranteed that common sense will prevail at all times .
As the author is not present , Question No 42 lapses .
Question No 43 by ( H-0042 / 02 ) :
Subject : eEurope 2002 initiative The Spanish Presidency , in its published work programme , notes that the ' eEurope 2002 initiative will have to be relaunched with new objectives ' .
Can the Commission explain why a strategy launched only two years ago is now in need of a ' relaunch ' , indicate the reasons for the failure of the original strategy and outline the objectives that the new strategy seeks to achieve ?
I should first of all like to thank Mr Harbour for keeping e-Europe high on the European agenda .
When we look back at the year 2000 we can see that the e-Europe action plan really rewrote the European political agenda .
The idea was to set clear targets for the EU and Member States , clear deadlines and follow it up .
Has this idea worked ?
I think it has .
To give you a few examples : the telecoms package and unbundling the local loop .
We would never have been able to imagine these rapid procedures without high priority being given to information society .
Internet penetration has increased .
It was 18 % in March 2000 and 38 % in December 2001 - more than double .
Nearly 90 % of schools are now connected to the Internet .
Today 90 % of European enterprises have Internet access .
We now have the fastest research network in the world .
The start of progress in getting government on-line is well under way .
A comprehensive overview is now available .
It was accepted today in the Commission .
I am happy to pass it on to Members of Parliament .
What are the new challenges ?
First of all , Internet penetration has risen sharply but is still very unevenly distributed across Europe .
Schools are massively connected but still the number of pupils per on-line PC varies enormously .
We must have more PCs at school per student .
Even though businesses are more and more connected the reorganisation of business procedures is only starting .
Business consumer e-commerce is still rather small .
Governments have started enthusiastically to go on-line .
Normally there is a question about presenting activities on their website .
Real interactivity is still rare .
All the interactivities give better services to citizens and increase the productivity of the public sector .
The Commission has not come to the end of its actions because technology moves quickly .
Broadband Internet is now a real option .
Broadband is the essential physical infrastructure of the knowledge society .
Without broadband we will not deliver fully Lisbon .
Other nations have already made their choices for broadband .
The Commission 's report to the Barcelona Summit said : " Broadband Internet access will be a key factor for improving the performance of the economy .
Broadband networks will form the backbone of an increasingly interconnected and integrated society . E-Europe should be continued beyond 2002 and shift its focus more towards effective usage and availability of the Internet . "
The Commission is particularly happy that the Spanish Presidency shares this analysis and has put the launch of e-Europe 2005 action plan on its agenda .
The first discussion on a possible new action plan will take place at the informal telecoms council in Vitoria in Spain on 22 and 23 February 2002 .
The Commission is ready to go into pro-dialogue also with the relevant committees in the European Parliament .
I should like to thank the Commissioner for a wide-ranging reply and I note that two of the central achievements are those which Parliament has pushed through very strongly .
However , my concern is not the work that he has done - for which I commend him very much - but rather , for example , the delays and problems that Member States are experiencing in transposing the electronic commerce directive , passed by this House with great speed .
Similarly , I see that as regards copyright in the Information Society - another fundamental plank in the legislation that he does not mention - discussion is continuing on ideas for new levies on computer disks and other issues that will fundamentally hold back the development of the e-society .
Does he share my considerable concern that Member States do not appear to be taking anything like seriously enough the fundamental principles that he has enunciated and would he give us some indication that he will give positive vent to them at the forthcoming meetings ?
Will the Commission publish evaluation reports on both of these issues so that we in this House can put some political pressure on Member States to get on with it ?
The two directives on electronic commerce and copyright are extremely important .
It is the Commission 's duty to ensure that Member States transpose them into their law .
They are both within the remit of my colleague , Mr Bolkestein , but we are cooperating here and I am ready to contact him after Question Time .
On the matter of copyright , the Commission is organising a workshop in the next few weeks on digital rights management technologies .
When content is sold on line it is very important to guarantee a system where the copyright holder can receive proper royalties for his production .
New technologies like digital rights management are helpful there .
My personal wish is that this technology could result in more targeted methods to get proper revenue for copyright holders so that Member States would not need to go for these very broad untargeted solutions such as copyright levy .
Finally , on the follow-up of the Member States , there is often a problem that progress is piecemeal and there is not sufficiently strong coordination in Member States to guarantee that progress will take place in all areas .
That will be one of the issues we will raise at the next informal Council and we will pass this challenge to European Council in Barcelona .
Mr President , Commissioner , what does the Commission intend to do about the threat that the digital divide will increase , because it affects people who are also financially badly off ?
Secondly , the usage rate of Internet connections amongst us in Europe is low .
What does the Commission intend to do about this ?
Thirdly , the development of content here in Europe is also slow .
It is nevertheless the key to greater action in the spirit of e-Europe .
How do you intend to tackle this ?
All these issues are extremely important .
I have just a few remarks .
Schools are well placed to bridge the digital divide .
Through them we can guarantee education for all .
In Europe comprehensive school systems still work .
We can guarantee skills for everybody .
When the Internet comes to homes via children we can avoid the divide from the start .
But we must also look to the older age groups .
Here , the combined efforts of the public sector in training , public access points which can be run by local communities , post offices and the private sector provide extremely important backup .
Here I hope all Member States will take active measures .
As regards usage , we are now discussing flat rates in general .
In America , higher usage is often explained by the fact that there are more flat-rate offers on the market , not only for broadband but also for narrow bands .
We have not reached a final conclusion on this , but this question is being raised now , as we have seen a tail-off in demand for broadband in the form of ADSL and cable .
Should that be a solution ?
I will reply to that after we have done some more internal work .
As for content , if the Internet is not in your own mother tongue it will be not the Internet for all .
The Commission is now implementing its programme , eContent , which concentrates on multilingual and multicultural platforms in the content area .
It brings together different operators from different Member States .
There has been huge interest and it is doing fine .
The Information Society Technologies Programme is shifting attention towards applications .
In the future the user will be at the centre .
We have often put technology at the centre , but we must now put the user at the centre instead .
Users are not looking for technology , but rather for content , services and applications .
For that reason the attention of research is moving in that direction .
The Commission supports these efforts .
Mr President , the UMTS licences were auctioned for very large sums .
What effect will that have on digital television licences ?
I believe that new jobs have been created precisely by these initiatives , which also involve very substantial investments .
What view do you take of the development of risk capital in this field ?
To be honest , Mr Rübig , last year was not an easy one for the risk capital market .
The venture capital market developed very rapidly in 2000 , then we saw the difficulties and it went down .
At EU level , the European Investment Funds invested in venture capital funds in various Member States .
These investments were well-timed because of the lack of venture financing .
We have also been using Community budget funds , with part of the multiannual programme credits transferred into the investment funds .
Through these efforts the public sector has been playing its role .
At the same time it is very important to complete the legislation on a genuine internal market for financial services and risk capital .
In this regard we hope that the solutions resulting from the Lamfalussy report will be very useful .
Today on the Internet I saw some good news : some new venture rounds for wireless applications have been completed .
Perhaps the worst is over , but the market is still very tight compared to the situation in the past .
So all such measures , an active financial market and public support measures , if there is market failure , will be needed .
Thank you very much for your cooperation , Commissioner .
Questions to Commissioner Diamantopoulou
Mr Alavanos 's question concerns the Lisbon targets and whether or not Greece will be able to attain them .
First , the target of full employment set in Lisbon was a political commitment by leaders of the Member States , not a binding legal commitment .
Except that the political commitment was also highly significant and all the national action plans for employment have been drawn up and submitted on the basis of that commitment .
In Greece , the second Community Support Framework applied over the last five years was completed in December 2001 , so it is difficult to make an overall evaluation of it .
Naturally , the job market was reformed and training and proactive employment policy structures and mechanisms were created during the course of the second Community Support Framework .
The problem lies with the employment services which Greece started to reform at the end of the second Community Support Framework .
As far as the third Community Support Framework is concerned , Greece is one of the few Member States which has set quantitative national targets under its national action plan , having announced a target of 61.5 % for 2005 .
The third Community Support Framework includes a hefty 2.9 trillion drachmas to fund pro-active employment policies and reforms .
The implementation of the third Community Support Framework is a huge challenge if Greece is to introduce the mechanisms needed for employment policy , such as an individualised approach , because the Greek national employment agencies need to be completely overhauled and training mechanisms need to work more efficiently and be geared to regional development objectives .
The Commission is working closely with all the Member States and , as you know , it repeats the guidelines every year so that the Member States can take account of European agreements on the application of employment policies .
Commissioner , I know you are a supporter of English as our official language , so I shall put my question in English .
By chance , I have before me Eurostat 's statistics on the economy labour market .
Total unemployment in the European Union in 1990 was 7.7 % ; in 2000 it was 8.4 % .
In 1990 unemployment in Greece stood at 6.3 % , less than in the Community .
In 2000 it was 11.1 % , the second highest rate after Spain .
In Ireland , unemployment in 1990 was 13.1 % ; in 2000 it was 4.4 % .
Ireland and Greece are both cohesion countries .
How do you explain that , and what critical view would you take of the Greek Government 's actions during the second Community support framework ?
First , may I thank you for your support .
I knew that a progressive person of your experience would agree that English - and our mastering it in Greece - are very important .
As far as the statistics which you quoted are concerned , we need to analyse the structure of unemployment in Greece .
The rate of employment for men is exactly the same as the European average , but there is a huge difference in the rate of employment for women , which is 40 % in Greece , compared with a Community average of 56 % .
Similarly , there is a very serious youth unemployment problem .
Here too , in comparison with other countries , unemployment is very high among the young in Greece , 29 % , mainly because the various types of part-time employment found in numerous countries , including the country you referred to , are counted as full-time jobs .
According to the Commission 's recommendations , what the Greek government needs to do is to focus more on policies for women and young people and on policies for older workers , because here again very few older workers are actually in employment .
These are the three main employment policy problems and , according to the national action plan which it has submitted , this is where the Greek government has focused its efforts .
Of course , the Commission will continue to make recommendations where policies have not progressed as the Greek government promised , as it did in September this year and will again next September .
Question No 45 by ( H-0008 / 02 ) :
Subject : Employment in Greece According to the Recommendation for a Council Recommendation on the Implementation of Member States ' Employment Policies ( COM ( 2001 ) 0512 / final ) , Greece continues to have one of the lowest employment rates in the European Union , and unemployment in Greece has stabilised at 11 % , which is considerably above the EU average .
These data show that the labour market suffers from structural problems , a finding borne out by the Commission Communication on structural indicators .
According to this Communication , Greek indicators concerning entrepreneurial expenditure on R & D , access to the internet , lifelong learning and public spending on education are the lowest of all the Member States .
Will the Commission say whether , following the Council Recommendation and the Commission Communication , Greece has taken any specific additional measures or initiatives concerning the above sectors with a view to promoting employability and improving its position ?
I should like to start , Mr President , with the tables of indicators announced by the Commission in its most recent communication , which will be sent to Barcelona .
It is true , as the honourable Member says in his question , that Greece 's indicators on matters such as entrepreneurial expenditure on research and development , access to the Internet , lifelong learning and public spending on education are lower than those of other Member States .
However , I should like to point out that the Commission 's philosophy behind these annual indicators is not just to compare the situation between Member States which do not always have the same points of reference ; it is to look at the progress made by Member States from one year to the next .
If we take the indicator for Internet access , Greece has progressed from 4.5 % last year to 11 % this year .
These are the main objectives for the operational programmes for 2000 to 2006 .
In other words , there are operational programmes for education , vocational training , lifelong learning , the information society and the dissemination of the information society in both the public administration and the business sector .
This is one of the major challenges of the Greek government 's national action plan and the Community Support Framework .
Of course , we must not forget that these programmes have substantial Community funds , but that alone is not enough .
Very substantial national funds are needed , together with efficient , urgent policies , especially for the information society , if these indicators are to improve significantly by next year .
Thank you , Commissioner , you are of course quite right .
What counts is the progress made from one year to the next and that is precisely why I should like to ask you if any indicators apart from the Internet , which you referred to , have improved ?
And secondly , as regards the third Community Support Framework , which makes provision for all the major budget items which you mentioned , has Greece actually started spending any money ?
We are already more or less at the end of the second year .
Thirdly , I should like to ask a question which I have been asking repeatedly for several years now , Commissioner , because I have been unable to obtain a reply .
Has anyone ever - not last year or the year before , because that would be impossible - but let us say five years ago ; has anyone ever actually counted how many jobs have been created over a period of time from funds budgeted for job creation , just to give us a snapshot of exactly how efficient it is .
Question No 46 by ( H-0035 / 02 ) :
Subject : Undeclared work in Greece In 1998 , the Commission published a communication aimed at launching a dialogue among the Member States with a view to combating undeclared work which , according to data at the time , accounted for some 15 % of the Union 's GDP , while in Greece and Italy the figure exceeded 20 % of GDP .
Recent investigations by the Greek authorities , together with other available data , reveal that 10.5 % of businesses are not registered with the Social Security Institution and that the percentage of non-registered workers fluctuates between 21 % and 30 % , resulting in a loss of billions of euro from the public purse and , in particular , the social insurance funds .
What commitments did the Member States make as a result of the dialogue launched in 1998 ?
What progress has been made ?
What are Greece 's commitments and what recommendations have been made to that country ?
What measures will the Commission take to combat undeclared work , in the context of the qualitative employment policy and the open coordination method , to ensure that pension schemes remain viable ?
Mr President , may I assure the honourable Member that the European Commission shares her concerns about the impact of undeclared work , the impact of losses on the public purse , the impact on the job market and the impact on the pension system .
The guidelines issued by the Commission in 2001 for 2002 call on the Member States to take measures to combat undeclared work and to encourage registration using a variety of means , such as regulatory measures , incentives , reforms of the tax system , allowances , collaboration with the social partners and special plans for relations between the social partners , between employers and employees .
Greece 's response does , I think , bode well for the future .
By which I mean that the Greek authorities have introduced a series of measures dealing mainly with work inspectors , controls carried out by inspectors and the auditing agencies of the various insurance funds have been tightened up and , according to our information , a further 120 work inspectors are to be deployed .
The commitments made by the Greek government in its national action plan also include a series of other measures dealing with allowances , that is , incentives to register low-paid workers , the results of which will not transpire until a later date , once they have been applied .
On 26 February , the Commission is due to present the study started following the 1998 communication to which you refer . Experts from all the Member States will attend this conference and the presentation of the study to discuss efficient practices for dealing with undeclared work which have brought in significant results in certain countries .
As far as the impact on pension schemes is concerned , I should point out that one of the parameters for combating the problem of the viability of pension funds is to increase employment .
Not to increase employment generally any old how , but to increase employment which pays statutory tax and insurance contributions .
This is the only way of boosting the funds and helping them to stabilise their finances .
The open method of coordination established between the Member States does not , I repeat , involve any legal commitment vis-à-vis the Member States .
Political commitments have been made and the Member States are due to submit pension reform plans , together with their economic and social implications , in September 2002 .
Thank you , Commissioner , for your reply .
I do not share your optimism about progress because , as we can see in Greece and Italy - and I refer here to Greece in particular because it is my own country - there has been no progress .
Twenty-five percent of unregistered workers alone are foreigners , in which case there is hardly any justification for the mass influx of unskilled foreign workers into Greece .
Do you really believe , with this situation , that the ambitious targets set by the European Commission can be achieved , or should you be calling for means over and above political commitment , the means which countries need to have if they are to make progress ?
Because undeclared work impacts not just on pension schemes , it also impacts on free competition and , of course , protection for workers , because we are hardly talking high-powered jobs here .
I ask you in all honesty , do you feel that the means which you have at your disposal right now are sufficient to stamp out this phenomenon and its many and varied implications ?
I must stress , Mr President , that the Commission is not a superstate and it cannot judge policies which are purely national policies and for which each Member State takes the specific measures which it feels it needs to take .
What takes place at European level on this particular issue is collaboration between the Member States , through the guidelines , in which undeclared work is a priority and , naturally , steps have also been taken in countries such as Italy which have serious problems .
Steps have been taken within an institutional framework to increase incentives to register workers and integrate immigrants .
My evaluation of the measures taken by the Greek government , which is why I was cautious , is that its reaction bodes well in that it has introduced a series of institutional measures which are now under way , such as integrating immigrants and paying companies incentives for low-paid workers and , once they have been implemented , these institutional reforms should bring in positive results .
As you know , the measures taken by government are evaluated every year and the guidelines contain the Commission 's input .
As you know , Commissioner , where there is undeclared work there are usually undeclared businesses .
So I think we should be discussing not how many people have not been registered with social security agencies but how many businesses have not been registered at all , either with the Ministry of Trade or the police .
Nowhere .
There are sectors in Greece in which this is the rule rather than the exception .
And their economic raison d 'être is that no one knows about them .
Of course , the Commission does not interfere in internal affairs in the Member States and rightly so .
But I do still wonder if companies in general can get away without registering from the point of view of Community legislation ?
Is there nothing the Commission can do about this during the course of its duties ?
As you said , this is a matter in which it is very difficult for the European Commission to intervene .
The registration of companies , which is the top priority for a country as far as its tax system , that is , its revenue is concerned , and as far as its social security system , that is , pensions are concerned , is obviously a priority for the Member States and I do not think that any recommendations are needed along these lines .
I can only hope , from the information at our disposal , that the computerisation of the Social Security Institution , the law on regional companies and certain reforms along these lines will bring in results .
Question No 47 by ( H-0015 / 02 ) :
Subject : Transfer of unemployment entitlements Under the provisions of Regulation ( EEC ) 1408 / 71 , employees who are nationals of EU Member States may acquire unemployment benefit entitlements in any Member State .
Immigrant workers , from non-Community countries , who wish to receive unemployment benefits in an EU Member State other than their country of residence are not entitled to do so under the terms of the Regulation , which does not allow them to transfer their entitlements .
How can you justify the fact that employees from non-EEC countries are not entitled to unemployment benefits if they change their country of residence despite having paid contributions like other employees ?
Why are they not allowed to make use of forms E301 and E303 to transfer unemployment entitlements ?
Regulation 1408 / 71 and Regulation 574 / 72 protect the social security rights of workers by coordinating the different national social security systems of Member States .
There are two main rights that workers have through these regulations .
Firstly they have the right to unemployment benefit ; secondly , to look for employment in another Member State and to continue to receive unemployment benefit for a maximum period of three months .
However , this regulation applies to workers who are Community nationals .
In 1997 the Commission presented a proposal to the Council to extend the scope of this regulation to workers who are third-country nationals .
The same extension had been included in the larger frame of the Commission proposal of 1998 to modernise and simplify Regulation 1408 / 71 .
There were many discussions over many years .
There was a very complicated discussion in the Council of Ministers .
There were many disagreements between the Member States .
The main obstacles to progress in this regard had been the lack of agreement on the legal base .
It is not a legalistic or technical problem , it is a political one .
But the difference in the legal base concerned first the Commission 's proposal , which was based on the implementation of Articles 42 and 308 , and certain Member States which considered that the basis of this proposal could be Article 63 .
The political difference is that under the last article there are some Member States that have the right to opt out of the regulation .
Under the Belgian Presidency the Council of 3 December 2001 unanimously agreed that the basis which must be used is Article 63 .
So the Commission will very shortly present a new proposal to extend Regulation 1408 / 71 to third-country nationals using this new basis of Article 63 .
As far as the substance is concerned , I must highlight the Commission 's agreement with your concept .
I should just like to make one comment : it is the employers , the bosses , who are forcing these workers to move into other national territories .
Workers are good for paying taxes , they are good for having profit sweated out of them , but there is no need for them to understand their minimum rights .
This is totally unacceptable .
Pursuant to the Rules of Procedure , Questions Nos 48 , 49 and 50 , by Mr Fitzsimons , Mr Korakas and Mrs Thors respectively , will be replied to in writing .

Questions to Commissioner Patten
As the author is not present , Question No 51 lapses .
Question No 52 by ( H-0960 / 01 ) :
Subject : Reconstruction of Afghanistan and improving the subhuman situation of women What specific action or programmes is the Commission preparing in order to improve the situation of women in Afghanistan ?
How will it ensure that women actually receive the aid and benefits intended for them ?
The Commission is very much aware of the need to improve the situation of women in post-Taliban Afghanistan .
Our initial EUR 57 m commitment to reconstruction in Afghanistan includes specific provision for this .
The Commission services are currently finalising contracts with NGOs and UN aid agencies to implement 18 projects worth EUR 25 m and programmes to support internally displaced Afghan people and refugees .
Gender is a cross-cutting issue in all projects funded from the Aid to Uprooted People budget .
In 2001 more than 50 % of the projects directed at health , education and refugee care had specific and significant gender components .
The Commission is currently assessing project proposals for the 2002 budget for uprooted people .
The amount envisaged is EUR 24 m .
In the new political situation in Afghanistan the Commission is planning to open an office in Kabul in February or March this year .
This office will further enhance the Commission 's ability to oversee the performance and delivery of its aid to Afghanistan .
ECHO reopened its office at the beginning of last month .
Regarding the humanitarian aid provided by ECHO , women are involved in various types of projects ; all medical and nutritional projects funded by ECHO aim to treat malnutrition among children under five years of age , as well as to monitor the health status of women , in particular lactating and pregnant women .
NGOs generally organise elementary hygiene education for women .
NGOs have access to all beneficiaries , women included , and can employ women as local NGO personnel in medically related programmes .
Medical NGOs play a great role in the training of women .
Commissioner , I would like to ask a supplementary question which focuses on two aspects .
Firstly , will women manage some of this economic aid ?
Secondly , since there are specific risks for women - just today a girl of seven has been sold into marriage by her family in order to deal with hunger and meet their needs - I would like to know whether the Commission intends to create specific funds to prevent this type of violation of women ' s rights .
Given the situation I have described , which will no doubt be repeated tomorrow and the next day , I would like a concrete reply from the Commission .
It is also very important to know whether women will manage these funds .
The fact that there are many armed men very much hinders progress in the improvement of the situation of women .
The simple answer to the very important first question that the honourable Member asked is an unequivocal yes .
Not least do we hope that women will be centrally involved in a great deal of our development activity , but there are women in the interim administration .
I hope there will be in the transitional administration .
Women played a crucial role , let us not forget , in the success of the Bonn talks in December and we will be doing what we can to support the Afghan Ministry of Women 's Affairs which will , I hope , be a good example of women managing programmes to help develop society and to help protect the role of women in a society which has abused them for far too long .
The honourable Member asked a question about the specific security of women and young girls .
In the light of recent well-publicised events , I wholly understand that .
I hope that the overall improvement in the security situation and the increasing grip of the interim authority with our support will help to prevent things like that happening .
But after the ferocious talibanisation of Afghan society over the last few years , and given the position of the country where warlordism is still rife , it is going to be some time before we can promote the sort of strong gender policies we would like to see .
However , we will do all that we can .
I am greatly encouraged by what the honourable Member has said .
As the author is not present , Question No 53 lapses .
Question No 54 by ( H-0965 / 01 ) :
Subject : Reform of the Stability Pact In light of the joint statement made by Patten and Solana on the reform of the Stability Pact , what is the Commission doing to ensure that the programme becomes more effective in the delivery of its services and in streamlining its personnel ?
The High Representative and I wrote to ministers in November setting out proposals for the future work of the Stability Pact .
Our main aim was to take the opportunity , two and a half years into the work of the pact , and with the arrival of a new special coordinator , to build on its achievements by enhancing the complementarity between the work of the Stability Pact and the EU stabilisation and association process , by focusing the pact 's activities as tightly as possible and by putting a particular emphasis on encouraging regional cooperation .
The General Affairs Council approved the recommendations in our letter on 19 November and asked the new Special Coordinator , Dr Buseck , who took up the reins on 1 January , to assess the current activities and working methods of the pact and to identify five or six objectives to be achieved by the end of this year .
The Council asked him to report back to its meeting on 11 March .
The Commission is now working closely with the Special Coordinator in the preparation of this report .
Detailed consultations are taking place within the informal consultative committee which was established following the High Representative 's and my own recommendations in order to improve coordination between the pact and the stabilisation and association process .
Two meetings have already taken place : on 11 and 31 January .
In conclusion , work is well in hand .
The Stability Pact and the Commission are working very closely together to deliver the improvements the honourable Member refers to .
I have every confidence that the report which Dr Buseck gives to the Council on 11 March will set out a number of practical proposals to that end .
I thank the Commissioner for his answer .
I am slightly perturbed that it seems to be taking so long to get this matter addressed .
As we have just heard , it is not going to be until 11 March that we get further developments .
I should like to ask the Commissioner , first , what measures are going to be recommended which will increase ownership by local people on the ground in the Stability Pact .
It has been seen as remote and , unless we have proper ownership , quite frankly it will continue to be remote .
Secondly , one of the areas of concern has been the quality of implementation in the Stability Pact .
Is he happy that we are moving in the right direction in terms of implementation ?
Thirdly , there is a view that there was a chronic lack of information on the ground about the Stability Pact .
Is a strategy being put in place to deal with that ?
As regards the first point , Dr Buseck is well aware of the problem to which the honourable Member referred .
The proposals he brings forward on 11 March will reflect that awareness of his .
The honourable Member will know that he is extremely experienced in dealing with the problems of the region and in particular in mobilising private sector support .
I am looking forward very keenly to working with him .
He will do an excellent job and he will want to engage with others who are working alongside him in an enthusiastic and transparent way .
On implementation , it is fair to say that overall we have established an impressive record as far as the Commission is concerned in implementing what we have promised to do in the western Balkans and in south-east Europe as a whole .
What we have been able to achieve in Serbia , in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , and in other countries , is impressive .
I hope that we will be able to ensure that where there have been any bottlenecks affecting infrastructure projects with the Stability Pact - and sometimes those bottlenecks are the result of problems in the beneficiary countries - we will be able to resolve them .
Dr Buseck and I are trying to focus on those problem projects and get them moving as rapidly as possible .
As for information about what is happening on the ground , that is an issue which Dr Buseck is well aware of .
We will help him to address it , trying to ensure that the publicity for the achievements of the Stability Pact goes to the pact , rather than to individuals .
It is a pleasure to work with Dr Buseck .
I think he will do outstandingly well and he can certainly count on our understanding and support and , I am sure , the understanding and support of Parliament , in the efforts he makes in the future .
Question No 55 by ( H-0002 / 02 ) :
Subject : Aid to Asia and Latin America Given the European Parliament 's amendment to the 2002 budget that 35 per cent of EU external assistance is allocated to social infrastructure , mainly basic education and health ; and given Commissioner Patten 's letter to the President of the Committee on Development and Cooperation of December 2001 , that ' the Commission is willing to implement the budget on this basis . . . understand ( ing ) that the Parliament 's focus is on the overall picture for EC assistance rather than the global performance of all donors ' ; what precise measures will the Commission take to operationalise this decision in relation to the regional budget lines providing aid to Asia and to Latin America ?
Can the Commission reply with respect to communication with its delegations , the mechanism for agreement of Country Strategy Papers , the operation of its Quality Support Group , dialogue with partners , as well as in any other respects ?
In the context of the 2002 budget , the Commission has supported a benchmark that 35 % of spending in Development Assistance Committee Group 1 countries , including macroeconomic assistance with social sector conditionality , is allocated to social infrastructure , mainly education and health .
This recognises that the Community contribution must be seen as part of the overall donor support in a given country and that a degree of flexibility must be the norm .
The Commission is committed to work towards meeting this benchmark in assistance to the social sectors in all its programmes , including Asia and Latin America .
With a view to honouring this commitment , a number of initiatives will be undertaken .
In particular , these will include , first , improved emphasis on the social sector in all Commission programmes , in line with the priorities in the Community 's development strategy .
Second , the establishment during 2002 - and I know this is a point on which the honourable Member has himself laid great emphasis - of a solid statistical basis allowing DAC sectoral classification of programmes and projects from 2002 .
A reclassification exercise of all 2001 commitments will be undertaken with a view to enabling comparison to be made .
Third , we want to make available to Parliament all approved country strategy papers , including multiannual programmes and associated financial envelopes .
Finally , the continuation during 2002 of work on the definition of internationally agreed performance indicators and implementation of sector-wide programmes in the social sector . The Commission is in contact , as the honourable Member knows , with Parliament 's Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the organisation of a seminar in the spring of this year , where the Commission will report on progress made in these areas and , I hope , continue to gain from the experience and enthusiasm and commitment of the members of the Development Committee , including , of course , the honourable Member .
The last time I debated with Mr Patten on this subject in committee he accused me of having an overdose of testosterone .
I am glad he has not repeated that tonight .
Stamina is what we need in dealing with this issue .
He is right in saying that there are a number of areas of agreement between the Commission and Parliament , not least in the DAC reporting where progress is such that we very much welcome it .
We welcome too their cooperation in relation to the seminar .
I am concerned that the emphasis in his answer was on definitions , about reporting , about statistics - i.e. analysis - rather than the tougher decisions that are equally required to shift resources .
It is important that we do not simply talk about the process in terms of information being available - important as that is , and agreed as we are on that issue - but that the Commissioner actually tells us , as those country strategy papers are passed , as the Quality Support Group evaluates new programmes , as delegations ( and he did not answer the point about the role of delegations in this ) take their decisions , as new staff are recruited , how will he ensure that real resources are allocated in greater number to basic health and basic education ?
We need to see some shift of resources during the course of this year .
Give us some hope that it will happen .
First of all I am not against testosterone in trying to achieve some progress in this area .
We need to show a great deal of energy and commitment .
Secondly , as far as the role of delegations is concerned , as the honourable Member knows , I place particular emphasis , on the deconcentration exercise , which is a particularly ill-starred , euro-gabble way of referring to trying to manage our programmes in the field and as closely as possible to the people whom we want to see benefit from them .
The delegations will play a key role in drawing up the country strategy papers , which will have to reflect the priorities of our development philosophy and development strategy .
The honourable Member asks us to give him hope that we will be seeing a real shift .
The purpose of providing a better statistical basis for analysing and planning what we are doing is to demonstrate that we are making an effort to achieve the objectives which the honourable Member and I have in common and which are also the objectives of my distinguished colleague , Commissioner Nielsen .
So there would be no point for example in the CRIS exercise in which we are engaged if we were not intending it to have an impact on policy .
I think the honourable Member accepts that one is looking for steady trends , rather than being too nailed down to specific figures in specific years in specific countries .
One wants to see a shift of emphasis and a clear indication that the Commission 's programmes are as associated as other peoples ' with the objectives of poverty alleviation .
I will make one additional point , which I attempted to make yesterday morning in the parliament of the country I know best .
There is still a tendency when people look at what we are doing to compare apples with oranges .
It is very often the case that other countries or Member States appear to have a far higher proportion of development assistance committed to poverty alleviation than we do because they look at what we are doing in the Balkans , in Russia , in the NIS , in parts of the Mediterranean , and compare it as though it was exactly the same as our more straightforward development assistance programmes .
Because we are carrying the burden in those areas , admittedly with Member States ' money , they are not having to do as much there as they would presumably have to do for political reasons , and therefore the figures sometimes flatter them at our expense .
That is part of the price we pay for having an external actions budget which has development assistance at its core but has other priorities as well .
Could the Commissioner tell me if what he said adds up to a guarantee that there will be a better balance between commitments and payments in Asia and Latin America and that we will have better utilisation of the funds voted for in the budget ?
I could also - if I was not as cautious a man as I am - point to progress already in increasing the percentage of payments in relation to commitments .
The figure last year in the Mediterranean was 56 % to 57 % , much higher than any figure we have achieved before but lower than I want to see .
If you look at the achievements of Europe Aid - all of whose staff I addressed yesterday - they are starting to be able to demonstrate an improvement in relation to commitments .
They have demonstrated a considerable success in reducing dormant commitments and sleeping commitments so that the reste à liquider has fallen quite substantially .
So we are making progress .
It will take some time before we achieve the sort of figures that all of us want to see , but we are headed in the right direction .
I very much hope that before I make my swan-song in this packed Hemicycle I will be able to point to even greater achievements by the excellent staff in Europe Aid .
We are going to put the last question to the Commissioner .
Question No 56 by Olivier Dupuis ( H-0007 / 02 ) :
Subject : International Criminal Court
For several years now the establishment of the International Criminal Court for war crimes , genocide and crimes against humanity has been a priority of EU foreign policy .
Only recently , the EU , through the Belgian Presidency , reaffirmed its commitment to working to secure , as rapidly as possible , the 60 ratifications required for the Criminal Court to be brought into operation .
To date , 48 countries have already ratified the Rome Statute , including all the EU Member States apart from Portugal ( which has , however , already completed the relevant domestic procedures ) , Greece and Ireland .
Three candidate countries - Poland , Hungary and Slovenia - have already ratified the Statute and Estonia has announced that it will shortly deposit its instruments of ratification .
Given the fundamental importance which the EU attaches to the speedy introduction of this first stage of an international justice system and in view of the tragic events which have occurred around the world over the last few months and years , would the Commission not agree that the ratification of the Rome Statute should be explicitly established as forming part of the ' acquis communautaire ' and as a new ' Copenhagen criterion ' to be met by any future candidate for accession to the EU ?
Does the Commission agree that ratification should serve as a precondition for the signing and ratification of any association or cooperation agreement between the Union and third countries ?
First of all I would like to apologise to the honourable Member for not being present earlier to hear his , I am sure , eloquent - though I am not sure , supportive - speech in the excellent debate on the Middle East .
He knows that was not meant as a discourtesy , it was for democratic reasons upstairs .
I am sure we will be able to lock horns about some of those extremely important issues on other occasions .
As for his question , the European Union attaches a great deal of importance to the ratification of the Statute of the International Criminal Court .
The adoption of the common position of 11 June 2001 , which aims to promote early ratification of the Statute and the swift establishment of the ICC , and the ratification of the Statute by 13 Member States underline our commitment to this objective .
Ratification preparations by the remaining two Member States are at an advanced stage .
The European Union 's commitment to this issue is also reflected in the level of Community funding given to NGOs working for ratification .
Since 1995 , this has reached almost EUR 7m under the European initiative for democratisation and human rights .
With respect to the enlargement process , the European Union position on support to the ICC is part of the common foreign and security policy acquis , which candidates are asked to subscribe to .
In addition , in line with the common position , the European Union regularly raises the question of ratification in the framework of political dialogues with accession countries .
Moreover , the Central and Eastern European countries associated with the European Union and the associated countries Cyprus and Malta aligned themselves with the EU declaration at the Sixth Committee of the UN General Assembly in November 2001 , which sought to encourage a swift start to the ICC .
In January 2002 , they also declared that they shared the objectives of the EU common position on the International Criminal Court and undertook to ensure that their national policies conform to that common position .
The Council of Europe has also called on all its members to ratify or adhere to the ICC 's Statute as soon as possible .
Mr President , I too have no desire to go into the ins and outs of the matter , which was on this afternoon ' s agenda .
I simply wish to say to Commissioner Patten that I knew he had informed us that he would miss some of the debate .
I am , therefore , very sorry , as I said a short while ago in plenary , that he was not able to join us .
Having said that , politically , we are at odds on the matter , but I believe we will have the opportunity to discuss this again later .
With regard to his answer to this specific question , I am quite satisfied with the Commission ' s position .
I would say that making this issue , as Commissioner Patten said , part of the acquis communautaire is a crucial point and this will certainly help the candidate countries to speed up their ratification procedures .
I certainly do not want to detract from the acquis which the Member concerned and I have discovered together , but I would only add my wish that some of our other partners in international affairs were also committed to establishing the international criminal court .
It continues to be an issue that we raise with our transatlantic friends with considerable vigour .
We did so with the last administration and we are doing so with this one .
It is not a question of the administration having changed its policy .
I would have thought that recent events - including those related to Afghanistan - would have bolstered the case for an international criminal court .
Maybe it will take a little longer for that message to get home .
Pursuant to the Rules of Procedure , Questions Nos 57 to 83 will be replied to in writing .
That concludes Questions to the Commission .
( The sitting was adjourned at 7.30 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

VAT - Direct and indirect taxation
The next item is the report ( A5-0466 / 2001 ) by Mrs Kauppi , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs ,
1. on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation on administrative cooperation in the field of value added tax ( COM ( 2001 ) 294 - C5-0269 / 2001 - 2001 / 0133 ( COD ) ) and
2. on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Council Directive 77 / 799 / EEC concerning mutual assistance by the competent authorities of the Member States in the field of direct and indirect taxation ( COM ( 2001 ) 294 - C5-0270 / 2001 - 2001 / 0134 ( COD ) )
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , VAT fraud is a widespread problem in the European Union , which is unfortunately becoming more common all the time .
According to reliable estimates , during the first half of 1998 , for example , Member States detected 250 cases of so-called Carousel fraud , worth more than 500 million euros in all .
To this must of course be added other types of fraud , and all the fraudulent transactions that remained undetected .
We can therefore estimate that VAT fraud costs the EU and its Member States hundreds of millions of euros every year .
Generally it is a matter of Carousel Fraud .
Carousel Fraud means the acquisition of goods without paying the VAT as required under the rules of the internal market .
It is characterised by a chain of invoices , with or without goods , extending across one or more borders .
The essential feature of this type of fraud is that one or more links in the chain do not pay invoiced VAT to the tax authority , while other parties in the chain receive VAT refunds based on these very invoices .
Carousel Fraud generally concerns small items of value , such as computers and mobile phones .
The most effective way of preventing this type of fraud is through close , administrative cooperation between the Member States .
It is generally known , however , that the current legal framework is not up to the task .
In order to streamline the current legislative framework , the Commission has now put forward a proposal for a regulation that would considerably enhance and improve current forms of administrative cooperation in the field of VAT .
I also support the Commission ' s proposal for a directive , in addition to which I propose measures in my report to make direct cooperation between the authorities still more effective and practical .
The main point of the proposal is to allow for direct contact between local and regional authorities responsible for the fight against fraud .
At present , all communication must go through central liaison offices , meaning that all requests pass through one country ' s administrative machinery from a local office to a national liaison office and down the same path in the other country . This means that requests for assistance often arrive too late at their proper destination .
The tax evaders may well have disappeared by the time the local officials in the country that received the request for help look into the matter .
I agree with the Commission that cooperation at local level would improve mutual understanding regarding requests for information , would increase the motivation of tax inspectors , and would avoid wasting the few resources that exist .
I therefore wholeheartedly support the Commission proposal , which should be seen as a major step forward in the fight against fraud .
All too often , criminals can take immediate advantage of the most up-to-date and advanced means of communication , while the authorities are weighed down by bureaucratic , cumbersome rules , which slows down the work involved in tracking down the criminals and uses up far too many of the administration ' s resources .
The Commission , however , could have gone still further to speed up cooperation and increase flexibility .
I support the Commission ' s proposal for sending communications in electronic form wherever possible .
I would also propose that , to speed up the flow of information , electronic communication should be made the rule , and traditional correspondence on paper the exception .
For the same reason , to speed up the exchange of information , that is , more room for manoeuvre should be given to the local authorities with regard to language policy .
The obligation to translate requests for assistance between authorities must be made more flexible .
Why should it be a requirement to translate a request for assistance into the official language of the second country if , for example , a Finn and a Greek come to an understanding that they will deal with one another in French ?
There is one point , however , where the Commission proposal goes too far . The Commission is proposing that the Member States would be under an obligation to restrict many of the rights contained in the Data Protection directive if they thought this necessary in order to safeguard important economic or financial interests .
It should be noted that there is no such obligation contained in the said directive but that it is simply a possibility that Member States can resort to .
This aspect of the matter would therefore be better addressed by an amendment to the Data Protection directive and at this stage it should be left to the Member States to consider whether or not to pursue this line of action .
Finally , something should be said about the legal basis .
The Commission bases its proposal on Article 95 of the Treaty , which means the co-decision procedure for Parliament .
I agree with the Commission ' s view that this proposal should concern administrative cooperation only and must be dealt with according to the procedure laid down in Article 95 .
The Council has always rejected this view , formerly , and changed the legal basis to Article 93 or 94 , which only require Parliament to be consulted .
Now , however , the Commission has decided to take the Council to the European Court of Justice over another proposal for a directive concerning the recovery of claims .
The legal situation will thus be cleared up soon .
I would also like to hear comments from the Commissioner in connection with this choice of legal basis and any new information he might have for Parliament regarding how the case regarding the legal basis for the proposal for a directive on the recovery of claims is proceeding in the Court of Justice of the European Communities .
Madam President , Commissioner , Mrs Kauppi , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by thanking the rapporteur , my colleague Mrs Piia-Noora Kauppi , for this report , which met with very broad support in the competent committee .
That means that there was excellent communication between all the parties involved .
The report constitutes yet further evidence of the competence for which our young colleague has , in a short time , acquired a reputation in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , as also for the industriousness shown by the quality of her work .
Many thanks for that .
The report is , secondly , evidence of our need , in many instances , for ' more of Europe ' .
It is only together that we can combat fraud more efficiently and thus more successfully .
In this connection , we need , on the one hand , better coordination in order to move towards cooperation and exchange of information , and , on the other hand , an improved and more professional legal framework to facilitate this process of information and coordination more readily .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats says ' yes ' to improved cooperation by the authorities against VAT fraud , although we of course emphasise that we are not only opposed to VAT fraud but also every form of fraud .
In any case , 250 instances of it were uncovered in the first half of 1998 , with losses amounting to over EUR 500 million .
I can do no other than associate myself with the rapporteur in saying that we do not need obligatory translations in cross-border requests for information , but rather more flexibility as regards the data protection directive , deregulation to make things simpler , rationalisation and flexibility to get the work processed more quickly , so that we can get on the fraudsters ' trails and so create greater security in Europe .
Madam President , I would like to express my total support for the rapporteur , Mrs Kauppi ' s suggestion , and , consequently , for the Commission proposal , to which the Kauppi report gives its almost unreserved support .
We Socialists also wholeheartedly support this Commission proposal .
The proposal deals with two very important matters .
The first is the issue of tax fraud in a specific area , that of VAT in intra Community and triangular operations .
The second issue , which is related to the first , as an instrument in combating fraud - is that of cooperation between public authorities to find a solution to , or at least , to reduce , the level of fraud previously mentioned .
Mrs Kauppi gave a perfect explanation of the proposals in her speech and I fully share her sentiments .
Having said this , I would like to make two additional comments with regard to the content of this report .
The first refers to the validity , today , of the ' provisional VAT system ' , a system which was implemented in 1993 on the completion of the single market , of a strictly provisional nature , even with an expiry date , that has been spun out and which has not been respected , as you are all well aware .
I would like to draw your attention to this because the reason we are having to discuss this report and the fraud it deals with today is that , to a large extent , we continue to maintain this provisional VAT system - set up by intra Community operations - which places a burden on a series of operations in the country of destination without having those border controls that were maintained by the system in place before the entry into force of the single market .
Clearly , in a definitive VAT system , which is appropriate to the single market , with taxation at source , we would probably not be discussing this issue , because much of this fraud would be prevented at source .
This is the first observation that I would like to make with regard to this report .
My second observation concerns a very important point , which Mrs Kauppi referred to : the legal base chosen by the Commission to present this proposal for a directive .
In my opinion , the Commission ' s interpretation of the Treaty has to be applauded , for considering that the base applicable in this case was Article 95 , that is to say , for deciding that tax matters can be reduced to matters of substantial , substantive tax law , but not to those of adjective law , to those matters - such as those we are dealing with at the moment - that deal with the management of taxes and the exchange of information between public institutions in the management of taxes .
In these cases , it is not really a matter of fiscal law or tax law itself , in the strict sense of the word , reserved for national parliaments and , as a consequence , for unanimity , but of an issue that can be dealt with , as is happening now , by the codecision procedure .
I would like to conclude , Madam President , with a piece of advice that stems from my last comment ; it would be a good idea if , in the next Convention and reform of the Treaty , the field of tax matters could be defined once and for all and that a precise framework for harmonisation can be established .
Naturally , not all tax matters can be harmonised ; there are certain areas , such as income tax , that will never be completely harmonised , but there are others - and here I am essentially thinking about the basis for calculating tax on company profits - which should be set up as something that can be harmonised and exempted from the unanimity rule , which would give Parliament the leading role in areas as important as those we are dealing with .
Madam President , the EU is continuing to be taken for a ride by professional fraudsters , a situation which is , regrettably , a beneficiary of the excessively complex VAT system .
It is through our tax regulations , which are in part difficult to understand , that we are laying ourselves open to fraudsters and indirectly promoting tax fraud .
What we need in order to raise the level of taxpayer honesty and increase tax revenue is not only efficient monitoring and effective cooperation by the tax authorities , but also comprehensible and simpler legal texts as a fundamental precondition for this .
The taxpayer very often refuses to pay taxes he regards as unfair .
Incomprehensible tax laws and the tax burdens arising from them are , though , always or automatically seen by the taxpayer as unfair .
We are therefore in urgent need of a reform of the VAT system , which is far too expensive and complex to the point of being incomprehensible even by experts .
It is not acceptable for transactions to be tax-exempt within the business chain between the Member States but taxable at national level .
It is advance deduction of tax within the business chain that facilitates this evasion of tax in the first place and that should therefore be abolished .
By taking this step , we would be cutting the ground from under the fraudsters ' feet , simplifying the system and avoiding needless controls , with all their vexations , which are a further burden on our small and medium-sized enterprises .
We should , therefore , be thinking , first of all , not only in terms of how we get the different authorities to work together better , but also about how we can simplify the system that makes fraud possible in the first place .
That would be a step in the right direction , but we will , nonetheless , support Mrs Kauppi 's report , as we share her view that it is self-evident that cooperation should be improved and that the effort must be made to make Europe less bureaucratic .
Madam President , I have no doubt that the existing arrangements for cooperation in the area of VAT fraud are inadequate in the context of the evolved single market .
VAT fraud costs the EU and its Member States several hundred million euro each year .
Although measures have been taken over the last few years to come to terms with it , VAT fraud is still a considerable problem today .
I agree that the best way to tackle this ever-increasing fraud is to have close administrative cooperation between Member States .
By allowing direct contacts between local offices , the fight against fraud will become less bureaucratic and more effective .
However , let me sound a note of caution in relation to the efforts inherent in this Commission proposal to base this measure on Article 95 of the Treaty .
Article 95 specifically states that it may not be used for fiscal provisions .
The Commission 's view is that this proposal is merely about administrative cooperation and that it does not relate to actual tax collection or tax measures .
With respect , I do not agree - my country does not agree - that by stealth the present position should be eroded .
I do not think that SCAC - the existing administrative committee in the tax area - should have more of these functions assigned to it .
It is the thin end of the wedge .
This proposal relates to fiscal instruments which Member States use and it should certainly be adopted , but it should be adopted with the correct legal basis , which is Article 93 , providing for unanimity of voting at Council level .
The regulation that this proposal aims to replace is based upon Article 93 , and quite simply this proposal should be also .
Mrs Kauppi has referred to the concerns regarding the legal basis in her attached explanatory memorandum .
In the past where conflicts have arisen in relation to the legal basis , the Council has always rejected the Commission 's view and has changed the legal basis to Article 93 or 94 .
As pointed out by my colleague , it did this most recently on the proposal for a directive on the mutual assistance for the recovery of claims .
The Commission has decided to take the Council to the Court of Justice in this matter and Ireland will be joining the action on the side of the Council .
While I welcome the substance of what this proposal aims to do , for the reasons I have outlined in relation to the legal basis , I and my Irish colleagues will be voting against the report .
Madam President , they say that ' noblesse oblige ' and I should , therefore , start my speech by congratulating Commissioner Bolkestein , on the skill with which he was able , this morning , to resolve the conflict that Parliament , the Council and the Commission have been facing for such a long time , preventing us from progressing towards a single market in financial services .
I would also like to congratulate Mrs Kauppi on her report , which has managed , as has already been said , to achieve the support of most of the political groups in this House .
I would like to make just a few specific observations .
In a recent appearance to prepare for the monetary dialogue with Wim Duisenberg , the President of the European Central Bank , we were given a report which demonstrated that the introduction of the euro will make price differences between the various countries in Europe more evident , as a result , amongst other things , of differences in taxation .
This leads us to call for the harmonisation of VAT and for it to be applied at source , as Mr Pérez Royo suggested , but , until this happens , it is clear that these price differences will encourage fraud .
For this reason , ' more Europe ' , or more decentralised cooperation within the European Union , is always welcome .
I was a tax inspector and I know how the obligation to refer to higher public authorities can paralyse an idea .
We need to eliminate formal requirements .
I see no need for a translation : nobody would ask for a translation of information that would permit the arrest of Jack the Ripper and I do not see why things should be different in the field of taxation .


With regard to the legal base , I disagree with the last speaker but I agree with Mr Pérez Royo , given that the difference between substantive law , which characterises the essential elements of the tax system , and formal law , which was set up in order to guarantee that these obligations are met , is well known .
Whereas the rules of substantive law have their base in Article 93 and , therefore , unanimity , those concerning formal law , administrative law and application law have their base in Article 95 because , amongst other things , this allows us to avoid unanimity and also paves the way , as we saw this morning in the field of financial services , for what the Spanish Presidency calls ' more Europe ' .
May I begin by saying that it gives me a great deal of pleasure to be able to discuss with Parliament today a proposal for a regulation to strengthen administrative cooperation between Member States in order to enhance VAT control .
I thank Mrs Kauppi very much for her report .
It is extremely constructive .
I can only echo what was said by Mr Karas who referred to Mrs Kauppi as his " young and effective colleague " .
She is not my colleague but I should like to echo the appreciative words of Mr Karas .
Mrs Kauppi , along with other Members of Parliament , spoke about the legal basis of this proposal .
It is about administrative cooperation .
It is not about changing the VAT regime .
I wish the Commission could do that .
We have wanted to do so for many years but we are not able to do so .
But no , it is about administrative cooperation .
It is not designed to change in any way the obligations of taxpayers or the rules governing the application of that legislation , but rather to gear administrative cooperation to the challenges of the internal market .
That is why the Commission is submitting this proposal under Article 95 of the Treaty .
In taking that article as the legal basis the Commission is consistent with its proposal for Regulation No 218 / 92 as well as with its proposal to modify the recovery directive .
The Commission is correct in choosing Article 95 as the basis of this proposal .
As Mr García-Margallo y Marfil said quite clearly , it gives Parliament codecision and that is what many Members of this Parliament want .
I take this opportunity to thank Mr García-Margallo y Marfil for the kind words he uttered in my direction .
I add to that that the Commission is extremely pleased that we have settled the matter of the so-called Lamfalussy proposal and that we can now continue with the work ahead .
More to the point , the Commission is of the opinion that this proposal is an important element of the new VAT strategy to improve the operation of the VAT system within the context of the internal market .
It also constitutes a response to the Council calling on the Commission to present proposals for fighting VAT fraud .
The intra-Community market is today seriously affected by organised VAT fraud , where professional fraudsters abuse the exemption mechanism of the VAT system .
Tackling that kind of fraud requires rapid and efficient cooperation between the tax administrations of the different Member States .
But at present the legal framework is too weak to support really effective cooperation , essentially because it is vague , over-centralised and the exchange of information is not sufficiently intensive .
In addition , cooperation is complicated owing to the existence of two legal instruments in this area with different scopes and different rules .
This proposal sets up one single legal framework merging , for VAT purposes , the regulation and the directive , and modifies the current arrangements in three ways : firstly , the proposal lays down clear and binding rules governing administrative cooperation between Member States , for example , for the presence of foreign officials during controls , or for organising multilateral controls ; secondly , the proposal devolves cooperation and provides for more direct contacts between tax inspectors of different Member States .
This is also a point which Mrs Kauppi drew to our attention .
She said that when French and Spanish controllers - for example - in a border area want to communicate , at the moment this communication has to pass via Madrid and Paris .
It is obvious that direct communication between inspection staff will make cooperation faster and more effective .
Thirdly , the proposal aims to intensify the exchange of information between tax administrations in order to combat fraud more effectively .
I am very pleased that this proposal gets the support of all speakers this evening , except for Mrs Doyle , whom I can no longer convince , since she is no longer here .
The Commission is extremely pleased with this support .
I would therefore like to particularly welcome the positive contribution of the rapporteur , Mrs. Kauppi .
But given the fact that examination of this proposal is ongoing in the Council , and given the Commission ' s strong desire to address this issue in a timely manner , I believe that the most appropriate course of action at this time is for the Commission not to formally accept the amendments put forward by Parliament , but to endeavour to take them on board , as much as possible , during the negotiations in the Council .
However I fear it will not be possible to take some of these amendments fully into account .
In particular , as regards the issue of electronic communication , I would like to stress that much of the information covered by this regulation is not available in electronic format , and therefore , in practice , cannot be exchanged by electronic means .
As regards the translations , I share the argument according to which Member States should strive as far as possible to waive a translation .
But the Commission takes the view that the arrangements under which Member States should waive translations should be determined in an implementing regulation , binding for all Member States , and not individually by each Member State .
Finally , as concerns data protection , the Commission takes the view that if Directive 95 / 46 / EC is fully applied , fraudsters would be informed that they are under suspicion , and consequently it is to be expected that they would transfer their fraudulent activity and would dispose of the evidence of fraud .
That would seriously hamper the fight against VAT fraud .
I am personally confident that an agreement between the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission will be achieved on these issues .
The Council has already started to discuss the proposal in detail .
It will do its best to achieve an agreement as soon as possible , and we are making good headway .
But your support of the proposal is important to achieve that much desired result .
I would therefore recommend this proposal most warmly for Parliament 's approval .
I thank Parliament for its most constructive intervention .
Thank you , Commissioner .
That concludes the debate .
The vote will take place tomorrow at noon .
State aid
The next item is the report ( A5-0002 / 2002 ) by Mr Rapkay , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the Commission ' s ninth survey on state aid in the European Union ( COM ( 2001 ) 403 - C5-0632 / 2001 - 2001 / 2269 ( COS ) ) .
Madam President , Commissioner , today the world 's eyes - or let us rather say , the eyes of Europe - were again upon you and what you were doing , although you were dealing with matters different from those which we are dealing with here tonight , which do not appear to be that interesting .
However , I have just heard that I am permitted to speak for eight minutes , as my group is not especially interested in the subject .
I see , though , that Mr Evans and Mrs Riis-Jørgensen are here , and so we can , anyway , give a repeat of our performance in committee , swapping our positions on this issue .
But , joking aside ...
We have jointly - and ambitiously - resolved that the European Union is to become the world 's most competitive region within the next ten years .
If the European Union wants to be the world 's most competitive region , that means that its enterprises must be the most competitive enterprises in the world .
It also means that we need the European Union 's ambience to be both favourable to competition and capable of handling it .
Thus far , it is right that our task should be to roll back state aid to enterprises as far as possible , and our task must also be - if we actually have to grant aid at all - to direct it increasingly towards horizontal goals .
To that extent , the perceptible decline in aid between 1997 and 1999 is to be welcomed - and that is the period under consideration , the period covered by the Commission 's ninth aid report .
We still , of course , call on the Commission to perform its role as a guard against aid that distorts competition .
On the other hand , we should desist from seeing aid policy only through lenses coloured by ideology , and from engaging in it from one ideological standpoint or another .
Some of us do that from time to time in this House , and I will give an example of it later .
Whether we like it or not , it is a matter of fact that aid is a tool of state policy , because it is used for incentives to facilitate control in line with the market and because it can be used to avoid the need for intervention in the form of instructions or prohibitions .
That cannot always be done .
It is sometimes more appropriate to achieve something by means of legal regulations , but also sometimes just as practical to do it by means of control in line with the market .
Aid has a vital place among the political instruments , as it can be used to correct failings in the market and reduce differences in standards of living between regions of the European Union .
What we are doing with European regional and structural policy is , indeed , also aid , albeit not of the State variety that we want to discuss this evening , and those policies are political instruments in supporting SMEs , environmental protection , research and development .
Let me say , Commissioner , that I welcome the fact that you , or the Commission , now have , in addition to the register of aid systems , which has now come into being , the State Aid Scoreboard .
That was something called for by all groups in Parliament .
This State Aid Scoreboard , which is in its earliest stages , can , in my view , be developed into an instrument which will make it possible to discern trends and assess aid by reference to qualitative criteria - the qualitative criteria to which I have just referred .
That , then , is something I value .
It is not only the quantity of state aid that should be comprehensively assessed ; we also need qualitative criteria and objectives that have to be taken equally into account .
As I have said , I have named them .
Sometimes they justify control measures with time limits , and even existing market distortions can be removed in the medium term by the use of aid .
I believe that the Commission has a far more broad and open mind - with apologies to Mr Evans , and Mrs Riis-Jørgensen - than has the present conservative-liberal majority in this House .
I have noted that , in general debates , there is always full-bodied rejection of aid as if it were quite simply a snare of the devil .
The politicians in the field , should one ask them , take quite different views of certain points .
In reality , they too want nothing to do with its general disparagement .
Let me now give you the example I mentioned earlier .
The Commission has , fortunately , been investigating for some time the extent to which sleights-of-hand in the taxation of businesses are being used to obtain illicit aid .
The Commission is doing this on its own initiative and because it is right to do so , but it is also doing it because it was called upon to do it .
In committee , I formulated a passage in my draft report which the Commission , remarkably , emphatically supports , and along the lines of which it intends to go forward .
When a vote was taken , the majority in committee cut out this passage .
Now , I will be giving you the opportunity to make good this error tomorrow .
My group will be reinserting this passage , and a couple of others as well , by means of an amendment .
Do please remember that this is common policy on which we have agreed .
So , tomorrow , you can make good the committee 's error , or , alternatively , make it clear in public that that is not how you see the details of aid policy .
You will have to do some thinking about that .
I want to wind up by saying that too much praise for the Commission is not such a good thing .
Let us cut back on it a little .
So I would like to refer , Commissioner , to something I touched on once or twice in committee .
It also has to do with the subject of qualitative criteria , qualitative and quantitative assessment .
That is the area , as you will rightly observe , of regional aid granted by the Member States , which makes up a very large part of the aid total , well above half , I think about 56 % or more if I remember rightly .
You will conclude that that is the area in which a reduction in aid can be best and most rapidly achieved .
That is , though , rather a generalised way of looking at things , and I would again recommend that you think a bit about whether it is not perhaps the area of regional aid in which we have very definitely to be guided by qualitative criteria .
If we were to have a debate on that next year , that would represent some small progress .
Madam President , I should like to challenge some of the assertions that have been made by Mr Rapkay .
Firstly , there is very much more that unites us on the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs than you would think from some of the assertions he has just made .
We can see that from the report that we are considering .
There are 22 paragraphs in this report .
Mr Rapkay had only six areas where his report was significantly amended .
We have six amendments to consider tomorrow .
Let us look at the things that unite us .
I certainly do not believe that state aid is the work of the devil .
In a sense that was excessive rhetoric on the part of Mr Rapkay .
We actually both believe in a competitive Europe .
We are in favour of making our economy competition-friendly .
Mr Rapkay 's excellent report - which I will support in its current form tomorrow - is a consistent report building on the one produced by the committee last year .
Of course there will be some differences of emphasis between us .
We do not all share the same political outlook .
But there is a trend in relation to the views that have been forward by the Economic Committee which are at the core of Mr Rapkay 's report and for which I congratulate him .
Yes , I certainly believe in the rigorous application of state aid .
I congratulate Commissioner Monti for the stance that he has taken in this area .
It is something that broadly reflects the position of our Economic Committee .
Our committee is committed to taking forward the Lisbon process .
Building a competitive Europe must be a part of that , so it is important that we have proper state aid control .
Part of that is through the transparency that comes from the State Aid Scoreboard , of which Mr Rapkay has been a keen exponent .
He has raised the issue consistently .
We are delighted that Commissioner Monti has made progress in this area .
There is more work to be done in developing the scoreboard .
I am not absolutely sure that the Competition DG competition is at the front of the queue in terms of the Internet-friendly nature of its particular website .
I am absolutely confident that more progress will be made .
I went on to the Internet the other day to find out about the Competition Day that is coming up .
It was not a particularly friendly site to deal with .
I should like to mention the Steel Aid Code .
I have consistently said to Commissioner Monti that the industry is looking for guidance here .
We want the current regime to stay in place in some format .
I hope that Commissioner Monti will feel after mature reflection that , given the difficulties with the United States of America , that is something he could support .
Madam President , as Mr Rapkay said , we can talk to each other as we are used to doing now that we are gathered ' in the bosom of our family ' .
I would first of all say thank you again to Mr Monti for the great efforts he has made in this area , and I would also thank Mr Rapkay very much .
We do not always agree , but I am very pleased with the report , even if there are a number of things we have to discuss regarding how we are to vote tomorrow .
There are also a couple of practical matters I should like to comment on , first of all a matter on which I myself have done some work , namely the Commission ' s proposal concerning the shipyards package .
We had a debate on this here in Parliament last autumn .
I was very much against the proposed aid to shipyards , and I therefore want to ask the Commission how this matter is progressing .
I was delighted to note that , at the Council meeting of Trade and Industry Ministers at the beginning of December , it was impossible to obtain the necessary majority for adopting the Commission ' s proposal .
The Commission was not immediately willing to alter its proposal , which was based upon the results worked out in what is known as the TBR report , drawn up by the Commission every six months .
Naturally , I am concerned that the Commission ' s next TBR report will conveniently demonstrate that we need aid for more types of ship than those cited in the Commission ' s original proposal .
I would therefore ask Commissioner Monti to answer the following question : is there a new TBR report on the way from the Commission and , if so , can the Commissioner then inform us as to what conclusions are to be drawn by it ?
Tomorrow , we in Parliament will vote on a proposal we did not have time to discuss before the vote .
It is most certainly a proposal that does not fall within your area , Mr Monti , for it concerns the fact that , quite extraordinarily , the airlines have been allowed to retain airport arrival and departure times which , under normal rules , they have made too little use of to be permitted to retain .
We are , then , preparing special legislation which we are now rushing through and which will , of course , mean that smaller airlines that wish to enter the market with competitive prices will not be allowed to offer this service to us as consumers , who shall instead have to put up with airlines which do not deliver the goods and which - when they do deliver them - only do so at unduly high prices .
That is also the reality where state aid is concerned , for it largely favours the old national companies with their monopolies .
For me , that is an example of the way in which our fine words about cutting back on state aid are all too infrequently followed up by firm and practical action .
I would therefore also permit myself to ask you a question , Mr Monti .
How does this proposal fit in with our general desire to cut back on state aid and create a situation in which we can all compete fairly and on an equal basis ?
Madam President , Commissioner , I have no hesitation in adding to those words of thanks that have gone to Commissioner Monti and Mr Rapkay , as rapporteur .
State aid granted on a large scale , often for shortsighted reasons , has for a long time been a strain on the purse of the European taxpayer and has slowed down the reorganisation of the economic structures of our Member States .
Although aid granted by Member States might be justified in particularly exceptional circumstances , large amounts of aid and various tax concessions distort competition and go against the principles of the single market .
For that reason , reductions in state aid and effective monitoring strengthen the competitiveness of the European economy and thus boost economic growth and the creation of jobs .
At the Stockholm European Council the Member States renewed their commitment to reduce state aid as a proportion of GNP .
There was also a promise to redirect state aid to horizontal objectives that benefited the Union as a whole .
This commitment must be kept to .
According to the general survey we are now dealing with , a decline in state aid was achieved in the period 1997 - 1999 .
We cannot , however , be satisfied with the progress made up to the present day .
We in Parliament have time and time again called for action that would guarantee greater transparency in this area .
The Member States still do not have any monitoring instrument that can be compared to the state agency monitoring that is conducted at Community level .
Data on state aid is still provided only in the form of total sums .
To make an accurate analysis possible we need more detailed information on the use aid is put to and the sectors and companies that receive aid .
Like many of my colleagues before me , I also take a very positive view of the Commission ' s announcement that a state aid register and scoreboard is to be introduced .
I also urge the Commission to continue with its earlier policy of reorganising the Union ' s economic and production structures , especially with regard to sector- and case-specific state aid .
In this respect I agree fully with what my colleague , Mrs Riis-Jørgensen , said about the shipbuilding industry , which is also a major sector from the point of view of Finland , my country .
There has been good progress made recently in that area by the Council .
If Europe is to become the world ' s most competitive economic area , it will mean giving up the practices of old .
It is clear , however , that new and permanent jobs will not be created by trying to maintain dilapidated structures .
Madam President , I would like to start by thanking the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , particularly Mr Rapkay , who has tabled this excellent motion for a resolution .
I greatly welcome the support pledged by the committee with this report for a rigorous state aid control policy .
Listening to this brief but interesting debate , I believe I can see a wide consensus , as , moreover , has been pointed out , between the different parties represented in Parliament .
I believe I can also see a non-ideological approach , and I feel that the more we succeed in producing information tools , the more we will be able to move away from reasoning solely in terms of ideologies and place ourselves in a position to assess the qualitative as well as the quantitative aspects of state aid .
I welcome the fact that the committee calls on Member States to live up to the commitment they entered into at the Stockholm European Council , which Mrs Kauppi has just mentioned , to reduce state aid as a proportion of GDP .
Despite the positive developments of recent years , I too feel that there is still room for further reduction of state aid in the Member States .
I essentially agree that a careful reassessment of the relationship between regional policy and competition policy must be carried out for the period after 2006 .
I also share the concern expressed in the motion for a resolution regarding returning regional policy to national control , given that some of the economically stronger Member States are arguing that a reduction in Structural Funds expenditure should be offset by greater tolerance with regard to national aid .
I see this as an extremely worrying trend .
I am very pleased with the positive reaction of the committee and the Rapkay report to two instruments which might not yet be as user-friendly as we would like .
For our part , we will endeavour to constantly improve the State Aid Scoreboard and the state aid register now available on the Internet .
There is no longer any need for me to describe these two instruments - you are quite familiar with them - and from now on the scoreboard , in particular , will make it possible to share useful information through Internet connections with the Member States and , with the introduction of the second edition , with the European Parliament as well .
What is more , the state aid register supplements the scoreboard , providing more detailed information in a less aggregate form on each case of aid , specifying the sectors and businesses concerned .
Concerning the steel industry , may I remind Parliament that the Commission has already expressed its intention that strict rules on state aids to this sector be maintained after the expiry of the ECSC Treaty .
The European Parliament , Member States , the ECSC Consultative Committee , as well as steel companies and their associations , have also requested strict rules for state aids to the steel industry .
The Commission considers that this objective may be attained by focusing on the types of state aid that , from the experience of the past and taking into account the features of the steel industry , have most distortive effects on competition in this sector .
This is the case of investment aid and rescue and restructuring aid .
It is the Commission 's intention to continue the current prohibition of these types of aid after the expiry of the Treaty on 23 July 2002 and this point is planned for discussion in the Commission very soon .
Mrs Riis-Jørgensen mentioned shipbuilding , and your interest in this does not surprise me entirely .
You are well aware what the conclusions or the non-conclusions were in the Industry Council in December .
Indeed , a report is being produced concerning the situation of another market segment , for which a procedure has been started .
I have nothing new to report on this .
On airlines , I would just like to point out that the Commission has decided , concerning the events of 11 September , that indeed they were of an exceptional nature in the sense of Article 87 ( 2 ) ( b ) of the Treaty .
This means that state aid to make good damage caused can be accepted - though as you know , this has been applied by the Commission in a very stringent and cautious and restrictive manner - concerning the four days following 11 September , as a result of the closure of US air space , and measures to cover the excess costs of insurance in air transport for one month or if needed to the end of the year .
Finally , let me once again stress how grateful the Commission is for the interest of Parliament in the state aid policy .
This encourages us to act more and more effectively in this delicate and important area .
Madam President , they could not fly for four days after 11 September and now they want to have a monopoly for more than a year .
Everything can be blamed on 11 September .
Please give us a free economy .
I understand Mrs Riis-Jørgensen as saying " they want " .
So far as I am aware , this is not a Commission position or decision , even though my colleague Mrs de Palacio is the Commissioner responsible in this area .
Thank you , Commissioner .
That concludes the debate .
The vote will take place tomorrow at noon .
Monitoring of BSE
The next item is the report ( A5-0467 / 2001 ) by Mr Olsson , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the follow-up to the BSE crisis with regard to public health and food safety ( 2000 / 2321 ( INI ) ) .
Madam President , allow me to begin by thanking everyone who has helped with this report : MEPs from other political groups - especially Mrs Roth-Behrendt , former chairperson of the Temporary Committee of Inquiry on BSE - together with the Commission and the Food and Veterinary Office in Dublin .
Globalisation increases with every day that passes .
It is a good sign that we are trading more and more across borders .
We need a free flow of goods within the European Union , as well as an ever freer flow of goods in the world .
It is , however , important that this should not lead to our seeing a freer flow of viruses .
Where mad cow disease is concerned , it feels as though the European Union has gone into the free market back to front .
First of all , a free market was created , and then we began to investigate whether the rules were adequate for a free market .
In recent years , a number of gratifying measures have been adopted .
For example , we have created the European Food Authority .
Moreover , food legislation has been reviewed , and this will lead to sound legislation once all the legal acts have entered into force .
Experience so far is alarming , however .
A look back shows that many Member States have been poor at complying with the legislation .
It is , then , not only the defective legislation but also inadequate compliance with this that have resulted in the present position .
It is extremely important that we now remedy this and become better at complying with the legislation .
If we consider the connection between these different diseases , we can see that scrapie , which is the oldest TSE disease , was discovered as long as several hundred years ago , while BSE , which attacks bovines , was not discovered until 1986 .
We are obviously at a stage where a lot is happening .
Life continues , and so does its negative sides .
We must therefore be prepared for the possibility of constantly discovering new problems .
During the autumn , there was some anxiety that BSE might also be able to attack sheep .
That is presumably the background to Paragraph 11 , about the need to monitor sheep , being included in the report .
I believe that its inclusion is a mistake and call upon Members not to vote in favour of it , for it appears that the investigation which was to have been carried out on sheep ' s brains was most likely carried out on cows ' brains .
Scientists too , of course , make mistakes from time to time .
The problem with BSE is that it is a disease which crosses the species barrier .
This means that there is a risk of people too being infected .
We know that Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease is a major worry in this context .
I want to point out some of the measures we propose for the future in the report .
First of all , I want to state that , for ethical reasons , ruminants must obviously never be fed with meat meal .
They are not carnivores by nature and nor , therefore , must they be forced to eat meat .
It is , however , sensible - and we return to this in the second report - for primary produce that is suitable for human consumption also perhaps to be used as feed .
The problem is that there is a risk of disease if an animal eats other animals of the same species .
What is termed a cannibalism ban ought therefore to be introduced , prohibiting the feeding of animals with feed produced from animals of the same species .
There is a considerable risk of infection , and there has been little in the way of compliance .
We must therefore probably observe that it will not be possible within the foreseeable future to remove the ban on feeding omnivores with meat meal and bone meal .
In the long term , when there is better compliance , it may perhaps be possible to do so .
Regarding the important issue of sanctions , I want to put a direct question to Commissioner Byrne . If individual Member States do not meet their Treaty obligations , the EU must have powers to intervene by taking measures to guarantee food safety - an issue that we also address in a number of points in the report .
We also believe that the Commission must be able to impose sanctions upon Member States that have not done enough to apply this type of legislation .
It would be particularly interesting to hear the Commissioner ' s view on this .
Finally , I want to repeat what I actually stated at the beginning of my speech .
Research is needed within both this and other adjacent areas if we are to be alert to new problems ' and diseases ' arising .
Diseases of this kind are dangerous to both animals and human beings , and it is incredibly important that we in the EU devote adequate resources to maintaining the fight against them at a high level .
Madam President , Commissioner Byrne , this being the fifteenth year since cases of the disease first appeared , one might think we had done everything necessary and had got a grip on BSE .
When we in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development were drafting our opinion and yet again pointing out that all Member States should now be carrying out their checks properly , we did think that , well , that has to be re-emphasised .
We could not have guessed that it would become such a live issue , yet we are now learning from Germany , mainly from Bavaria and the Rhineland Palatinate , that the tests were done carelessly and the checking handed over to private firms which were ill-suited to it .
One can only scratch one 's head in bafflement .
One can , of course , tell the Commission to better exercise supervisory control , but one can scarcely demand that any more , as the people at the bottom know just as well what it is all about .
Let us face it , BSE is a dangerous disease , and it is actually scandalous that tests are done only from the age of thirty months .
Most of the animals that end up in the slaughter line have not been tested .
Take Great Britain , where tests are still not being done at all , because animals over 30 months old are not permitted to enter the food chain , even though tests are , of course , necessary in order to establish the incidence of BSE among animals that are not getting into the food chain .
When it comes to the scientists who made a laughing-stock of themselves by examining sheep whose brains then turned out to be those of cattle , we cannot of course say , ' OK , then there is no danger to sheep . '
There is a danger to sheep , so they too have to be tested .
Turning to the circulation of animal bone meal , there are still evidently thousands of tonnes of infected or potentially infected animal bone meal making their way around the world , so that BSE is still spreading further afield and cropping up in places where we had never expected it .
We see here , Commissioner Byrne , that the feed ban is evidently inadequate .
It must be stated where the stuff has to go and how it is to be destroyed .
As the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has also made clear , the same applies to feeding with swill and food leftovers , which has , over and over again , brought us foot-and-mouth disease and rinderpest when feed contained these in untreated form .
This means that , here too , we can do nothing by means of a ban on its own , but must say where the stuff should go .
If we had voted on the so-called interim report - ' The Handling of Animal By-products ' - all of ten years ago , we would , of course , be under far less pressure from BSE , and if we had had it all along , there would have been no BSE .
I would say the same about swill and food leftovers : if we had had proper handling of these food leftovers , there would have been no infection with foot-and-mouth disease and rinderpest .
We must reach the stage where one system prescribes this for all countries .
Those who have an economic interest in bringing about the proper handling of animal by-products must be granted licences and punished by their withdrawal if they fail to do what the law prescribes .
Whoever breaks this law must lose his livelihood , because human health in our country is at stake here .
We must be bold in showing this rigour , or else - even in ten years ' time - we will still be discussing the recurrence of lapses .
Mr Byrne , I wish to expressly confirm to you that the Commission bears no responsibility for these latest failures .
They are the responsibility of the Member States .
The Commission has also done good work on the drafting of the interim report and on its presentation .
Madam President , I shall try to be brief , but I should like to say to the rapporteur , Mr Olsson , that this report comes at a time when we have the impression that we have reached a standstill in the BSE crisis .
The Member States have , on several occasions , shown how hard they are finding it to manage this crisis .
The European Union must not , therefore , shirk its responsibilities in this matter , particularly with the prospect of the forthcoming enlargement .
It is crucial , today , to better coordinate everyone ' s efforts to put an end to this epidemic and to prevent further crises arising in the future .
Our objective is food safety .
We will only be able to achieve this objective by means of better coordination of the policies implemented in each State , and through greater harmonisation of screening procedures and of the fight against the disease .
My group , however , is divided over the measures to be adopted in this field , although I personally fully support the report by Mr Olsson .
On the whole , my colleagues fully support these measures , which must enable us to achieve the objective of food safety .
The differences of opinion concern the approaches to be taken .
This is something I regret , because this obligation to public health must not allow us to relax the rigour to which we have subscribed under the precautionary principle .
The aim is not to pit farmers and environmentalists or farmers and health specialists against one another .
Farmers want to produce and to be able to guarantee the quality of their products ; environmentalists , like those responsible for public health , want to contribute to a sustainable development , but everyone ' s objectives are , in fact , the same .
Therefore , this obligation to public health does not allow any relaxation of rigour in terms of implementing the precautionary principle and the principle of zero tolerance , respecting the ban on feeding animals with animal meal , and the destruction of existing stocks of such meal .
I can see that our British colleagues are having a hard time and that they would like to find alternatives to destroying the entire national herd , but none of this should allow us to relax the rigor that we want to see in this monitoring of the BSE crisis .
I should like to conclude , Madam President , by reminding you that , in this field , it is crucial that the Commission is able to put a number of sanctions in place and that it ensures that the necessary inspections are made by the Food and Veterinary Office .
Community legislation must be implemented more systematically and must be implemented in all the Member States in the same way .
Sanctions must be followed up and we must be able to guarantee consumers the highest level of safety in order to restore the public ' s confidence in their farmers and in their political leaders .
Madam President , the Commissioner is in danger of hearing the same speech many times in different languages .
This is the English version .
I am speaking here on behalf of Mrs Roth-Behrendt , as her father died yesterday and she has had to return home .
I am sure the whole House will join me in expressing sympathy to her .
These are the things I want to say . First and foremost , we still do not know enough about BSE and about how it is spread .
We certainly do not know enough about its incidence in all the Member States of the Community .
We know that we still have it in the UK and although in the coming year it may be that other Member States have more cases than us , that is not a cause for satisfaction for us , but rather for commiseration with those who are still discovering the full horror of what this may mean for them .
In the UK we have had over a hundred cases of the human form of CJD .
We pray that other Member States will not go through that agony either .
The Commissioner will be entitled to say to us , when we talk about inadequate testing , that the Commission has said time after time that the real truth about BSE was hidden because there was no effective testing .
If this debate does one thing at least , as Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf and others have said , it may impress upon us that the Member States need to be able to do this .
I am glad that Mr Olsson accepts that there is an equality of effectiveness between the way the UK takes out animals at 30 months and the slaughter of affected herds and testing of individual animals before they enter the food chain in other European countries .
I would not want to see any misunderstandings about that .
I believe we need more effective checks for contamination .
There are some late , worrying statistics in the UK and elsewhere about animals born after the checks were put into effect , which are still now showing symptoms of BSE .
There are obvious suspicions about the hoarding of meat and bonemeal and about where and how the testing is effected .
Mr Olsson wants the FBO to be in effect the monitoring agency .
I do not mind that , but I believe that nothing should subtract from the responsibility of the individual Member States to ensure that their testing and external controls are effective and are carried through .
Then there is the question of animal waste to herbivores .
We will be debating this when Mrs Paulsen 's report comes back for its chequered second reading .
I would simply say that I am in that party in this House that believes , with Mr Olsson , that we should outlaw the feeding of animal waste of any form to ruminant animals .
It is high time that was done .
Finally , on the issue of sheep , I would just say to Mr Olsson that when we look at that lamentable failure over the testing of what turned out to be cows ' brains , all that tells us is that there was incompetence of a grotesque kind .
It does not tell us that we have proof positive that BSE has not jumped species once again and got into the sheep population .
I would like to hear the Commissioner 's views on those things and I apologise for repeating some of the other excellent remarks made in this debate .
Madam President , I welcome the report as it raises many important issues as we work towards a comprehensive and a safe food policy in the EU .
Control of infectious diseases goes hand in hand with proper monitoring .
Close consideration should be given to how infectious diseases are monitored by European Union institutions .
We must likewise question the methods of countries outside the EU and impose stricter import controls like those carried out in Australia and New Zealand .
However , we must remember , if regulations are drawn up , that it is important to impose penalties on Member States which fail to implement EU legislation on feed and foodstuffs , otherwise regulations are not worth the paper they are written on .
I call on Members to let common sense prevail .
Of course we need to test animals for BSE , but let us base the tests on sound scientific practices .
There is no proof that testing animals at 24 months is foolproof .
On the contrary , animals can develop BSE after 24 months .
I have had no satisfactory answers as to what this calculation is based upon .
The 30-month threshold currently imposed seems to be working .
The forecasts are that the UK will be BSE-free by 2005 , and this has been achieved using the 30-month threshold .
Meat under 30 months can now be exported from the UK and it is true to say that it has proved to be a safe product for the consumer .
Another concern is the compulsory testing of sheep .
Again I urge caution and call again on sound scientific evidence .
The whole UK flock was nearly wiped out last year because of the discovery of BSE in sheep .
However , luckily someone questioned the validity of the findings and it was then discovered that the test was actually carried out on a cow 's brain after all .
This episode did little to restore farmers ' confidence in proper scientific research .
We need to develop a comprehensive animal health strategy and ask ourselves what we have learned from BSE .
The main thing , without a doubt , is not to tamper with nature on ethical grounds .
Herbivores must not be made to eat meat or fishmeal .
However , we must now concentrate on the future and work on a policy and strategy to undo the damage to the food chain .
Finally , the farming community has suffered a great blow over the past few years .
Let us work together now towards a food safety policy and a reform of the common agricultural policy which moves us away from a so-called consumer-led policy that led to intensification - but let us not move either to a consumer-led policy based on unfounded theories .
We must regain consumer confidence by producing a policy that will embrace all aspects .
Madam President , infringements of the fundamental principles of food standards law provide a great deal of headline material in many , if not all , of the countries of the European Union .
Although they involved a lot of distortion and scaremongering , reports played a significant role in preventing such occurrences from being forgotten .
The breaches in the investigation of BSE which have become public knowledge in recent days represent setbacks for all those who have campaigned to introduce a high level of consumer health protection in food production , and I think they had had some of those already .
It is precisely the great public interest in this subject , and the apparent avoidability of the most recent instances of human health being put in danger , that justifies the introduction of strict sanctions as asked for by the report , in order to finally stop new cases of BSE flaring up .
The highest standards in food production should apply in the European Union .
Such is the most significant statement in the White Paper on Food Safety .
The legal framework this requires must , as I understand things , be allied to a recognised early warning system through the EU countries , so that suspicion that human health has been endangered will result in the products being designated and their manufacturers named in public .
As a rule , public warnings are always desirable , above all when it is suspected that a product has been widely distributed , which is always the likely case in the never-ending cycle of food production .
It makes sense to me that specific food producers should be publicly named and warned where , in future , there is the mere suspicion of danger through unhygienic production practices or basic materials .
The widely-honoured principle is this : checks on animal feed are the preliminary stages of foodstuffs inspection .
The report 's demands are indeed far-reaching .
Practical experience will show whether breach of a specific duty by the withholding of information should have the same consequence as fraud against the financial interest of the European Community .
The whole importance of the report lies in the necessity of referring again and again to the need to abide by existing prohibitions and instructions .
I wish to observe in conclusion that Mr Olsson 's report is of contemporary relevance and shows close acquaintance with the present situation .
I do not believe that it is a plan of campaign for the next BSE crisis .
Madam President , BSE crystallises the fears and the doubts of both consumers and producers : a considerable fall in the consumption of beef and a more than 20 % fall in the price of produce .
Europe , which is largely responsible for this tragic health crisis , must learn the lessons from it , particularly with regard to the failings that have occurred .
Instead of giving the Commission and the Veterinary Office greater powers , it would be better to harmonise the measures that need to be taken and then implement them effectively .
How , for example , is it possible that the list of specific risk material varies from one State to another ?
The European Union , the largest consumer of agricultural produce , must impose its requirements for food safety on extra-Community policy . In other words , it must apply to imports similar rules to those that regulate European production .
With regard to research policy , all means must be harnessed : research into the disease , methods of transmission , means of prevention , the updating of tests on living animals , etc .
With regard to waste treatment , how is animal meal stored ?
How is it going to be processed ?
This crisis also has a major economic and social aspect , with the threat to entire swathes of the farming sector .
The fall in the number of farms clearly illustrates the professional crisis affecting young farmers .
How , indeed , can they contemplate the future with ease if the high-quality products adapted to the new expectations of consumers are not selling ?
Other professions lower down the food chain are also affected .
This is true of small butchers and specialist butchers , who refuse to give up their right to remove bones in their shops when they only work with healthy carcasses .
Farmers have already made huge efforts to ensure quality , labelling and traceability , for which they are not always compensated .
Large-scale distribution continues , in fact , to favour cheap meat , even if this means importing from third countries .
If , as we are told , society has opted for quality , it must stand shoulder to shoulder with farmers in this process .
It has become crucial to launch information campaigns to reopen dialogue and to finally restore confidence between consumers and producers .
This step is essential to finding a way out of a crisis that is still unfolding .
Ladies and gentlemen , the first thing we must bear in mind at the outset of this evening ' s useful and necessary debate on the monitoring of the BSE crisis is the confusion , the distress , the suffering and the fury of farmers , whose possibilities , prices and morale have all been struck by a veritable earthquake that has shaken their world , ruined years of work on breeding and good practices and has caused them to be distrusted by consumers , which they feel is particularly unfair .
We are concerned to see that , in many farming regions , as you know , Madam President , large numbers of still young farmers are leaving the business because , unable to put up with the consequences of a crisis for which they are not responsible any longer , they are forced to stop farming .
In some cases , their despair leads them to take violent action , even to commit suicide .
The Commission , which reacted so badly and so slowly to the outbreak of this crisis , first by denying it and then by playing down its severity , appears today , probably to get itself off the hook , to be prolonging the matter by imposing whole ranges of measures which do nothing to allay consumers ' concerns ; they risk destabilising the markets and increase the costs of making changes to the industry , whilst at the same time proving itself to be more generous in laying down regulations than in providing money .
The European testing programme for scrapie enters into force this month .
Is this good timing when each test costs as much as a sheep ' s carcase and cannot currently distinguish between the prion which causes scrapie , which is harmless to humans , and the prion that causes BSE , which can be transmitted to humans ?
Furthermore , Argentinian meat imports have started up again .
Is this really the right time , when some parts of Argentina remain infected with foot-and-mouth disease ?
Incidentally , the special purchases programme , set up by the Commission is about to be abolished , on 31 March , and according to Agenda 2000 , the intervention mechanism for beef and veal is due to end on 30 June 2002 .
I call on the Commission to state unequivocally that these deadlines will be put back , because going ahead with these blows to the beef and veal industry would be like cutting off the oxygen to an injured person who is being resuscitated .
Instead , we feel that at a time when the BSE epidemic is at very different stages in the various Member States , it is the vigilance of the States themselves that provides the bests results .
In the United Kingdom , where the disease originated and which has had 99 % of all clinical cases , the measures , which admittedly took a long time to be adopted and an even longer time to be properly implemented , are now bearing fruit .
The number of BSE cases has steadily fallen by 40 % per year to reach fewer than 1000 cases last year , whereas in 1992 , there were 36 000 .
In France , where the epidemic is more recent and where systematic screening over the last eighteen months seemed to initially increase the number of cases , there has been a slight decrease since the end of 2000 .
The other countries affected have a lower rate of prevalence and also appear to be in control of the situation .
As you are aware , it is now Japan ' s turn to be infected by the epizooty that we have experienced .
In Europe , we must now , therefore , allow the authorities of the Member States to get on with their work so that farmers can regain the total confidence of consumers , whilst , within the Union , resolutely making the necessary efforts to provide real traceability .
Consequently , with regard to France ' s maintaining its ban on British animals and meats , the European Court in Luxembourg - the judgment should be read in its entirety - has acknowledged that the ban was largely justified due to the still insufficiently reliable traceability within the industry in the United Kingdom .
It is also crucial to effectively implement , by means of systematic and rigorous inspections , the same quality and safety requirements , in order to provide consumers with the same guarantees for meats imported from third countries as for Community meats .
Item 25 of the draft resolution that has been presented to us makes a timely insistence on the importance of this issue by emphasising the Commission ' s responsibility to " ensure that the same safeguards are applied with regard to imports from third countries as apply to Community products , in particular as regards BSE testing , the temporary ban on feeding meat-and-bone meal and the proper removal of specific risk material . "
Furthermore , the Commission should also inform us , as well as the Member States , of the results of its inspections .
To sum up , Madam President , consumer confidence , which is crucial if our farmers are going to find new hope , will only fully return when they see that in the European Union , public health protection comes before the dogma of free trade .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by congratulating Mr Olsson on his work and also on the willingness he has shown in incorporating the suggestions he received from all Members of Parliament into his report .
The report ' s explanatory statement gives a perfect account of the BSE crisis from its origins in the United Kingdom in the 1980s .
The 180 000 infected bovine animals in Great Britain , in addition to the 1 325 in the rest of Europe by the year 2000 and the 101 human cases of new variant CJD have raised serious issues about animal feed and have highlighted the far from harmless effect of this feed on the food chain .
Today , fortunately , we can congratulate ourselves on the scientific advances made in discovering the cause of the disease and on the efforts being made by the Commission and the Member States to eradicate it once and for all .
However , there are still some loose ends that need to be tied up in order to complete these investigations and implement the measures that are strictly necessary , because the measures that have been implemented are extremely costly to public and private funds , and for this reason , we must not ask for anything that is unnecessary , even though it costs nothing to ask .
Consequently , I wish to put forward the idea that , until there is scientific evidence to support it , we should neither gratuitously request that the age for obligatory BSE testing be lowered , nor should we ask for the list of risk material to be extended .
It would be a different issue altogether were veterinary scientists to recommend this , but , as things stand , they have not done so .
With regard to conclusion No 27 , which calls for a reform of the CAP to tackle this problem , I would say that the CAP deals with a great deal more than food safety alone and that this safety is sufficiently complex to be addressed within the reform of the CAP .
This is well understood by the Commission and hence the White Paper on Food Safety , the European Food Authority and all the legislation on food safety and animal feed that we are revising in this legislative period .
This is the framework in which the technical and regulatory actions to be taken to guarantee food safety in the whole food production chain and not in the CAP are established , although one side-effect of it could be to impact on some aspects of the CAP .
Finally , as has been said on many occasions , we think that if the crisis was not tackled earlier , it was not due to a lack of research , studies or mandatory regulations .
It was due to a failure to implement standards and to a breakdown in the appropriate controls for their implementation .
These are areas in which we should have more influence in the future .
Thank you , Madam President .
It is beyond me why , after putting so many strict measures in place , we are still fighting BSE .
Due to the unknown incubation period , the measures that have been taken only take effect in the longer term .
It is therefore possible for new cases of the serious Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease to emerge , against which we are still powerless to do anything .
We have to be very frank about this .
On the other hand , we can also state that , by the compulsory removal of specific risk material , a guarantee is put in place that the carrier of the disease no longer ends up in the food chain .
Since it is no longer permitted to feed cattle animal and bone meal , I expect that , in time , the number of cattle infected with BSE will be relatively small .
At some point , we hope that tests will show that we are at the level we were at prior to the BSE crisis , namely a few cases per annum .
Unfortunately , the testing of cattle for BSE has disastrous side-effects .
If one cow appears to be infected , the entire herd is slaughtered .
However , this makes no sense .
BSE is not the same as foot-and-mouth disease .
Infection is caused through the feed and is passed on down the breeding line . That is why the birth and feed group need to be traced and tested , and not the cattle accidentally sharing the same shed .
It is irresponsible to sacrifice healthy animals to a false sense of consumer confidence .
We went against God ' s creation by turning ruminants into cannibals .
We cannot conceal our shortcomings with futile measures .
We will once again abuse God ' s creation if we slaughter and destroy animals unnecessarily .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Parliament is using the Olsson report not only to take up a position on the current BSE situation , but also , in particular , to look into the future .
Our objective is to guarantee food safety , and we will not have reached it as long as our knowledge of this disease is incomplete .
That is why I particularly support the demand for the resources needed for continued research into TSE diseases to be made available by the Commission .
We need to learn more about these diseases and epidemics , which were previously unknown , in order to be able to combat them more effectively .
Society 's hysteria , which was particularly marked in Germany , is diminishing .
People are going back to eating meat , and are again buying it cheaply .
There is a need for clarity about who , in the European Union , is to bear the costs of additional impositions such as tests and investigations , and conditions for this must be the same from one Member State to another .
We must , in the same way , see to it that regulations are transposed in the same way in every Member State .
The provisions of the TSE Regulation need to be stringently applied , with tough penalties imposed for disregarding or fraudulently evading them , not only as regards the production and utilisation of animal feeds but also tests , regulations on slaughtering and the disposal of hazardous material .
Animal feed is the target of criticism as much as ever and will continue to be so until we have open declaration and can at last check to ensure that only what is listed on the container is actually in it .
We cannot carry on being driven by fear of fraud , improper treatment and erroneous identification to destroy valuable substances and , apart from that , to import materials or feed from overseas , for example , where we have no influence on their production and composition .
That is why I put working towards openness , ease of control , and truthfulness right at the top of the list , for only by them will we achieve credibility and trustworthiness .
Until that day , the ban on feeding omnivores with meat and bone meal will have to stay in place .
It follows from this , though , that the Commission urgently needs to develop innovative methods of disposal and recycling , such as , for example , the production of biodiesel from tallow or fats .
It must at least be made clear that unprocessed offal , waste water , fat and tallow still have to be treated .
We intend that this report should promote greater awareness and urge the Member States to be unstinting in their efforts to beat this disease .
Madam President , I should like to begin by congratulating the rapporteur , Mr Olsson , on his excellent work in compiling this report .
As a farmer myself , and someone who had a beef herd , I can testify to the wholesale damage and destruction that BSE has done - not only to the beef industry in my own country , but also in Member States throughout the Union .
So I welcome his efforts in fighting BSE .
This is a scourge that we must defeat across the whole of Europe .
I welcome any moves that will strengthen the efforts already made in the UK and by the Commission to stamp out BSE .
However , the report also raises some serious questions that are to be addressed if we are to maintain the efforts to improve food safety .
Firstly , I do not believe that the whole-herd slaughter policy has any scientific base for adoption .
BSE is not a contagious disease and cannot be spread between cattle .
As we have seen with foot-and-mouth , to adopt the scatter-gun approach to disease control policy of mass culling does nothing to instil confidence in the consumer and only serves to spread further concern .
In fact , if a farmer has to lose his whole herd for one case of BSE he may be less inclined to declare the animal and may bury it instead .
I ask Commissioner Byrne to review the whole slaughter policy for BSE in the EU .
Secondly , there have recently been worrying cases in the UK of beef being illegally imported from Ireland , which breaches the UK 's very strict regulations .
In the UK at present we have a scheme in place which prohibits beef over 30 months from entering the food chain .
In one recent case , beef over 30 months from a plant in Cork was shipped illegally for processing and then resale within the UK .
It is a testament to the tough and stringent controls in place in my own country that this particular breach was picked up so quickly and effectively .
But I call on the Commission and other Member States to ensure that their own authorities are as vigilant against this dangerous trade .
Finally , there have been far too many cases of meat containing specified risk material being exported into the United Kingdom .
The growing number of cases and the fact that they come from so many Member States - Germany , the Netherlands , Belgium , Spain and Ireland , to name but a few - must be a huge concern for us all .
I am not seeking to apportion blame in any way , but if we wish to see the farming industry - particularly the beef industry - flourish in Europe , we must all shoulder the responsibility to enforce the rules .
What I am calling for is a mood of resilience and an ardour to implement the EU regulations and the tough controls that we have in place , and for us to work together to improve the inspection regimes in all Member States .
I call upon the Commission to take a more robust attitude to the enforcement of this regulation .
We have found in the United Kingdom that the only way to rebuild the beef industry is to rebuild consumer confidence .
We will only do that by guaranteeing the public a safe product that they can trust .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this report focuses principally on public health and food safety .
Feeding with infective animal meals or fats is still regarded as the principal trigger for BSE .
It is irresponsible , in view of the experience we had of poor adherence to the ban on feeding ruminants with animal meal , to think at present in terms of lifting the general EU-wide ban on it .
Moreover , consumers would find it incomprehensible .
All animal meals still kept in stock , as well as feed containing them , must be destroyed without delay in order to prevent future cross-contamination of feedingstuffs .
There is a particular and connected danger presented by the animal meals , some of them infective , still stored in other states .
The smallest amounts of this material is sufficient to cause infections , and this is yet another reason not to lift the ban on feeding with it .
Guaranteeing the safety of humans and animals most certainly and fundamentally presupposes a working and stringent system of controls in the Member States .
I welcome the strict prescription of effective tests for BSE in all the Member States , and also the demand that the age for testing be reduced to 24 months .
The Commission must also intervene in favour of the introduction of the open declaration of all feed ingredients in all nation states .
Even before the Central and Eastern European states accede to the EU , they need to set up working systems alongside our own to oversee the safety of food and feedingstuffs .
There is an especially urgent need for slaughterhouses to be reorganised so that the immediate removal and disposal of hazardous materials in accordance with European directives may be guaranteed .
Imported food must be every bit as safe as that produced in the European Union , and so tests for BSE must now be made obligatory in countries outside the EU .
The safety of food , including that which is imported , is a fundamental requirement for consumers who want to eat healthily .
We must make it our concern .
Madam President , in the previous legislature , this issue was dealt with mainly by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , whereas the committee responsible is now the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
This is right and proper , for in this tragedy - a tragedy which is equally great for all - there are in effect two victims , also equally affected : the consumer and the farmer .
I remember the long hours of debate , the on-site inspections carried out at the beginning of the committee of inquiry ' s work and then during the work of the supervisory committee monitoring the committee of inquiry , set up because Parliament did not have confidence even in the information provided by the Commission ; in effect , it proved to be severely lacking in many areas .
Now we know more than we did then , for the world of science has also provided some answers and clarified the main issues somewhat .
We now know that the bulk of the blame for this tragic affair lies with the State , with the world of politics .
Basically , there are some Member States which have been less diligent in enforcing precautionary rules and , above all , bans , over the past two years .
Other States seem , once again , to have adopted , as in the past , the approach of a conspiracy of silence , in what could be described as an irresponsible attempt to hide and minimise the impact of the tragedy or - at least - the problem .
Already , in the past , precisely this attitude of lack of transparency has caused the most severe damage for farmers , for they were the butt of suspicion , mistrust and discouragement on the part of the consumer .
I therefore feel that the most important part of the Olsson report is precisely its loud call to governments to enforce the rules properly and thereby restore the confidence of the citizens , whether they are consumers or farmers , with an adequate information campaign and , most importantly , with sufficient support not least for those who are the direct victims of the tragedy : the farmers .
Madam President , Commissioner , it is , I believe , beyond dispute that public health and food safety are matters of importance to all of us , producers every bit as much as consumers .
Preventative consumer protection is on everybody 's lips , but my understanding of these things leads me to believe that our role as politicians is not to give additional impetus to the emotional discussions that are still being carried on about the ongoing handling of the BSE crisis .
For my part , I do not want to help discussion of matters concerning BSE to slavishly follow the spirit of the age .
In view of current events in Germany , I favour the strictest controls right along the food production chain .
We also , of course , need the toughest sanctions when offences are committed .
In the meantime , I advocate testing for BSE from 24 months .
Now , when can we actually expect science to come up with definite findings on how individual animals get the disease ?
I think that when that does come to light , we could say goodbye in no time to the idea of killing off all our livestock .
Until then , going down the road of mass slaughter is only one alternative .
The feeding of omnivores with meat and bone meal will no doubt continue to be prohibited , at that for a variety of reasons .
We will certainly maintain the current ban on feeding with animal meals for as long as the open declaration of feedingstuffs is not made mandatory and for as long as the processing of offal from healthy animals cannot be carried out with any guarantee of safety .
I will mention , though , the formulation used in Mr Olsson 's report .
He , too , says ' for the foreseeable future ' .
' For the foreseeable future ' means , for me , that the future may perhaps find us back on a better road ahead .
Let me conclude by saying that it is easy for us to explain to any critically-minded consumer that healthy meat on healthy bone is part of good diet .
Processed healthy bone in animal meal is , though , apparently a danger to the omnivore .
Just try making sense of that .
We could take numerous other examples to illustrate this state of affairs .
I take the view that we , bearing as we do political responsibility , have to get back to discussing things in a more matter-of-fact way .
Madam President , we still know very little about BSE , a disease that has shaken the whole European agricultural sector .
We urgently need new research into what causes it and how it spreads .
There is no reliable proof of the quality of the screening process .
The call to lower the age of animals to be tested from thirty months to twenty-four months is hardly relevant .
In most cases , the disease is still diagnosed in animals when they start to behave strangely .
The possible connection between calf feed and BSE must be studied .
There has been no clear explanation for recent individual outbreaks of the disease .
It is nevertheless worth supporting the disposal of stocks of bonemeal and tallow .
The disease must not be allowed to spread by accident as a result of contaminated feed .
There must be unambiguous declaration of ingredients in animal feed , and responsible cattle breeders must be able to make the right choice on the basis of reliable information when purchasing animal feed .
The wellbeing and health of animals must be safeguarded .
There can be no transitional periods allowed for new Member States joining the Community with regard to food hygiene and declarations of quality and ingredients , as the new Member States will be joining a real internal market .
The applicant countries must be given technical and financial support in the prevention of the BSE risk .
We have to ensure that the measures will also continue after the enlargement process is over .
A lot was done last year to bring BSE under control and this brought results : for example , consumer confidence in beef is starting to return .
At this stage it is reasonable to remain cool , reinforce the measures that exist , and await the outcome of new studies .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to thank Mr Olsson for his good and critical report , which does a thorough job of highlighting some difficult points .
The common concern of us all is , without any ifs and buts , the maximum possible safety of our food , which , though , should also look good and taste good .
To produce this food , we need farmers , we need agriculture and we need agro-food production .
That is still the case .
It is this fact that prescribes the frame of reference in which we are at present working on this own-initiative report .
The report rightly highlights a series of shortcomings , no doubt the most serious of which is the appreciable difference in the ways Community legislation is implemented in the absence of any common level of protection .
This is where , in my view , the Commission is meant to be able to intervene and should be in a position to do so .
The precautionary principle must be adhered to by any means available .
Current events in Bavaria and the Rhineland Palatinate show how important responsible controls are .
We must therefore hold fast to the imposition of strict sanctions when binding regulations are not complied with , but I counsel a more cautious approach where a scientific justification has not , to date , been found .
I cannot therefore go along with testing for BSE as early as 24 months , with the ban on feeding with leftover food , even if it has been treated in accordance with contemporary scientific knowledge , and , likewise , the idea of slaughtering the whole stock when a case of BSE occurs , which is something I reject .
There is an urgent need for more research into comprehensive food safety .
We need farmers to be well-trained , good managers , motivated and - which is most important - respected by society , and these farmers need a fair price for what they produce .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I , too , would like to thank Mr Olsson most warmly for taking upon himself the very difficult task of drafting this report .
Ever since the first case of BSE occurred , Parliament has always very closely observed and discussed the steps taken at both European and national level to deal with the crisis .
It is important for us , the farmers right across Europe , that all possible steps should be taken to avoid future food crises .
The precautionary principle , already mentioned by many of my fellow Members , must be adhered to , and the latest medical findings must be taken into account .
One difficulty that has become apparent is that of the marked divergences between Member States in the way they implement EU regulations and the partial absence of details as to how and to what extent Community legislation is being transposed .
I am in good company when I say that , above all , though , much firmer measures must be taken in respect of non-compliance , including the removal of hazardous material .
I do not believe that it is sensible to provide for the reduction to 24 months of the age at which tests are carried out .
I think this would give rise to unjustifiable costs .
Tests should continue to be carried out at 30 months in order to obtain secure results .
I therefore also support those amendments that provide for this .
As I have already said , the greatest protection is offered by proper slaughtering and removal of hazardous material .
Let me make another observation . I really would like to make the point that the common agricultural policy surely already does justice to the objective of food safety even now .
In my opinion , there is no absolute link between the continuing handling of BSE and the treatment of food leftovers .
The BSE crisis was , as we know , triggered by the production of animal meal under improper conditions and the equally improper feeding of it to ruminants .
The problems of recycling should be dealt with in another report .
A second consideration to which we should give attention is that the subject of animals , which are actually omnivorous , should be dealt with elsewhere , in a report of its own and not in this report , which is actually only on the ongoing handling of BSE in ruminants .
Madam President , I am very encouraged by the recommendations in Mr Olsson 's report and his support for the Commission 's approach in this .
I want to thank him for this report .
His extensive experience in this area is evident from the detail and the high quality of this report , and I thank him for that .
There is too little time available to speak of the recommendations that the Commission can support .
I would like , therefore , to concentrate on those recommendations with which we differ or where there appear to be differences within Parliament itself .
The recommendation to reduce the age of testing of bovines to 24 months is an example of this .
Almost eight million tests were carried out last year on healthy animals aged over 30 months .
The youngest positive case in these animals was aged 41 months .
This suggests that there is no immediate urgency to lower the current age limit .
However , the situation will remain under review .
Another issue where there is some confusion is in relation to the Commission action in cases of poor implementation of BSE measures by the Member States themselves .
I have gone on record repeatedly to the effect that the existing enforcement mechanisms , namely the infringement proceedings , do not have sufficient teeth .
The Commission 's intention is to present a proposal to the Council and Parliament shortly on food and feed controls .
This proposal will fundamentally review the inspection systems in the Member States .
In the process it will also propose much stronger action , including stronger sanctions , which many of you have referred to as having been contained in Mr Olsson 's report .
The question of financial penalties in the case of fraud or serious malfunctioning of a national control system is being considered in this context .
The incidence of BSE in the Community gives mixed signals .
The total number of cases in 2001 , excluding the UK , is likely to be in the region of 1,000 cases .
This is more or less double the 482 cases registered in 2000 .
However , most of this increase was due to the impact of the generalised testing of healthy and at-risk animals with the newly available rapid tests .
In addition , frankly , Member States that previously were not looking very hard for BSE have now learned their lesson and have hugely improved their surveillance efforts .
Nonetheless , there is still room for improvement in the area of implementation , as the reports of the FVO consistently highlight .
Another continued difficulty is the problem in the Member States in coping with the huge volume of meat and bonemeal which must be destroyed .
The Commission has actively reminded Member States of their obligations to respect Community law in this regard and I would refer to a number of contributions from Members of the House on this matter , and would draw your attention to the fact that there is legislation in place relating to this issue which must be complied with by Member States .
Finally , the continued uncertainty over the possible presence of BSE in sheep is also of concern , and many of you referred to this .
A decision was taken only last week to substantially increase the level of testing for TSEs in sheep .
This will provide a much better picture of the potential problem facing the Community if the presence of BSE in natural conditions is ever confirmed in sheep .
So , I greatly welcome this opportunity to respond to Parliament 's initiative in the report .
It is only a little over a year since the most recent crisis peaked .
We have made a lot of progress in the meantime .
At this stage I should summarise the key measures that have been put in place .
First of all , the use of meat and bonemeal in animal feed has been suspended .
Testing for BSE has been introduced for all healthy animals aged over 30 months and for at-risk and casualty animals over 24 months .
The list of SRMs has been extended , notably to include the vertebral column and the entire intestine of bovines , and mechanically recovered meat from the bones of ruminants has been banned .
There has also been very important progress on the legislative front .
Regulation No 999 / 2001 on TSEs was finally agreed and entered into force on 1 July 2001 .
Very good progress has also been made on the animal by-products proposal , with the question of how to deal with catering wastes as the main obstacle to final agreement .
The agreement also on the open declaration of animal feedingstuffs and on the Food Safety Authority will also greatly strengthen the overall framework in relation to TSEs .
Turning to imports from third countries , there are already a comprehensive series of measures in place under the TSE Regulation and its implementing provisions .
The FAO has undertaken a series of inspection missions in the candidate countries in recent weeks and months .
Argentina , Brazil and Uruguay will also be visited shortly .
The reports on these missions are now coming on stream .
It appears that while there has been some progress , further important efforts are still required to achieve full compliance in these countries .
I am very concerned that they should not repeat the mistakes of the Member States in their handling of the BSE problem .
The Commission will be actively calling on the countries concerned to take urgent corrective action .
I also intend to raise the matter in the meeting of the Agriculture Council with the candidate countries scheduled for next month .
Let me conclude by thanking Mr Olsson for his report .
I want to assure Parliament that the Commission 's attention remains firmly fixed on TSEs .
I am insistent that there will be no complacency .
I know that Parliament will continue to keep a close eye - rightly - on eradicating this disease .
There were a number of points raised by Members that I would like to refer to .
In the UK there is now testing of all bovines born between August 1996 - the date of MBM ban - and the end of 1997 .
The youngest positive test was found at 41 months .
That is in respect of eight million tests of healthy animals .
I should emphasise that there is no question ever of lifting the ban on the feeding of meat and bonemeal to ruminants .
That ban is in place and will remain so .
There is no debate concerning that issue .
Thank you , Commissioner .
Madam President , I should first of all like to thank Commissioner Byrne .
I am delighted that he replied so clearly to my direct question concerning sanctions and that this is an issue which is being dealt with by the Commission .
I am really looking forward to our being able to adopt a position in this House on the Commission ' s proposal concerning the way in which the issue is to be handled .
I see this as a major step forward when it comes both to this issue and to the control and inspection of foodstuffs generally .
I can also tell the Commissioner that I share his view of the proposal to reduce the age of animals that are to be tested for BSE to 24 months .
That was not my proposal .
Rather , it came from elsewhere .
I shall therefore help vote down this proposal tomorrow , using the same arguments that the Commissioner used .
I want to take the opportunity of thanking you , my fellow MEPs , for all your kind words .
It has been a pleasure to work on this report .
I would , however , emphasise in conclusion that the danger is not over .
As we have seen during 2001 , new cases have been discovered in many other countries , not only within the EU but also in the candidate countries , Slovenia and Slovakia , as well as in Japan .
BSE is still a problem .
I share the view expressed by Mr Whitehead concerning the BSE investigation which proved to have been carried out on cows ' brains instead of sheep ' s brains .
That means that the only thing we know in many of these situations is that we really do not know anything , or that we do not know a sufficient amount .
That is why there is a need for research .
That concludes the debate .
The vote will take place tomorrow at noon .
Climate change
The next item is the report ( A5-0025 / 2002 ) by Mr Moreira da Silva , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal for a Council decision concerning the conclusion , on behalf of the European Community , of the Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the joint fulfilment of commitments thereunder ( COM ( 2001 ) 579 - C5-0019 / 2002 - 2001 / 0248 ( CNS ) ) .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we have now been waiting for ten years , since the Rio de Janeiro Conference , for this moment to arrive .
It is true that the absence of the United States makes the Kyoto Protocol less universal than we would have liked .
It is also true that the Protocol is less ambitious than originally intended .
Nevertheless , the alternative to this small step would be incomparably worse : without the political agreement reached in Marrakech , we would have to waste another ten years in negotiations on drawing up a new Protocol .
I am , therefore , pleased that tomorrow we will adopt the Kyoto Protocol and we hope that this can enter into force as early as this year .
There is , however , one aspect of the Council decision that concerns me . I am talking about the alleged desire of Denmark to reopen discussions on the burden sharing agreement , which was approved in 1998 .
Such a renegotiation is unjustifiable , unacceptable and would heap ridicule on the European Union ' s international standing .
We should remember that , very recently , we censored Russia for attempting to do exactly the same thing .
However , in addition to this environmental message that demands that we act , approving the Kyoto Protocol also sends out other political signals that are worth highlighting .
Firstly , it has proved that it is possible to regulate globalisation .
Secondly , the European Union has demonstrated its capacity for leadership and , in this particular instance , I wish to congratulate Commissioner Wallström on the admirable way in which she has exercised this leadership .
Thirdly , it has created a new economic paradigm , the carbon economy .
From now on , the price of a tonne of carbon will be quoted on the markets and carbon dioxide emissions will represent a cost to be reflected in the price of all products .
The winners will be those able to produce the same things using cleaner technologies .
Having assessed the situation , let us now talk about the future .
Between 1990 and 1999 the European Union already achieved a 4 % reduction in its greenhouse gas emissions .
Nevertheless , the lack of commitment by the vast majority of the Member States is still a matter of serious concern and the situation is very worrying in some sectors , such as transport , in which it is predicted that emissions will increase by 50 % in the next ten years .
Given this framework , the community instruments proposed by the Commission are to be praised , specifically the European Climate Change Programme and the directive on emissions trading , on which the European Parliament is due to deliver an opinion within the next six months .
However , although we know what the Community strategy is , what role should the Member States play ?
In my view , the Member States must not fall into the easy temptation of only implementing reduction measures that entail low costs in both economic and political terms .
This would basically be an attempt to resolve the problem by cutting emissions in industry and in the energy sector without tackling the transport or civil construction industries .
This option would be environmentally dishonest and economically irrational .
By avoiding applying the policy to some sectors , Member States would not only be wasting an opportunity for technological change but would also run up a much higher reduction bill for the future .
The strategy must , therefore , involve a reorientation of economic polices , internalising the environmental costs of the ' greenhouse effect ' in all economic sectors .
This will only be possible if we introduce certain measures that are considered to be consensual , such as the production of renewable energies , energy efficiency and public transport , in addition to clearly unpopular measures such as ending subsidies to the fossil fuel industry , an energy tax and a tax on carbon dioxide emissions in the transport sector .
I shall conclude by thanking the shadow rapporteurs of all the political groups for their cooperation and commitment .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by thanking the rapporteur for the presentation of his report , and also for his commitment to climate protection in recent years .
I would also like to thank the Commission , in particular Commissioner Wallström , who has done everything to make it possible for us to now discuss in definite terms the ratification of the Kyoto Protocol , which , we can now , thank God , get to grips with .
Tomorrow we can say only ' Yes ' or ' No ' to the Kyoto Protocol , but it has taken a great deal of work to give us the chance to say ' Yes ' to a comprehensive agreement .
I thank all those who have played a part in this .
The Kyoto Protocol has come in for heavy criticism and will continue to do so .
Most recently , as the rapporteur has mentioned , it is burden sharing on which criticism has again been focused .
I will say here quite openly that burden sharing merits criticism , and that those who say that the burdens are shared unfairly , are right .
No one , though , is reducing too much ; all the Member States are reducing too little .
The experts tell us quite unambiguously that , if we want to put a stop to climate change , we must reduce greenhouse gases by 50 % worldwide .
The magnitude of the task and the pettiness of the discussions between the Member States about this first step - which is , after all , a very modest one - is shown if we work on the basis that the industrialised countries need to reduce by over 50 % in order for the developing countries to have any kind of chance of achieving some sort of prosperity for themselves .
India produces a tonne of CO2 per head of the population , as against the Member States of the European Union with about 10 tonnes on average .
Against such a backdrop it is bad enough that some EU Member States are permitted to increase their emissions , and that the Member States that produce a very great deal of pollution , such as the one from which I come , complain about now having to reduce their emissions by a relatively large amount .
The Kyoto Protocol is only an initial step and must be followed by many others .
We should not , therefore , be small-mindedly discussing the number of places after the decimal point , but energetically striving for a sustainable economy , being careful with resources and saving energy .
Madam President , I also wish to welcome the Commissioner at this late hour .
I cannot help but wonder if it is always the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy that meets on Tuesday night during the part-session in Strasbourg or whether we are regarded as some kind of suspect fundamentalist sect that is always placed lowest down on the agenda .
That would be pretty odd , given that we are responsible for one of the most important issues in Parliament , namely that of the environment .
I should like to ask both the President and the Commissioner to look into whether it would be possible to change this , that is to say whether it would be possible at least sometimes to raise the status of environmental issues by debating them in the daytime and not always after nightfall .
I had really intended to begin by parodying a well-known Conservative politician in Sweden who once said that he was not only a Hallander but also a European .
I should like to say , today , that I am not only a proud Gothenburger but also a proud European .
I am proud to be able to say that Parliament has now concluded its debate on the Kyoto Protocol , and I look forward to the Council ' s also being able to ratify it in March .
I am particularly proud , however , of having been able to participate in the little delegation that visited the United States last week .
We were given the opportunity of discussing the climate issue with both Congress and the House of Representatives .
I have the sense that there is not only a physical ocean separating the continents but also a mental ocean , given the way in which the United States regards the climate issue and believes it should be handled .
Certainly , the climate issue has now been recognised as a problem in the United States because their own researchers have stated that it is a problem .
However , it is still believed that the solution to this problem is to be found in the United States .
It is this view that most divides us .
The United States regards a global environmental threat as a domestic problem that only concerns Americans , while the European attitude is that the issue should be dealt with jointly .
I therefore wish to thank the Commissioner for having taken such an active role and also thank the rapporteur of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , Mr Moreira Da Silva , who has kept us together and ensured that we have held a common view and position beyond the frontiers of Europe .
We need , in the future , to stick together not only in theory but also in practice .
That cohesion will be put to the test following ratification , as it will also be when , a little later on in the spring , we debate the European Climate Change Programme and emissions trading .
It is just unfortunate that certain members of the Council will feel the need to make a fuss about the way in which the burden is distributed .
It is pretty pathetic that it is Members from a Scandinavian country who will be doing this .
However , there are black sheep everywhere .
Whatever the case , I am pleased that we are able to conclude the debate on the Kyoto Protocol today .
Thank you , Madam President , the Kyoto Agreement is an historic agreement , the basis of which was laid in Rio in 1992 .
Bush senior was in two minds whether he would actually go to Rio , but he eventually went and signed the Rio Agreement .
The attempt to conclude an agreement with the Clinton / Gore administration in The Hague at the end of 2000 failed .
It was disconcerting to witness how Bush subsequently discarded the Kyoto Agreement .
Fortunately , the breakthrough came in Bonn in July of last year - a major breakthrough - and it is for my group of great importance that nuclear energy plays no role , either with the CDM or with the Joint Implementation .
Parliament will ratify the Agreement tomorrow .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy has already given us a taste of what to expect : 33 votes for , 0 against , 0 abstentions .
We will see similar figures tomorrow too .
We will be voting unanimously .
Hopefully , the Council will do the same , which on 4 March will first need to iron out a minor Danish issue , but I feel confident .
Europe has taken the lead , and I , too , should like to thank Commissioner Malmström for her boundless commitment .
As far as the content is concerned : 8 % less in Europe and 5 % less in the industrialised world , is far from good enough .
However , Kyoto is the only international Treaty we have for combating global warming .
And like the Ozone Treaty , it will need to be improved many times .
But Canada , Japan , Australia and Russia still need to ratify the Treaty first .
This will hopefully be done before the Rio Plus 10 Summit meeting in Johannesburg .
Like Bush senior , Bush junior is in two minds whether he should go to Johannesburg .
Hopefully , like his father , he will decide to attend after all .
Last week , we were in Washington with a small delegation , and there are indications that the United States is actually under pressure to change its attitude .
The Democrats were embarrassed about the fact that their country was not participating in the Kyoto Protocol , and a number of Republicans too have seen the light .
Bush will probably proclaim a national climate policy soon : a modest , partial disengagement from economic growth and energy consumption .
Not good enough but far better than what he stated a year ago .
We have made it clear that the economic costs of such a policy for America will be greater than the costs of taking part in Kyoto .
It is also satisfying that a number of large concerns in the US want America to take part in the Kyoto Protocol .
The question is no longer whether , but when , the United States will take part .
Three major questions remain .
First of all , there is the implementation .
Attaining 8 % less is starting to become a serious matter .
Then there is the discussion about the objectives following the initial period .
One per cent less per annum is a very good start , and I hope that the Commission can confirm this .
Finally , the most important and most difficult issue is to persuade the developing countries to come onboard in due course .
Madam President , Commissioner , as Mr Moreira da Silva reminds us in his report , ten years have passed since the 1992 Rio Earth Summit .
I hope that in September we can celebrate the implementation of the Kyoto Protocol .
We will have to consider whether or not these last ten years have been wasted .
Whilst on the one hand we recall how reports , financed mainly by Americans , were falsified during this period to show that climate change did not exist , in the same way that any scientist who insisted on the problems that climate change could cause , was discredited , it is also true to say that public awareness has greatly increased over these ten years .
In other words , we may have wasted time in implementing measures , but the level of public awareness is higher than ever before .
I think that today we are all aware of the significance of the Kyoto Protocol , the meaning of climate change and its associated effects , such as the submergence of islands , the destruction of coastline , the massive displacement of millions of people and the loss of biodiversity .
Therefore , I think that we have made gains on the one hand even if we have suffered losses on the other .
It is also true that , from 1990 to 1999 , greenhouse gas emissions were reduced in Europe , but it must be said that this is due , to a large extent , to two countries in particular , for very specific reasons .
There are many countries , such as my own , whose greenhouse gas emissions have increased - excessively , to my mind .
Spain ' s emissions have increased by 23 % , although the possibility that at the next Council of Ministers , according to today ' s papers , the Spanish government will decide to ratify the Kyoto Protocol is to be welcomed and is good news .
This is an example that other countries should follow , to be able to reach , in September , the figure of 55 countries needed to ratify the Protocol , which account for over 55 % of all greenhouse gas emissions .
I believe , in agreement with some of my fellow Members , that the final result is not as ambitious as expected some years ago , but , as Mr Moreira da Silva also states , the alternative would be much worse .
We have to work to ensure that States ratify the Protocol , but also that they implement specific measures , with the priority of those economic sectors that pollute the most , such as transport .
The rapporteur very clearly states that emissions caused by transport could rise by 50 % over the next decade .
Priority measures should be direct action in key economic sectors .
I also agree with Mr Moreira da Silva that the balance that has been achieved should be left alone , for , as many of my fellow Members have already said , Mrs Wallström and this Parliament have done some great work and , although it may be modest , the step forward is very significant .
Madam President , the Kyoto Agreement is very important and we can all be satisfied that at long last it is to be adopted .
The EU has shown astonishing powers of leadership in talks on climate change .
Without that , the Protocol could not have been saved .
European companies have had to agree to strict measures to try to achieve an 8 % reduction by 2012 compared to the 1990 levels .
Our competitors in the United States do not have to withstand this burden , President Bush has stated quite coolly that this way he is protecting American industry and production .
The EU cannot bear the responsibility for the entire world alone .
The USA , Russia and China must all commit themselves to a common aim .
This has been insisted on strongly at WTO talks .
It is not merely a matter of commercial policy but the world we share and our future .
The burden has already been shared within the EU .
Now there is talk of emissions trading .
We cannot let emissions be auctioned off ; we have only bad experience of the UMTS and other auctions .
I am especially worried about those industrial sectors and companies that have already made massive investments to reduce emissions .
These responsible companies cannot now be allowed to pick up the bill again .
Surely it is nobody ' s intention to force successful and environmentally caring companies out of the market ?
The Union ' s need for energy is only increasing with economic growth , regardless of the savings made .
To achieve the Kyoto targets we have to continue to save energy and adopt the use of renewable energy sources .
To ensure the supply of basic levels of energy , however , nuclear energy is the only realistic option .
Madam President , it is quite remarkable how Parliament is united across the boundaries of group and nation on this issue , and the Commission and the Council , too , are of the same opinion , that we want to ratify Kyoto .
I hope that tomorrow 's vote will see us achieve the greatest possible majority and perhaps even unanimity on this issue .
There is a cultural significance to this , for - if I am right - Europe would be assuming cultural leadership on an important issue for the first time since the Second World War .
In the past , we always followed the Americans , trailing them by five to ten years .
This time , Europe is indeed ahead .
That is something that I welcome .
Only a few , though , are aware of what this ratification signifies .
Signing it takes no time , but putting it into practice is extraordinarily difficult .
Some have already referred to that .
I find it all the more regrettable that , on this issue , we - we , the popularly and directly elected European Parliament - are only being consulted .
This is a great economic upheaval - and we are only being consulted .
That strikes me as extraordinarily regrettable , although I must say that I would still say ' Yes ' to Kyoto if Parliament had the right of codecision , and I assume that my fellow Members would do likewise .
I also call to mind the fact that we are acting on the basis of the precautionary principle , which has , in the meantime , found its way into our lawmaking .
Were we not to act , our inaction could , under certain circumstances , lead to us being sued in the European Court of Justice and compelled to ratify Kyoto .
This agreement also has its advantages , for we are putting our industry and ourselves under pressure to develop the most energy-efficient products and processes , and , finally , we are making ourselves competitive , even though I cannot deny that there will also be difficulties for some branches of industry .
Madam President , the European Parliament could have insisted that the ratification of the Kyoto Protocol complied with what is called the assent procedure , whereby this legal instrument could not have been brought into force in the Community without the approval of the European Parliament .
Against certain legal advice , we are now , however , satisfied that our opinion on this matter is being heard , and this is because we have said how important it is to have the Protocol ratified at long last .
Parliament is really doing its utmost now to see that the Kyoto Protocol will be in force when the meeting on sustainable development is held in Johannesburg in September . That is very important .
I would like to add my thanks to those expressed here both to the rapporteur and the Commissioner .
It is certainly true that this process , which has now ended with the acceptance of the Kyoto Protocol by the Community , will not be the last indication that the European Union can demonstrate a real capacity for global leadership , and can also show its citizens , as the rapporteur stated , that globalisation can also be controlled if proper rules are applied to it .
There has also been talk of the economy in this debate .
It is important to realise that a good number of companies have already become aware of just how much potential there is for business in policies on climate .
We must also have confidence in this and include the United States in the process .
As my colleague , Mr de Roo said in his speech , a large number of companies in the USA wish the United States would become involved in this process .
It may actually be , as my country ' s Minister of the Environment has said in this connection , that the USA will become the last open-air museum of the old technology unless it joins in these efforts .
Now we have before us the task of implementing the Kyoto Agreement in practice in the Community .
Thanks go to the Commission for the swiftness with which it proposed a directive on emissions trading as well as a large-scale climate programme just before the Marrakesh Conference .
This spring the European Parliament can now participate with determination in drafting the rules of this directive on emissions trading .
I believe that in this we will be acting with the express purpose of seeing to it that the companies that have already played their part will also receive a reward of some sort , and that all the other companies will also be tempted to join in .
Madam President , Commissioner , as Mr Moreira da Silva stated , on 4 March the Kyoto Protocol will be submitted for ratification to the Environment Council .
I am convinced that the Spanish Presidency is determined to overcome any last-minute difficulties that could arise and that the result will be satisfactory .
This will mean that the European Union is taking another step forwards in leading the struggle against climate change .
We have seen once again this evening that the United States is widely criticised for not sharing the level of commitment the Protocol demands .
This puts all EU Member States , and this is particularly true if we are able to get the United States to sit around the negotiating table , in a position of urgent need to fulfil each and every one of the provisions laid down in the Protocol , unless we want to suffer total ridicule and have our reputation in international politics tarnished .
Nevertheless , although achieving the Kyoto objectives will not be easy , it is possible .
This is demonstrated by the data in Mr Moreira da Silva ' s resolution .
We must become a society that is poor in carbon and rich in the use of cleaner technologies , taking full advantage of energy efficiency .
We know that the role of the market is crucial to achieving these objectives , but we are still hesitant when it comes to implementing specific measures , above all when we give in to those short-sighted sentiments that still perceive the Kyoto Protocol as an attack on competition and employment when it should be seen , because it can now be seen , that the opposite is the case .
We must act on demand at Community level on aspects such as the internalisation of costs , emissions trading and the exchange of certain policies such as transport , energy or agriculture .
With regard to demand , we must focus on training and motivating some European consumers who are still very apathetic and uninformed in this regard .
I believe that the rapporteur has tabled a proposal that is committed to sustainable development , which is clear and precise in stating exactly where we need to act .
For this reason it deserves , and I think already has , this Parliament ' s gratitude and total support .
Thank you , Mr Moreira da Silva .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I wish to say that I welcome the European Parliament ' s draft resolution on the proposal for a Council decision concerning the conclusion , on behalf of the European Community , of the Kyoto Protocol .
I wish first of all to thank Mr Moreira Da Silva for the report and for the fact that it has been possible to resolve this issue of such political importance by means of a vote in Parliament at an early stage .
I also want to take the opportunity to emphasise how much I value the cooperation with the European Parliament concerning the Kyoto Protocol .
Your efforts , including visits to the United States and contacts with parliamentarians in different countries , have been extraordinarily important .
The cooperation we have had during the negotiations , especially under Mr Moreira Da Silva ' s leadership , has contributed to our having come as far as this on our home ground .
I also wish to say that I consider it self-evident and very important that Parliament should be fully involved in the work we are now doing on the European Climate Change Programme and on the proposal concerning emissions trading .
For some years , the EU has of course advocated that the Kyoto Protocol should come into force at the World Summit on Sustainable Development to be held in Johannesburg in September of this year .
If it is to be possible to achieve this objective , the EU should set a good example .
Mr Liese and Mr Linkohr are right : even though we can quarrel about the distribution of the burden , this is just a first step if we want to take the climate experts seriously .
It can only be seen as a first cautious step along the road .
I am particularly pleased about Parliament ' s support for the proposal ' s being adopted as soon as possible so that we can ratify the whole proposal by no later than 1 June , when the Member States have concluded their own national procedures .
I want to comment briefly on what is termed the Danish problem , which is to be regarded as a technical complication .
It is also in terms of a technical problem that we are trying to solve the issue .
At the Council meeting in December , the Environment Ministers agreed that we should try to find such a technical solution and that a decision should be taken during the Council meeting on 4 March .
I hope that this will be possible .
If this decision is adopted at the Environment Council meeting in March , this would be a clear signal that the EU is determined to comply with the Kyoto Protocol , a move that would strengthen the EU ' s credibility and leadership role in the matter of combating climate change .
It would also increase the pressure on other parties , for example Japan and Russia , to follow our example .
The prospects for this are fairly good , given the way things look at present , particularly in Japan .
At the same time , we are going to continue the dialogue with the United States and try to convince them to resume the Kyoto negotiations or at least adopt similar measures on a national basis to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases .
If we are to be credible , we must put our own house in order first .
In plain language , this means that our first priority must be ratification and effective implementation of the Protocol on the part of the EU .
Thank you for your views and for this debate .
That concludes the debate .
The vote will take place tomorrow at noon .
Education and training systems
The next item is the report ( A5-0017 / 2002 ) by Mrs Martens , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , on the Commission communication on the draft detailed work programme for the follow-up of the report on the concrete objectives of education and training systems ( COM ( 2001 ) 501 - C5-0601 / 2001 - 2001 / 2251 ( COS ) ) .
Madam President , education is an important topic , and I am therefore pleased that the Spanish Presidency has selected it as one of the spearheads of its activities .
This report is about developing the objectives which the Commission has formulated in the field of general education and occupational training .
At the Lisbon Summit , it was stated that the European Union was to become the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world , capable of sustaining economic growth with more and better jobs and greater social cohesion .
This is an important objective which is also attended by the necessary urgency if we want Europe to be accorded a respectable place on the economic and cultural map of the world .
Education is rightly regarded as an important instrument for attaining this objective .
It is no less justifiable to apply all existing brainpower and experience .
This is why I regret that the European Parliament was not involved in drawing up these objectives , was not consulted and can therefore now only react to the programme which the Commission has in mind for developing the objectives .
Having said that , I do agree with the goals which the Commission is formulating : increasing the quality and effectiveness of education ; facilitating access to education ; and opening up education and training systems to the world .
The Lisbon Summit thus wanted Europe to do more to promote the knowledge-based economy , sustainable growth and social cohesion .
Unfortunately , the Commission report mainly refers only to the first two objectives .
The focus is on new technology , expertise in the field of ICT , getting boys and girls interested in education and technology , etc .
This is important in occupational training which prepares people for making a professional contribution to society .
General education is broader .
Not only does it prepare people for working life , it also has a duty to prepare people to function in society as people , as citizens .
This dimension is missing from the Commission communication .
The Commission is thinking of education too much in terms of the economy and the labour market .
In other words , it mainly wants to educate people in their role as economic players .
When we talk about a future Europe , when we talk about a stable Europe , a Europe with social cohesion , then education has a role to play in that field too .
This is particularly the case since education , notably general education , has in many countries been given a strongly complementary function in relation to the family .
Education in my own country , the Netherlands , is in crisis , in my view .
There are too few teachers .
The quality of education is going down , there are complaints about the level of knowledge of students about to embark on a university degree , there are too many regulations , etc .
There is also insufficient funding .
There are problems in other countries too .
That is why I am pleased that consideration is once again being given at European level to the objectives of education and training , and that concrete testing criteria are also being formulated , with due respect for subsidiarity .
In my report , where social cohesion and a stable Europe are concerned , I call for indicators to be formulated and applied which home in on skills that people need to function well in society .
Communication and social skills spring to mind , as well as knowledge and understanding of other cultures and a developed sense of citizenship .
As already stated , education also offers , of course , a preparation for working life , but must certainly also contribute to educating people into an awareness of democracy and of the notion of the rule of law , as well as helping to educate people into becoming active citizens who not only have their own self-interest at heart , but also the public interest .
Needless to say , the report must be seen in the context of other programmes which touch upon education , such as lifelong learning , mobility and language programmes , etc .
Lifelong learning is important when we talk about improving access to education for all , not only for young people , but also older people , not only for healthy people , but also for those with a handicap , and not only for the native population , but also for foreign people .
I should like to conclude with one remark about language education .
With a growing , open internal market and with a society which is becoming ever more multicultural , the importance of a knowledge of languages is growing .
This is why , in the report , I subscribe to the objective that all pupils should be proficient in two languages in addition to their mother tongues by the end of their compulsory education .
Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to emphasise the importance of this report , which underlines the fact that the role of education does not consist merely of preparing young people for employment - even if employment also underpins society and is a means of gauging inclusion and economic and social reproduction .
It is generally said that training is about filling in the gaps .
The same applies to education .
What we really need to do here , therefore , is define what these terms actually mean , which is not happening today .
We must , therefore , also discuss the definition of the gaps that we want to fill with our education and training policies .
Definitions of this matter are not unanimous ; it could even be said that there is a profusion of definitions and that this very profusion reveals our political leanings and the values that we advocate , individually and collectively .
To my mind , the greatest challenge of this decade is that of social cohesion .
In a world in which everything is going faster and faster and in which speed of movement has become a factor in the generation of wealth , there are increasing numbers of men and women for whom the doors to work , to culture and to knowledge are closed .
I would go so far as to say that exclusion is on the increase and that this trend is harming our various strategies for social cohesion , a concept which we are nevertheless fond of in the European Parliament .
Consequently , the gap is continually increasing between a growing number of European citizens and what I would call the world of money .
This divide illustrates not only the distance between the individual and the market , but also the confusion , the loss of meaning in a collective system within which there are two groups : those who make the rules and those who merely follow them .
We must , therefore , urgently discuss the issue of the continuous assessment of the European social model and of the price that we are prepared to pay to produce this social cohesion , this citizenship .
In this context , we must do everything we can to ensure that the decision of the Lisbon European Council , confirmed by the Stockholm European Council - which , in strategic terms , places economic growth , better employment and greater social cohesion on an equal footing - becomes a reality for all and that finally , everyone , without a single exception , has access both to the social skills required by citizens and the professional skills required by economic producers .
I now call on the Commission to take my suggestion fully into consideration and put in place the necessary policies for social cohesion to no longer be the consequence of other strategies and become a fully-fledged , high-priority approach in order to safeguard public welfare , in other words , the harmonious and dignified development of Europe ' s citizens .
Madam President , according to Hegel , culture - that is , philosophy - spreads its wings only at the falling of the dusk , but it is getting on for dawn here !
In any case , in my capacity as shadow rapporteur for the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport for the Martens report , I would like to start by thanking and congratulating the rapporteur on her work .
I am not greatly opposed to any of it and would just like to highlight a few particularly important points .
I feel that it is important - as the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy has also pointed out - that this report should address the issue of education not just in terms of professional training , of the development of skills which will increase our citizens ' chances of finding high quality work , but also in terms of more general education , of which school education is part in a wider sense , directing it towards a humanistic culture which - although it does not directly provide professional skills - certainly achieves that task of social cohesion which is our goal .
The same may be said of the report ' s focus on equal opportunities for all citizens and the possibility that European Community action might remove those gaps , those divergences and distances which , in our society , still divide those who have skills , who have access to a computer and information technology , for example , from those who are still excluded from this world .
These are the main principles of the Martens report and I feel that Parliament cannot fail to support them .
This is the line taken in both the report ' s declarations of principle and its practical recommendations : it focuses especially on the need to root and ground these recommendations in the changes currently taking place in the world of communications and in new teaching methods and , above all , to facilitate the climate and conditions necessary for the need for a higher level of quantity and quality of education for all to be met .
In this respect , all the measures seeking to actively involve teachers , students and trainers in the implementation of the programme are vital .
The emphasis placed on language learning , on strengthening the ties between the world of work and civil society , on the need to find more attractive images to encourage students and teachers ' learning and mobility must not , however , mask the practical root of the problem : the need for financing which respects the choices of the individual .
To this framework we need to add a top priority action plan to assess and intervene with appropriate , effective tools in the tensions which can develop in the worlds of education and work where there are cases of discrimination , with the common desire to fight racism and intolerance .
For all these reasons , the Committee on Culture thanks the rapporteur once again for her work and calls upon Parliament to adopt the Martens report .
Madam President , I welcome the report on the Commission communication on the concrete objectives of education and training systems .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for her conscientious work .
In line with the goals of the Lisbon and Stockholm European Councils , it is vitally important that we enable the generation of young Europeans to choose European research careers and European scientific disciplines .
I also agree that companies have to play a key role in training students and employees .
However , before submitting the report we should pay attention to the following points . There seems to be a gap between the proposals in this report and the progress made by the Commission and its expert group so far .
My understanding is that the Commission has already started its work on social inclusion and reset its goals on the Leonardo da Vinci programme by , for example , including older people and disabled people within its scope .
This is welcome .
We look forward to the European Year of Disability in 2003 .
In addition to that , one should not neglect the efforts made by the Commission on cooperation with the candidate countries at all levels .
While not wanting to undermine the good work of the Commission , I must say that more can be done .
We should also underline the importance of encouraging increased integration of European Union , Member States and regional initiatives in order to make efficient use of the relatively small budget for education and training systems .
In this respect I would suggest better cooperation between the different kinds of funding and an exchange of best practice , together with better dialogue between the supranational , national and regional decision-makers within the Community .
Finally , I would like to see more attention paid to the lack of equal opportunities for all individuals to experience better European integration throughout their professional lives .
There are possibilities within the budget to facilitate exchanges of experience of vocational training systems in the different Member States .
I encourage this .
Europe can offer better education for everybody .
Parliament 's report should not forget to underline that .
Madam President , I should like to congratulate the Commission and Mrs Martens on her report , although I must admit that , like a pupil at night school , all I can think about is going home to bed . This is a detailed and , I think , exemplary programme of work because it systematically links the objectives , the indicators and the timetable , thereby giving us a benchmark .
But what we have to ask ourselves is , what sort of benchmark is it if , when it comes to the crunch , we shy away from a real policy of educational convergence at European level .
We ignore the main differences , we are not willing or perhaps able to do anything about them or our priorities lie elsewhere and we use the Bologna method to set targets which every Member State has yet to meet .
I have my doubts , which I have already voiced to Mrs Reding .
Nonetheless , I think that it is a benchmark and we shall see in a few years ' time how hard it is for some and how close others have come to it .
But I think dialogue is indispensable , and not just at the level of Parliament .
We need to find a way of formulating an opinion and a view before we are presented with faits accomplis .
We need dialogue at school unit level .
Teachers are strongly resisting indicators , at least in Greece .
Most indicators are quantitative , only a few are qualitative , meaning that the picture we get will not always be the most accurate , and we do need the most accurate picture .
I also share Mrs Martens ' view that we need more indicators on education systems , not just training systems .
And here the Commission proposal really is one-sided .
I know we are all worried about unemployment , I know that we want to leave school with prospects of getting a job rather than joining the dole queue , but a general education for young children is equally valuable .
Thank you , Commissioner .
That concludes the debate .
The vote will take place tomorrow at noon .
( The sitting was suspended at 12.10 a.m. )
Resumption of the sitting
Mr President , I do not want to comment on yesterday ' s Minutes , but would like to make an observation of a different kind ; so I hope you will allow me to do that first .
Indeed , I understand - and I am speaking as the coordinator for my group for the ACP Meeting - that none of the Commissioners will be attending the ACP-EU Meeting in Cape Town in four weeks ' time .
Not one single Commissioner , not Mr Nielson , nor Mr Patten , nor Mr Lamy , nor Mr Fischler , for that matter .


In order to avoid a huge disgrace , you could perhaps make an urgent appeal to the European Commission to ensure that a Commissioner attends this Meeting , for an entire programme of questions in writing and such like are on the agenda there .
It is also a disgrace in respect of the 70 developing countries that the Commission is not making an effort to attend the ACP Meeting .
This would be the first time that this has happened , and I have been attending ACP meetings for years .
Hence my urgent request that an appeal be made to the European Commission .
I will take it up with the Commission , Mrs Maij-Weggen , and when we have the response we can come back to the House .
Statement by the President of the European Parliament
We come to the next item of business - and here I would like to thank the Conference of Presidents and colleagues in the House for taking a short policy statement from myself , followed by a debate , to talk a little bit about the next two and a half years of the presidency .
When I spoke after my election on 15 January I said I would like to claim the privilege which is a common privilege of the newly elected President to address the House on our strategic purpose for the coming period .
In deciding to speak today it was in deference to the fact that on the Wednesday of that part-session the Spanish Prime Minister was here to launch the Spanish presidency .
One thing I want to bring to this House - and I hope we will all work on this together - is an ability to communicate who we are and what we do .
So when you wish to communicate something you need to pick your moment and you cannot pick a moment which on that day belongs to someone else .
Thus I am availing myself of the opportunity this morning .
The great sense that I carry from the campaign which preceded my election as President is that there is an enormous appetite for change in our House .
Despite that , it is a frustrated appetite in terms of the delivery of change .
We need , through the different mechanisms - the Bureau , our committees , the Conference of Presidents - to convert that appetite for change into actual change on the floor of this House .
My invitation to colleagues today is to seize this opportunity to create the change for which there is self-evidently such an appetite in this House .
I hope in the next period before the election that we can be a reforming parliament in a visible way and that we can be a communicating parliament and a parliament that is prepared to take risk for change .
This will require creativity and imagination on the part of everyone and together we can face that challenge .
In effect what I should like to invite you to address in our debate today is a willingness to engage in creating a culture of transformation .
It is now more than two decades since direct elections were introduced and we need to review how we do our business .
We need to create a more vital and dynamic sense of parliamentarianism on the floor of this House .
The greatest transformation in hand of course is enlargement .
The time has come for us , the political class , to repossess enlargement .
It is inevitably the case that the acquis communautaire requires an enormous amount of work on the part of the European Commission and on the part of the public service in the candidate states to deal with all of the detail .
But surrounding that detail is the wider political challenge - and that is our challenge .
This House is uniquely well-placed to lead the politics of the transformation towards an enlarged Europe .
We are now entering the end game on the enlargement debate and we have the complex budgetary proposals which no doubt the House in due course will express itself on .
It is important that the era for change which is enlargement should not be reduced to a budgetary debate about small change or large change , however one may perceive that to be .
We have to take initiatives in this House to drive that agenda .
I want this Parliament to be the place where the vitality of the enlargement debate plays itself out .
Although the calendar is not yet firmly set , it seems to me that on two occasions this year we are likely to discuss enlargement , probably before the Seville summit at the end of the Spanish presidency and probably again in November .
I would like to ask you , especially in the political groups , to consider a formula where we can invite MPs from our political families from the candidate states to participate in our enlargement debates with us this year , to create a sense of vitality , to create a moment which is a very European moment , and to do it in terms which allow us to hear the different voices .
They may be voices of accord or discord on some of the issues , but it is a really vital time and I hope the House will find within its mechanisms , and through the groups , a willingness to explore and create this platform , to express in a parliamentary sense this new Europe .
Eventually , following from the example of German reunification more than a decade ago , I would hope that the House will agree that , when the candidate states sign the accession treaties that have yet to be ratified , we might consider budgeting and planning for full observer status so that we create the avant-garde for the new Europe and that we do it in this House because it is our public purpose to give real political leadership .
Subject to these details and to getting agreement - because we need to work through it as regards budgets , we need to work through it in our Bureau , we need the agreement of the Conference of Presidents on our calendar - I should like in the coming months and before the Seville summit if I can , to visit every candidate state on behalf of this Parliament and to issue to them , to our parliamentary colleagues , the formal invitation to be the avant-garde for the new Europe and , if you allow it , it will be your invitation to them and my privilege to deliver it on your behalf .
( Applause ) In the context of foreign policy and on a wider basis I hope in a number of ways that we can up our game .
Europe needs a new foreign policy and I am certain in this House there is a majority and a will to create that foreign policy .
In forming and developing strategic partnerships with the United States , with Russia , with a Euro-Mediterranean dialogue , with a dialogue of civilisations , we are engaging in politics that are vital not just to the parliamentary process which is the image of the European Union itself .
In this House we have great credibility in terms of our appetite to fight global poverty , disease and famine .
In this House we have a wonderful and proud record in the promotion and defence of human rights .
We must be determined to continue to play a leading role in this but we must find new platforms to express our leadership .
It is not simply that we need to follow events but we ourselves , as a Parliament , have the capacity to create new platforms to offer a lead .
In the last few days and weeks , thanks to the work of so many colleagues in the House , we have begun to move towards a new and more mature form of political relations with other institutions and in particular with the European Commission .
I congratulate Mrs Malmström in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs and the Vice-President of the Commission , who is here today , for the work which they have done in securing a landmark high-quality agreement on how we will go about the legislative process from now on .
We need it and the work is excellent .
( Applause )
I congratulate the House for the overwhelming vote of support yesterday for the report by Mr von Wogau which will allow us to adopt an effective interim solution - and it is only an interim solution - on the financial services reform pending , through the Convention , and through the Intergovernmental Conference , a new basis in the Treaty on which to conduct our institutional relations , on which to promote the role of a democratic Europe and on which to promote this Parliament 's role in representing citizens in a vital way .
I would like in particular also to pay tribute , because these two reports have come through the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , to the leadership role and qualities of Mr Napolitano whose work in this House has contributed so handsomely to these achievements .
( Applause )
The thread of consistency in all of these measures is the primacy of politics itself .
That is our business .
We also have to give a signal to the Commission , to the Council , to the wider world , that we in the European Parliament are mature and reliable partners in the project that we share in terms of European integration .
The counterpart is that I want to work now in the lead-up to the Barcelona European Council , with the Commission and with the Council , to get a meaningful interinstitutional working group .
The primacy of politics comes to zero if the platforms to develop politics are not there .
I say this to the Council : the time has now come for it , with the Commission and Parliament , to deliver that platform and to give us the ability to restore and to develop the primacy of politics , to prepare ourselves for common work on the Convention and for successful and common outcomes of substance in the Intergovernmental Conference .
We must not forget also that we here in this House are a tribune of the peoples of Europe .
Our essential public purpose is to serve our citizens .
We can create and we can communicate a new pride in this Parliament .
Our determination must be to accentuate the democratic over the technocratic , to insist on openness and to connect our message in every way we can with a wider European public .
I am very proud of the fact that it was on the floor of this Parliament that we , the parliamentarians , created , developed , explained and won the argument in favour of a Convention , in favour of a new way of creating the new Europe , in favour of an open and democratic and transparent way , in favour of trying to get in touch with a rising generation of Europeans who are untouched by business behind closed doors .
The old permissive consent to allow the elite to proceed is no longer there in the old way and so we must earn the consent and respect of a rising generation .
We can only do it through open methods and the Convention must be an open method and can be a very significant start .
Parliament can claim an ownership of the idea .
But we also have a key role as a stakeholder in this Convention .
Our determination as Parliament is to promote the democratic Europe over the technocratic Europe and to insist on openness .
In that regard , it is my view - and later today we have the possibility in the Conference of Presidents to meet the President of the Convention - that we must ensure as a Parliament that the Convention itself in its open work is the primary platform , is the main way , is the open discussion that leads to the way forward .
It is important - and we have distinguished colleagues on the praesidium to help to lead this debate - that this is a well-managed Convention .
But its management must assist the Convention itself to be a real platform for open debate .
I have asked the services here , in terms of connecting this debate to the wider public , to ensure that it is broadcast on a continuous basis on video-streaming , so that those who wish to follow - whether they are journalists , people working in research institutes , students in universities , different groups in the socio-economic sphere in Europe - but who are not in Brussels for its work , can do so on a regular basis .
Colleagues , we still have a long way to go on the question of internal reform .
I read the book Mes combats produced by my predecessor Nicole Fontaine .
She spoke in it about the Members ' Statute and about the virtual impossibility of making progress on that issue .
I do not know what progress we can make but I express this hope today .
I would like to bring closure to the Members ' Statute .
I want to work with the rapporteur , Mr Rothley ; I want to work with key colleagues in the Bureau and the College of Quaestors .
But firstly I want to talk to Members in this House to try to develop , mobilise and motivate a majority for change .
Over the coming weeks , we will engage in an intensive round of consultation with Members .
There will be no statute over the head of Members - I give you that guarantee .
But there can be no statute without mobilising the majority - first in here .
Then , of course , even if we do that , we still have to rely on the Council to deliver its part of the contract .
But I want to start the first phase right here : to know the ground we stand on , to create a clear will for this change and then to try to bring closure to it .
It is politically important to do so before the next European elections .
I hope you agree and I hope you will help to create that climate for a majority for change .
( Applause )
I mentioned at the outset that there is a great appetite for change .
Very many colleagues feel that the House lacks vitality in many of its debates and we need to work on this .
I look forward to the Corbett report and whatever change that may bring .
I do not prejudge its outcome - it is still a matter of debate and controversy .
I have no monopoly on wisdom , but we know - even as far as it goes or may go - that the Corbett report itself is just a start .
The House will decide on the Corbett report - the President will not .
But a point I want to make : whatever powers that gives to the presidency to try to regulate how we do our business on the floor - to have fewer votes , more work done in committees and then to create space here for real political debate - I will use it to the maximum extent .
So I want people to know in advance : whatever that platform is , I want to use it in a way that opens up space to have creative political debate on the floor of this House .
We had a wonderful debate yesterday on the Middle East but we need a lot more of that class of activity because we are a political institution .
In that regard - I claim no monopoly of wisdom in this - I cannot displace the work of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs - but I pose , Laeken-like , a number of questions .
Why is it when we have a debate that the groups have not so far been able to agree that somewhere - maybe for the last third - we actually ask colleagues to respond to each other ?
Why do we not create a dynamic which demands that we debate and not simply read statements ?
Some way or another we need to respond to each other .
Should we consider on committees , that where there is a report where there is broad agreement but where there are key amendments on which there is clear disagreement , that we could through the Conference of Presidents debate only the key amendments ?
It is sometimes done on the floor of the Congress in the US - not the whole debate but the debate on the key amendments , because that is the part that has the political voltage running through it .
We need to look at some of these things and I invite you to look creatively at them , because we need more vitality and we ourselves can gift this to ourselves if we are creative enough .
The acquis communautaire to which I referred earlier on enlargement , covers 2 500 legislative acts over 50 years and 85 000 pages of legislation .
On the Eur-Lex website you will find half of those acts in a consolidated form - not yet the law , because we have never made a law to consolidate all those acts - but you will nonetheless find that half the acquis is now on Eur-Lex in its shortened form .
I am told that through consolidated text we could reduce the 85 000 pages to 25 000 .
That is already very big but it would be some achievement .
I believe that we should work with the other institutions to do this as a matter of priority .
It is a failure in strategic planning that it has not been done already .
It should have been done in advance of enlargement , for which these 85 000 pages of text are now being translated .
However , we should do it primarily for citizens who want to connect to European law , to find in one place one consolidated text that explains their rights and the limits to them .
I hope that we can engage in an exercise with the other institutions on this .
We as Parliament have a public purpose to bring real value to debate , to be a continental-scale legislator .
I want over the next period to try to sell our story better than we have done in the past .
I want to propose to the Bureau a comprehensive stocktaking exercise in order to provide Parliament with modern and streamlined information policies .
I want with you to develop a communication strategy before the next European election in 2004 .
We will have to invest in intellectual honesty and political realism to recognise past defects ; to look at the underlying reasons for those defects ; to look at any confusion about images of our institution in the eyes of the public .
We have many strengths to build on , not least our unique status as the largest elected representative assembly on our continent .
The pivotal role that we play in the Convention itself also requires a special exercise in communication .
As I said earlier - and I close on this - we must earn the consent of today 's generation of Europeans .
This is the tribune of the people where that process must play itself out : creating a cultural transformation , recognising our responsibilities towards enlargement , towards building new strategic partnerships , stressing the primacy of politics , reforming the House , communicating our public purpose .
These are the aims of my presidency .
They can be summarised in one phrase : working together to create a Europe fit for its future .
( Applause )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we had the opportunity to congratulate our President on his new office on 15 January , and I want to do so again today .
Mr President , I would like to express our group 's congratulations and appreciation to you for the way you have just spoken .
One got the feeling from your speech that your role as President is not just a representative duty for you , but that politics , what we can do here in Parliament , is something close to your heart .
In any case , it is that sentiment that communicated itself to us .
We want to thank you for that and express the hope that you will be able to keep to this policy in these two and a half years of practical work .
Mr President , I feel particular gratitude for the way you spoke out in favour of us inviting observers from the candidate countries to Parliament and to our groups once the treaties have been signed .
I think that this idea , which our Group of the European People 's Party / European Democrats has promoted for some time , is an excellent one .
We must make it clear that political debate must not be dominated by such issues as when agricultural aid is going to be fully operational in the candidate countries , when these or those other conditions are going to be complied with , but we must rather be saying clearly even now to people in the candidate countries : you are welcome in our community of shared values .
That is why we also want soon to welcome to Parliament members of the national parliaments as observers , as partners in dialogue , as people with whom we can discuss the future of Europe .
We are right alongside you if you are about to put that formally into effect by means of resolutions .
You rightly spoke about the strategic partnership in the Mediterranean countries , in which context you mentioned human rights .
It is easy for us in this House to talk about human rights in quite abstract terms .
We have been talking about terrorism in recent weeks and months .
My group is definitely in favour of combating terrorism , but , in the weeks , months and years ahead , we must take care not to permit violations of human rights in the name of counter-terrorism .
This means that we must speak out when human rights are violated .
Let me give Chechnya as a quite specific example .
We must not close our eyes to what is happening in Chechnya just because we say we have to combat terrorism .
This is something we cannot allow !
( Applause )
You mentioned interinstitutional balance .
It is with great disquiet that I see how some governments are now trying , for whatever reasons they may have , to cut down to size the European Commission 's role as Guardian of the Treaties .
Even though it may bring us into dispute with a government on our side , our group will not permit a crucial Community institution such as the Commission to have its rights and powers interfered with .
It is the Commission that is the Guardian of the Treaties !
Madam Vice-President Loyola de Palacio , we urge you to pursue this approach with determination .
We are there alongside you .
Much has been said about the Convention .
We are , in fact , going to be discussing it this afternoon with the President .
I believe that , right from the start , we have to counteract the impression that it is not the Convention that is to play the principal role .
We have a praesidium in which there are three people with specific offices : the chairman and his two deputies .
We need working procedures for the Convention .
That is the new method and you have given it expression .
We need a way of working that is transparent and public , and that is why the Convention as a whole must be at the heart of the work .
The work cannot be delegated to the praesidium , to the triumvirate of the chairman and his two deputies .
It is clear that the leadership function naturally devolves upon the praesidium , but the work tempo - including the frequency of the Convention 's meetings - must be such that it is the Convention that conducts the debate on the future of Europe .
Turning to the issue of the statute , which you have addressed , our group supports the introduction of a Members ' Statute , but we also say that Members ' independence , integrity and dignity must be guaranteed , and , in law , it is we who draw up the Members ' Statute - and not the Council !
So , at the end of the day , this is not about us saying ' yes ' to something proposed by the Council , but rather we are the ones who make the proposal , and then we must work with the Council towards a result .
Please permit me a concluding observation , Mr President .
You have just referred to Mr von Wogau 's report on the financial services proposals and on the Lamfalussy Final Report , on which we voted yesterday .
I am addressing my remarks to Mr Ramón de Miguel and to the Council when I say that this was a fine hour for the three institutions , the Commission , the Council and Parliament .
If that is how we go about our business in future , we will achieve something .
This is not just about which of us - Commission , Council or Parliament - achieves the most ; on the contrary , our common task is to get Europe moving .
Your speech , Mr President , was manifestly in this spirit .
We stand alongside you , encouraging you to be committed and consistent in giving your words practical expression over the next two and a half years .
( Applause )
Mr President , on behalf of the Socialist Group , I welcome your Presidential programme .
You started with a statement : the culture of change in this second half of the legislature .
I would say that , fundamentally , what this requires is the consolidation of the culture of democracy in the European Union .
We are facing a veritable obstacle race , in political and electoral terms , in the next two and a half years .
I believe that there are basically two things we must do : one concerns our citizenship .
We already have European citizenship and the euro , but we must convince our citizens to participate actively in the forthcoming elections to the European Parliament .
And this is something that we must all do together .
At the same time , we must focus on those who wish to become citizens of the European Union , the citizens of the candidate countries and try to engage them in the most noble aspect of our great adventure , which is not simply discussing budgetary issues , but sharing a common destiny founded on peace and democracy .
I would say that these are the noble objectives that we share with a view to making Monetary Union , which is already a reality , into an Economic Union and , above all , as you rightly said , a Political Union , giving primacy to the most noble aspect of politics in public life .
There is also another important dimension to the European Parliament , which is our voice stating the universal primacy of human rights .
Not because we are superior , but because we Europeans have learned , in the course of a long and painful history , that human rights are the best cement for maintaining peace and prosperity .
This is an important point , both with regard to the world that borders our own - I am thinking here of Eastern Europe , the Caucasus and also the Mediterranean - and especially with regard to the Middle East .
I welcome the fact that yesterday , for the first time , a large number of Members took part in the debate on the Middle East .
We must keep this up .
With regard to the most tangible issues that you raised , the agenda of reforms , I should like to express my agreement with you , in that the most important thing we can do is to make our message more specific and to give primacy to political debates .
In this regard , I also wish to thank you for having mentioned the work of the members of my Group , who are also Members of this Parliament , but whom you mentioned specifically .
First of all , with regard to the reform of the Rules of Procedure , the Corbett report .
It is obviously Parliament that must decide , but the President also has powers of proposal and of approval .
The Corbett reform is not only the product of the rapporteur or of the Socialist Group .
This reform is something as vital to us as the air that we breathe .
It is absolutely crucial if we are to ensure that our debates resonate beyond the walls of this Parliament .
Secondly , the Members ' Statute .
At the moment , the Members ' Statute , which is a long-standing ambition of this Parliament , towards which we have been working for many years , is not simply something we wish to see . It is constitutionally essential if Parliament is going to be a member of the European Union with full rights .
This is the issue : we are not simply discussing the problems , the type of Assembly or the advantages that we could gain .
This is an issue of dignity and of equality between the citizens and their representatives .
As you know , you have always had the support of the Socialist Group on this matter , and considerable progress has been made by recent governments that are part of our political family .
I also hope that you also maintain your resolute support for the work being done by the rapporteur , Mr Rothley , not only because he is rapporteur for the Socialist Group , but as I have said on other occasions , because this is the birthright of the entire Parliament .
With regard to defending democracy within the European Union , I welcome the agreement reached yesterday on the Lamfalussy programme on the basis of the von Wogau report .
I wish to highlight a few points that I consider to be crucial and which should lead to Parliament maintaining a very firm stance .
First of all : governance .
This is an absolutely crucial issue and we must prevent a drastic reduction of our powers and a return to commitology .
I urge you , Mr President , to ensure that the interinstitutional working party announced by President Prodi in the December Plenary and which the President of the Council , Mr Aznar , also ratified here , is set up as quickly as possible so that we do not see our power of codecision eroded .
Secondly , immunity .
Recently , there has been a major shortcoming on an essential issue , from the point of view of the dignity of Members .
I am counting on you to take this issue seriously so that we do not find ourselves in a situation in which a fundamental aspect of parliamentary dignity is rendered meaningless .
Lastly , the Convention .
I also thank you for having today appointed Giscard d ' Estaing as its Chairman .
The Convention is the daughter of our parliamentary work , but it also has other partners and members and I think that Parliament must act as the keeper of the conscience in this field to ensure that the Convention is visible to the public , achieves tangible results and is not simply a forum for discussion .
Furthermore , it must be able to push forward and develop something on which we can all agree .
As you know , Mr President - and with this I shall close - we supported an excellent candidate , Mr Martin .
I see that you have integrated many of Mr Martin ' s ideas into your campaign , but in any event , I should like to say that if you implement this programme , you will have the loyal and honest support of the Socialist Group in this work , which concerns all of us .
Mr President , my dear Pat , congratulations once again , this time on your new professional début .
It is splendid to see you doing what you promised .
You are showing yourself to be trustworthy .
We have obtained a new Europe today , but we have also had a new Parliament since January .
Now , we are to be politicians , not technicians , and you have shown , and will show , us the way .
Pat , we are hungry , in fact very hungry , and we have an appetite for change .
Our group will support you entirely as you prepare the individual dishes that can satisfy us .
However , our group will always have an appetite for change .
In Denmark , we have a lovely song that our family often sings .
It goes like this : ' Life ' s harvest is in struggle never ceasing ... ' , ' ... while changeless calm is death ' s abode ' .
Our group has always wished for struggle , for we have an appetite for change .
Enlargement is the most important matter we are facing at this time .
It is about people rather than about technical devices , budgets , laws and rules . We are clearly the place where people are to meet , and we must make this place work .
Our group will do everything to move the tradition on , as we have already done by now inviting members of the national parliaments in the candidate countries to visit us .
What is most important , however - and what we have a very great appetite for - are reforms to this House of ours .
We have a need for reforms , and not only reforms of our statute - important as those are - but also changes to the way in which we work , so that we can deliver the results our electorate wants to see .
That leads me on to my next point , concerning contact with the people .
The prerequisite for being in touch with the people is that we should be able to deliver the goods and , more specifically , the goods that people demand .
That means being able to put our own house in order and being effective and concentrating on what is really important and what we have some influence upon .
In those terms , what is most important are reforms , results and communication , and certainly it is splendid to hear you communicate .
You are enthusiastic , you show your feelings , you are colourful in your speech and you use the right words .
I would almost go so far as to say that we in effect have a female President , for you employ the feminine side of your personality : imagination and creativity ; and that is what we need if we are to reach our citizens .
We must be politicians , not technicians .
All right , we were unable to have a woman as President , but a man with feminine sides to his personality is no bad thing either .
The Convention is what is most important in connection with the Europe of the future .
Moreover , it is important that we should not just engage in navel-gazing but try to find solutions to the tasks facing us . Rather than get bogged down in a dispute about whether we are to have a ' Constitution ' , a ' Basic Treaty ' or a ' federation ' , we should design a system in which there is democratic control over political decisions .
When we draw up legislation for our citizens , they must be able to see who are making the decisions , and those who are must be democratically accountable for them .
That is the message of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party .
We want to see political accountability in Europe .
We are " fit for the future " , but our group is also " fit to fight for the new Europe " , as well as being " fit to fight for the future together with yourself " .
Mr President , the Group of the Greens and the European Free Alliance is pleased with your speech because , in it , you remind Parliament of its political role and do not dwell on technical details , although I am certain that it will take a lot of time to regulate these .
We do not want to be a well-oiled voting machine .
We want to make history and we want to highlight Europe ' s own role in the world at a time when peace and stability in the world are under threat .
It is not sufficient to organise development cooperation .
We must be able to promote peace and stability in a European manner , on the basis of our values .
We want to maximise our role as a parliament .
We want to monitor . We want to enact laws on behalf of public opinion but also in contact with that opinion and with the media which should bring us closer to the public .
A great deal of progress has been made .
I arrived in this Parliament having had experience of many parliaments before , sometimes parliaments which were usually better attended than this one , a phenomenon which I regret .
Outside these walls , people often think that we are not a real parliament , but I have found a true parliament here .
However , we must ensure that we have a statute , we agree with you on that , otherwise we as MEPs lack credibility .
In addition , we must also further shape the assistants ' statute into which Mr Onesta has put such great effort .
Moreover , we must be given more competences .
Codecision must be extended rather than eroded , and this must be done in a fully transparent manner .
Needless to say , the activities must be reformed .
The will to reform is there .
A great deal can be done within the current Rules of Procedure , provided that the will is there , the will to debate rather than read out little monologues prepared on paper , the will to be present and to enter into dialogue with each other .
The debate must not stifle pluralism , quite the contrary .
We are here to talk , for we are a parliament in which it must be possible to express the whole range of opinions .
This is why we do believe that the Corbett report is a solid basis for a discussion , but if it means that the rights of small groups are cut back , or the rights of individual MEPs compromised , then we touch the soul and diversity of this Parliament , and that is not acceptable .
We also want to express our slight concern to the Council .
Parliament cannot accept shortened procedures if the Council fails to debate with us in our committees .
We can hold more debates there , but not in the absence of the Council , not without the attendant transparency and not without the debate that we want .
We must condemn creeping reforms without clear objectives .
We want more democracy , respect for subsidiarity , a rapprochement between citizens and the European Parliament and a dialogue with the regional and national parliaments . If not , the already strong distrust among our citizens will only grow .
We must clearly establish the legal basis for our actions once and for all , and not let our legal basis be taken away .
We welcome your instruction to prepare the future in consultation with public opinion and with the parliaments in the candidate countries .
You are moving closer to them .
We encounter them in the joint meetings .
Why do we not open up our committees to enter into debate with them , as we also want to do with our own public opinion , and why do we not open up our sumptuous chambers more than has hitherto been the case ?
The Convention will be the proof of the pudding .
We are putting our trust in this .
If we want to prepare Europe for tackling the enormous tasks of enlargement , the Convention cannot afford to fail .
It should not endeavour to write a cookery book , which is subsequently used in some new night-time session to concoct a grim menu .
We want a Convention that knows the direction in which Parliament wants to guide it .
As the European Parliament , we must face up to our task in that Convention and involve the others in that debate , both regional and national parliaments , as well as public opinion , and ensure that Europe takes the qualitative step forward that is required for enlargement .
Mr President , during the debate held in preparation for the election of the President of Parliament , I had the opportunity to say what I expected of the new President .
Basing my comments on the undisputed observation that the increasing numbers of citizens are showing a very worrying lack of interest in the European institutions , I said that the number one priority of the new President should be to do everything in his power to win back their confidence .
I am therefore pleased to see that this objective is implicit in your programme .
You said that we must win back the confidence of the people .
We fully support you in doing this .
How can this be achieved in practical terms ?
I myself have come up with three ideas .
I think that two of them partly cover the same areas as your plans , but I would venture to say that the third idea could remedy a shortfall .
The first idea concerns the involvement of citizens in the debate on the future of Europe .
I suggested that our President launch , in parallel with the work of the Convention and in conjunction with the national parliaments , a campaign on the theme ' Let your voice be heard ' .
This would be an incredibly bold experiment for our institution to undertake .
We should stimulate a real confrontation of ideas , as you said , we should listen to what the people have to say to us on what they expect from Europe and strive to connect the Convention to the subjects of these diverse discussions .
Then we should all face up to our responsibilities .
We want the Convention to shake up the IGC , so let the citizens shake up the Convention !
My second idea was for our President to take the initiative , along with ourselves , in organising meetings in Parliament of groups of citizens from various European countries to discuss common objectives that we could support .
I mentioned three examples .
The first is to organise meetings involving young people to discuss questions that directly concern them , such as Erasmus-type grants or the full and mutual recognition of qualifications , as well as broader subjects - we could call them more civilisation-related issues , like those that were recently discussed in Porto Alegre , under the alluring title ' Another world is possible ' .
Another example is to invite women from all over Europe to meet and discuss the question of the full application of Treaty provisions that encourage equality .
The last example , which is similar to your proposal , Mr President , is to organise meetings of members of civil society from the candidate countries and Member States to examine , together , the ins and outs of this quite historic undertaking and to give us the best possible chances of making it a success .
In the same spirit , you proposed to invite observers from the candidate countries and we shall support you in this effort .
The third idea that I mentioned two months ago is the only one that I fear was missing from the speech you gave this morning , and that is the idea of putting pressure on the Commission and the Council regarding several emblematic legislative texts that clearly spell out to our fellow citizens the direction in which we want to take Europe in the future .
I am personally thinking , particularly at a time when so many businesses are undergoing restructuring , of the directives such as that on the information and consultation of workers , that on the European Works Councils , or even of the framework directive on services of general interest , and am looking forward to the possible - and , in my view , desirable - reform of the Treaties in this crucial area .
The general approach advocated by my group and the many practical suggestions that turn it into a reality are the same as they were before your election and they will remain thus during your mandate .
In this spirit , we will naturally be prepared to help you to make our Parliament a positive role model for millions of European citizens .
Mr President , on a lighthearted note may I firstly say that I am extremely pleased to be here to witness the discovery of the feminine side of your personality , revealed to us this morning .
Let me also assure colleagues that there is a tougher side to the personality of the President , as I have seen in another House in another place .
I warmly welcome the statement made by the President to us here this morning .
I am genuinely pleased with the response to it by the people who have already spoken .
It augurs well for the change that we know must take place - a change that we have been hesitant to face up to for quite a considerable period of time .
I would like to go on record as saying that this , in my view , is the first serious attempt in a long time to take up the challenge of the need for change .
We often see change as something that is always desirable but that can wait until tomorrow .
Now , with Pat Cox as our President , we must confront it from day one .
I welcome that .
There is an obligation on each and every one of us to support that change .
My Group in particular welcomes the changes that you have outlined in your statement .
They will make this Parliament more meaningful .
They will give it the role that Parliament must , and should , have and which we know it has not got .
They will give us the type of debate that will mean we can put away all the documents we read diligently and carefully on technical matters that we should not be debating at all .
Let us debate the political issues .
Mr Barón Crespo mentioned the good debate we had yesterday with the High Representative , Javier Solana .
It was a good and open debate , but we should have had more debates like that one .
It should not just be a privilege for us to have Mr Solana present ; perhaps he should be here on a more regular basis .
He is accountable to this Parliament - we should not overlook that .
That is important too .
I was delighted that Commissioner Patten was here yesterday because his is a role that we must respect and support as well .
I should like to thank the Commission and the Spanish presidency for being here at this most important debate here today .
They too have a role .
I have consistently supported the view that the Commission 's best friend is the European Parliament .
Parliament will support the Commission and make sure it is not sidelined by one or two of the larger Member States wishing to do so for any particular reason .
I also know that the Commission is the best friend of the smaller Member States within the European Union , which can count on protection when they need it .
As regards the representatives of the Spanish presidency , it is right and proper that they are here today and I thank them for coming .
Last November they came and met the political leaders of the groups in this Parliament and held open consultations with them on the agenda that they proposed to put forward during their presidency .
This was a worthwhile initiative that we welcome , value and appreciate .
It is not so long ago that the outgoing presidency refused to come to this Parliament to report on its activities because it wanted to go immediately afterwards .
It did not want to answer questions .
We should not accept that .
Much reform is required within this House .
We will support that reform .
I welcome what Mr Cox has said on the different matters he mentioned .
He mentioned the need for the statute .
There is full support for the statute and I welcome the fact that the consultation is going to take place from the bottom up , involving everybody in a decent , fair , upright , open and democratic fashion .
This will contrast with the past , when Mr Rothley was working on his own and efforts were made just to get a deal done to give a presidency something to their credit at the end of the day .
That was not good enough then . It will not be good enough now .
We have all involved ourselves in this debate and something worthwhile will come from it .
As regards the workings of the Convention , I very much welcome the suggestions that have been made here today .
I would add , though perhaps not with 100 % conviction , that the meeting that is taking place today between Mr Giscard d 'Estaing and the heads of the political groups should not have been confined to the heads of the political groups .
Consideration should perhaps have been given to having that meeting in this House to let all Members see what is going on .
We have urged Mr Giscard d 'Estaing not to have his little meetings behind closed doors .
We have called for the rhythm of the Convention to be dictated from the floor and to involve the Members from the different states in this House , yet we assist Mr Giscard d 'Estaing by having a private , cosy little lunch at which half a dozen people will be present .
Think again , Mr President , when these matters come up for debate and discussion .
As regards enlargement , I very much welcome and support your initiative to invite representatives from the parliaments of the applicant states .
That is good , right and proper .
Let us have debate and discussion .
One small word of caution : let us not overplay our role and move into an area where we might be overlapping the negotiating mandate of the Commission .
We have to be careful and I would trust your experience and judgement in that .
I speak from my own limited experience in that area , which I shall relate at another time and in another place .
Finally , I support and commend your approach towards promoting external affairs .
Might I ask you to look at the role of the parliamentary delegations in this particular area ?
Are we doing Parliament justice ?
Are we doing justice to anyone when we meet a delegation from India , say , or China once a year for one-and-a-half or two days ?
Is that promoting foreign relations ?
No , not in any shape or form .
Why are we not , for instance , opening up discussions and debate with Iran at the present time ?
If those advocating change within the Iranian regime need help and support through debates and discussions with people like us , why are not we giving them that ?
Is it not about time we became masters of our own policy , our own approach , our own attitude in foreign affairs ?
Mr President , you have made a great start .
I warmly support you .
I wish you well and I will be with you right along the way .
The only modest correction I should make is that Mr Giscard d 'Estaing will not be having lunch with the group chairmen .
Today 's meeting precedes the Convention , but I guarantee you that when the Convention starts and we know how it will be up and running we should insist on full accountability to Parliament on the floor of this House .
Mr President , your speech today shows the value of the open election campaign .
We have taken the time to discuss our own circumstances , and I should like to thank the President for his contribution and the discussion today , as well as table proposals for consideration .
Consolidation of the laws could of course take place through our refusing to debate , or directly rejecting , proposals that are not consolidated .
It cannot be sensible to accumulate 70 amendments in order to see how the law stands where fish are concerned .
A reform in the interests of transparency should ensure that all meetings are open and all documents accessible , unless a qualified majority approves an exemption supported by reasons , of the kind we approved in the Martin / Bourlanges report .
Political appointments must be a thing of the past .
In future , everyone should be appointed and promoted according to their qualifications , here in Parliament too , and we could make a fresh start with those who are now to be appointed from the candidate countries .
The plenary sittings must be turned into lively occasions .
A third of the time could be set aside for spontaneous debate , as you intimated .
Those active in Parliament must have the opportunity to tackle the Commissioner and the President-in-Office of the Council if they do not receive answers .
All MEPs must be permitted to speak at least three times a year .
The number of votes must be cut back so that we are only voting on political differences .
After each debate , the coordinators should meet and make the technical preparations for the voting .
Details of the voting list should be known at least a week before voting takes place so that we can all consult our electorates and be aware of what we are voting on .
The way in which posts are distributed should be revised .
The d ' Hondt method could be replaced by the Saint Laguë method in which the distribution is on the basis of 1,3,5 instead of 1,2,3,4,5 .
It would provide the same proportionate distribution , but it would make it possible for the smaller groups not always to have to take what the large groups leave aside and , in cases where the small groups are not represented , they could be appointed as observers .
The independent Members should have their quota of opportunities , and we should ourselves remove all forms of discrimination instead of risking new legal proceedings .
The Corbett report ' s attack on the small political groups should be replaced by a gentlemen ' s agreement through which we achieve some of Mr Corbett 's objectives without reducing the groups ' rights .
In the Convention , majorities and minorities must have the same access to qualified aid and be able to put forward , and campaign for , proposals in the same way .
There cannot be special rights for specific positions .
The European Movement and the federalists do not have a sole and exclusive right to organise the debate with civil society using Parliament ' s money .
We must join in getting the whole of Parliament and the Convention to operate in such a way that all Members representing all positions feel they are being treated properly and on an equal basis .
Today at the meeting with Mr Giscard d ' Estaing , we must make a point of ensuring that all alternates in the Convention are given full rights of participation in the work .
Good luck with the reform work !
Mr President , you have called for a more democratic and less bureaucratic Parliament .
I see this as an important concept , and so I would like to start with the situation of the Unattached Members , the 33 truly second-class Members who do not have access to the d ' Hondt system which is used to distribute everything in this House , who are not entitled to table documents or amendments and who are forced to admit even to their electorate that they are unable to play a full part in the Parliament ' s work .
There is a report which has been at a standstill for two years in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs ; moreover a judgement was returned a few months ago by the Court of Justice which raised a number of important points in terms of whether those measures were appropriate or did not need to be amended , or whether legal penalties should not be imposed for failure to apply them .
Mr President , I call upon you to pursue this matter and to revitalise that aspect of the work of this House , for I feel that , precisely with regard to the goal you mentioned , one of the problems facing us is not just the general , essential need to make our working methods more democratic and to ensure greater participation by all the Members , but also to take into consideration the second-class status of the Unattached Members which is endorsed and still confirmed in this House .
From this point of view , Mr President , as has already been said , the Corbett report not only fails to provide an adequate response but is also , in a number of respects , a caricature of what should be an endeavour to improve our conditions .
How could one possibly envisage - the Members may not be aware of this , but Mr Corbett did make this suggestion - doing away with topical and urgent debates , which are one of Parliament ' s opportunities for real political debate , as President Cox said ?

At this point , we might just as well do away with the resolutions at the end of political debates as well and , that way , we will become even more of a machine for voting on reports .
I feel that this is not the right direction to take and , in this connection , I genuinely hope that the political groups , the Members and the Committee on Constitutional Affairs itself will carefully reconsider this suggestion , which is not a good one .
Mr President , we need a Parliament whose work is better structured .
When we have major debates , attended by members of the Commission or the Council but where only 10 or 15 Members of this House are present , it does not reflect well on Parliament . Parliament is not doing itself any service .
Then , two hours later , maybe , this House becomes a sort of voting chamber , not least because , as we know , the existence of a certain penalty system makes it convenient to come here and vote .
We used to have explanations of vote and a system which made debates visible and comprehensible for journalists and the public .
That is no longer the case .
The other point concerns publishing our debates .
Mr Collins has raised this point and the other Unattached Members agree with him .
Even today , for example , this meeting could have been organised in such a way that everyone participated or it could even have been transmitted over the internal system .
I feel , and it is our deep conviction , Mr President , that , just as your election was broadcast over the Internet - and this was a major step forward - in this age of the Internet , both committee and plenary debates can and should be broadcast to give all the citizens , not just the European citizens , access to our work .
Lastly , a word on the subject of the statute , Mr President .
The statute is important , but it must also include Members ' prerogatives ; in other words , it must not be a statute centred solely on the financial side of being a Member of Parliament .
I feel that the challenge facing us is to produce a Statute that definitively defines and establishes MEPs ' status , their responsibilities , their prerogatives and their rights in respect of the institutions preparing for enlargement .
I wish you every success in your work in this area , Mr President , and I hope that major reforms will be achieved under your presidency before 2004 .
I wish to begin by congratulating you on the state-of-the-European-Parliament address , which perhaps , like other state-of-the-Union addresses , should become an annual event .
I personally think you have made a very positive start as President of the European Parliament .
If we are to carry out the reform agenda that you have discussed , then we need an esprit de corps in this House .
The way in which you have engaged the Bureau of Parliament , the Conference of Presidents , the committee chairs in your agenda , already in your first month , shows a determination to work across the whole of this House in order to deliver reform , and that is very encouraging .
But , at the same time , you have also done the same with the institutions .
Although we should not overstate these things , there is already an improved relationship between the Commission and the Council and this institution - and , perhaps most importantly - you have shown a willingness to take tough decisions .
That is something which , I am afraid , will become more and more a feature of your presidency , but we will have more and more occasion to take hard decisions .
If I have any criticism of your speech , it was not in terms of the content - there was hardly a word I disagreed with - but that I perhaps detected an element of " mission creep " in your speech .
If you try to do everything , you may end up not succeeding in doing very much .
I would encourage you to stick to just two or three key items : enlargement being the vital one ; the internal reform of this House being the second ; and also , as others have said , the communication strategy of this House to connect better with the citizens of the European Union .
If you achieve progress in these three areas , you will have achieved very much indeed .
Your speech also correctly got to the dilemma that we face .
If we are to improve our standing as an institution , then we have to reform internally .
That means a little navel-gazing .
However , if we spend two-and-a-half years navel-gazing , then we will be even further away from the citizens out there .
So we have to combine the two .
We have to conduct reform within the structures of this House while on the floor of this House , as you rightly say , connecting with the citizens by discussing the major items that face them in their daily lives - to actually talk about the issues that matter out there , not the issues that matter in here .
It is out there that really matters to us .
Mr Dell 'Alba made a point I had wanted to make .
When you talked about inviting the members of the applicant countries ' parliaments to be present at the enlargement debate here , I agreed with you , but my immediate reaction was to wonder where were they going to sit .
Then I looked around the Chamber and realised that there would be no problem in finding seats for them in this House .
There we have a double dilemma : one that you have identified , which is to make our debates more lively and interesting ; but another one , which we have tried in the past to solve and need to try again : to make this plenary the focus of our four days ' work in Strasbourg .
There is plenty of other time for committee and delegation meetings , and for meeting lobbyists , etc . , but when we are in Strasbourg , the plenary should be the centre-point of our activities .
In fact , for most Members it is a side-show when they come to Strasbourg ; the average Member spends less than five hours in this Chamber during a Strasbourg week .
It should be where they are most of the time ; it should be the focus of our activity ; you should feel that if you have not been present at the plenary , you have missed out on something .
Instead , sometimes you feel that when you have been in the plenary you have missed out on something that has been going on elsewhere .
So we have to refocus to make this the centre of activity : a livelier Chamber where we really discuss the day-to-day issues .
One last but important point , because both you , Mr President , and Mr Poettering in different ways referred to it .
I welcome the decision on the von Wogau report - it was a right decision .
But I do not believe , as you indicated , that better regulation or the long-term solution to what Mr von Wogau was dealing with in the Lamfalussy proposals can be left to the Convention .
We have to focus on that in the next two or three months because the June Summit will deal with governance and better regulation , and it may be , if we do not focus on that now , that by the time we get to the Convention the pass will have been sold in June , so it is important that we look at this issue now and do not think that von Wogau was even a five- or six-month solution .
It was a short two- or three-month solution to a very important point in terms of the powers of Parliament .
Thank you very much and , again , congratulations on the progress you have made so far .
Please be assured that , as I mentioned in the speech , I want to work between now and the Barcelona Summit to put together the interinstitutional working group or at least to be able to engage in that dialogue .
The Spanish Prime Minister has already subscribed to that idea before this House .
The Commission presidency has also backed the idea .
We need to lock it down .
You are perfectly correct : it is not something to be left for the medium term .
But its agenda is one that will carry us over a number of other major hurdles .
Mr President , I should like to start with a little irreverence which only your Irish colleagues can take the liberty of doing .
As I address you , it is a great pleasure for all of us to move from the era of Paddy the Irishman to Paddy the President .
In your own area of Cork in Ireland they would be tickled pink to think that we were discussing the feminine side of Pat Cox in Parliament this morning .
But it is right that we should .
I concur with Mr Collins .
But there would be some amusement in some of the more rural parts of Ireland at the tone of the debate .
I thank you for your contribution this morning .
I thoroughly support your plan , as you have laid it before us .
More importantly , thank you for addressing us in a language that was devoid of Eurospeak .
One of the great problems in all the European institutions is that we have developed a language , a glossary of terminology that has created a barrier between ourselves and the people of Europe we represent .
We have created that barrier not just between the people but between ourselves and the media , on whom we depend to sell our message to the people of Europe .
Your contribution this morning was devoid of Eurospeak .
For that I warmly congratulate you .
It is important that we all follow suit - from the technical end to us as parliamentarians - as we express ourselves .
May your enthusiasm not wane for the next two-and-a-half years and may it prove to be infectious as you represent us throughout Europe and indeed further afield .
May your affection and obvious love of this Parliament , of these European institutions prove to be infectious as you address gatherings throughout your term in office .
May it be particularly infectious in our country of Ireland as we endeavour to awaken from their slumber , from their indifference the 65 % of the Irish electorate who failed to turn out to vote for the Nice Treaty last June , as we yet again try to offer them the opportunity to endorse enlargement of Europe between now and the end of December this year .
It is most important that we enthuse our peoples and - top of your agenda - enthuse the Irish people for the enlargement project which we all support .
I wish you good health and Godspeed for the next two-and-a-half years .
Mr President , I shall keep it very brief .
I am delighted that you have emphasised the ' primacy of politics ' .
In the final analysis , this Parliament has grown from a paper tiger into a watchdog of democracy , and that is down to politics .
In my view , communication and information are crucial in this connection .
Information more so than communication .
They are not the same .
Communication is about bringing news .
Information implies a dialogue with those to whom the information is directed .
The dialogue must be open and objective , and should not degenerate into indoctrination and propaganda but should comprise communication and information .
Sound information means that one has to present something of substance , that one has something to offer or something that one can pass on .
It need not be perfect , but a dialogue is necessary to make any improvements .
How will we deal with this ?
There are countless reports on this subject .
I myself had the honour of being the author of one of the many that are stored in the dark recesses of this institution .
There have been many reports , yet little has changed in the many years I have been in this Parliament .
How will we tackle this ?
Could I make a suggestion , as we have tried all manner of things ?
Why do we not hold an open debate ?
You as representative of Parliament , along with those you select , you on behalf of Parliament along with the representatives of the media .
Not with the intention to indoctrinate .
I know how anxious the media is about propaganda , and with good reason . But simply an open dialogue to examine together how we can best serve the parliamentary , democratic culture , and hence Europe , a democratic Europe , for this is what is at stake in the final analysis .
Mr President , I wish to say first of all that your work programme is also ours and that really your ambitions are also ours , and I am sure you will have the support of the House .
I wish to make three distinct observations .
Mr President , you spoke of a realistic and intelligent defence of the prerogatives of this House ; you mentioned the Lamfalussy report ; also , yesterday you decided not to attend the Court of Justice and to adopt a long-sighted approach on a matter vital to Europe ' s citizens .
I would say that this intelligent defence of our prerogatives - which are not our own , but which represent our responsibility towards the citizens - is a leitmotif that I wish to highlight .
Within this defence of our prerogatives and this maintaining of better relations with the other two institutions , in which we all have an interest , there is , nevertheless , one aspect that you touched on briefly and on which I should like to focus : access to the ' screening ' documents for the candidate countries which , to date , are being denied us .
It makes no sense for us to ask our colleagues from the candidate countries to familiarise themselves with these ' screening ' documents , whilst we ourselves do not have access to them .
This is one of the practical issues , which should not simply be of concern to us , but which we should attend to immediately .
The second aspect concerning this Parliament ' s prerogatives is image .
One image reveals more than a thousand words and the press conference held yesterday by the three institutions , together with the rapporteur , Mr von Wogau , will mean that , in future , we will not have to read , as has happened before , that a directive has been approved , when what has really been approved is a Council common position .
The three institutions are committed to demonstrating responsibility towards the citizens to produce effective and good legislation .
Which leads to the second aspect : the insistence on the rigour of this institution is important .
The three institutions have to improve the quality of legislation .
This has been said on various occasions and is one of the great challenges overall , not just for the European institutions .
Legislation must be legible despite its complexity .
We must eschew jargon and unintelligible expressions , as has been said .
To this end , when it comes to reforming this House , I wish to point out that this is a House of committees .
We must support your idea - expressed , amongst others , by the Provan group and by other working parties within Parliament ' s Bureau - that the more technical work must be carried out by the committees , but without its visibility to the citizens suffering .
It is important that the citizens understand the work we are undertaking , not only in Plenary , which is already happening , but also in the committees .
This is why we have to improve the committee ' s system of communication with our citizens .
I shall finish by discussing a third aspect , which is dialogue with the citizens .
Mr President , you are a magnificent representative of what this House stands for .
Your personal skills will ensure that we are able to undertake a useful piece of work .
I use this word carefully : we have worked constructively on European integration , on what the European institutions really do , on what this House does and on to what extent we in this House feel responsible for the extremely important task of representing Europe ' s citizens .
Mr President , I too would like to congratulate you on an excellent start to your presidency .
This debate has shown that there is much support and much appetite in this House for reform , in this lively exchange we are having in the catch-the-eye procedure at the end of this debate .
You were kind enough to refer to my own report , which hopefully will be on the agenda at the next part-session .
We are building quite a broad consensus on the bulk of the proposals contained in my report .
In the last few days many groups have been kind enough to invite me to address their meetings and to engage in building this consensus .
I am now quite confident that there will be a majority next month in favour of a useful package of reforms that will not solve all our problems - far from it - but will be a useful step forward .
To those colleagues who feared that there may be elements of my report which are unfavourable to the smaller groups , I would like to reassure them .
There is nothing that significantly undermines the position of the smaller groups in my report .
If they continue to have fears , I shall be very happy to meet them to try to find a solution to any issue they wish to raise .
My preferred solution is to persuade them , but I am open to other solutions if we can find them .
This will be a useful part of the reform process and I thank you very much for your support .
Mr President , on a point of order : I just wanted to engage in 30 seconds of navel-gazing .
I agree with everything that has been said about reform .
But when we talk about reform , let us not forget the conditions in which backbench MEPs work in this House .
David Martin reproached us for not spending more time in the Chamber , but one of the problems is the amount of time we waste getting to this place .
I will not relaunch that debate , but anyone looking at this splendid Chamber and the palatial public spaces of this building would not believe the cramped conditions in which a backbench MEP works .
Please do not forget , you important people who have spacious offices - even the secretaries-general of the political groups have office space four times that of a backbench MEP - that when you have an assistant and a stagiaire crammed into one office , you have no place in which to meet visitors .
Mr President , will you at least pledge to back us in getting computers for MEPs , preferably flat-screen computers so we can fit them on to our desks in our tiny offices and be more efficient for the 21st century ?
I am sorry to raise such a brass-tacks issue : I know parliamentarians are always shy about raising the matter of their own working conditions but , frankly , unless we can be efficient in dealing with our work , we cannot deliver good service and present a good showcase to the world .
I would not like people to look at the masses of space in the public areas and then come and see our little cramped offices , out of which we lose a third for a useless bathroom - but that is another matter .
Please help us to be efficient , Mr President .
The Bureau is looking at the technological aspect .
I am sure we can do that .
I am not sure what I can do as regards the buildings aspect , but you have my sympathy .
Mr President , it is being stated that President Prodi took a position in a press conference yesterday on Commissioner Verheugen 's behaviour in the Commission .
This has to do with Stability Pact issues .
Mr Verheugen is alleged to have assented in the Commission to the Commission 's decisions , but then , last Sunday , to have dissociated himself from them in an interview with a German newspaper .
I wish to ask you to give consideration to a procedure whereby we , that is , in Parliament or some appropriate forum , might hear an explanation of this from Mr Verheugen .
That is my request , which I would like to make a matter of public record .
I will check with the Commission as to whether the Commissioner is available to come to the House this week or , if not , on another appropriate occasion .
Mr President , since Mr Poettering has raised this issue , I would remind him that , for the last six months , we have been waiting for Mr Bolkestein to speak to us , as we requested , on the remarks he made about Islam .
I think that we must start at the beginning , because otherwise , only the Group of the European Popular Party will be able to raise these issues and I believe that we all have the right to have the Commission make a statement .
As long as we make sure we are dealing with issues of political substance and not something else I am sure we can find a modus vivendi .
I should like to thank everyone who has participated in today 's debate .
I should like to say in particular to the Commissioner and the Council present here that we are normally not so self-indulgent in terms of the time we take to talk to each other as colleagues .
It is very important that in this House we work towards establishing an esprit de corps .
It is very important that we work on this culture for change .
If we do that I guarantee that the other two institutions will also benefit .
I hope this has been time well spent for you too .
The debate is closed .
Combating terrorism
The next item is the joint debate :
Council statement - Decision taken on 27 December 2001 on measures to combat terrorism ;
Report ( A5-0003 / 2002 ) by Watson , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a Council framework decision on combating terrorism ( 14845 / 1 / 01 - C5-0680 / 2001 - 2001 / 0217 ( CNS ) )
and
on the proposal for a Council framework decision on the European arrest warrant and the surrender procedures between the Member States ( 14867 / 1 / 01 - C5-0675 / 2001 - 2001 / 0215 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , my report is a draft response by this Parliament to two legislative acts : a proposed Council framework directive on combating terrorism and a proposed Council framework directive on the European arrest warrant and surrender procedures between Member States .
Together with the creation of the European judicial authority , Eurojust , these two measures form the legislative basis of the European Union 's response to the menace of terrorism .
The European Union may allow itself a few moments of satisfaction .
These measures represent a major step forward towards the creation of a European judicial space .
I would like to thank the President-in-Office for reminding us that this judicial space did not start on 11 September last year , although it would be churlish not to recognise that the attacks on New York and Washington on 11 September gave a political momentum which allowed us to knock heads together and overcome certain objections .
Many of us regret that such a stimulus was needed .
Nonetheless we welcome the progress it has brought .
What do these measures do ?
The European arrest warrant applies to a wider range of offences than previous extradition agreements .
It makes surrender a judicial , rather than a political process .
It largely abolishes the dual incrimination principle .
It sets a time limit of 90 days for extradition , giving us the chance to judge all suspects of an offence at the same time .
It consolidates the idea of European Union law .
The framework decision on terrorism makes terrorism an offence in every country .
Currently it has been an offence in only six .
It defines for the first time in international law a terrorist act and the offences which constitute a terrorist act .
It seeks to approximate laws with common minimum penalties .
I commend these measures to the House .
The terrorist threat is deadly serious .
It requires a serious response .
These two measures constitute such a serious response .
I regret - and we have in previous debates here regretted - the absence of proper democratic oversight and control of the Union 's procedures of law-making in this area .
This House argued for the invocation of Article 42 of the Treaty , allowing these measures to be brought within the first pillar .
Nonetheless , we recognise that the process of debate has brought improvements , that our amendments at the first reading have introduced certain safeguards into these measures .
I welcome the words from the President-in-Office of the Council about closer involvement of Parliament in the process of passing such legislation .
Other measures , such as the freezing of assets , have been far less coordinated .
Indeed , it is not unfair to say , from reports of Coreper meetings , that the European Union has been all at sea in its approach to freezing of assets and other decisions .
The motion for a resolution on the table today reflects that .
We know since the end of the 1990s that three phenomena - terrorism , internationally organised crime and corruption - are increasingly linked .
What academics have called the terrorist criminal nexus is well established .
The fight against the terrorist criminal infrastructure must be our top priority .
We know , too , that internationally organised crime is by far the biggest factor , economically and probably politically , in this terrorist criminal nexus .
Money laundering represents between 2 and 5 % of aggregate global GNP .
That is between EUR 500 billion and EUR 1.5 trillion .
It is not enough just to freeze assets of terrorist groups .
We must fight the economic dimension of terrorism if we are to get on top of the problem .
The United Nations has started to do this through its financial action task force .
The recommendations from the Washington meeting of 30 October to be implemented by June of this year are essential and provide an area where we can work together with the United States of America in combating this threat .
But here I would appeal for the European Union to take the initiative : to take the initiative on ways forward , to try to bring the Americans back into the international community in this fight against terrorism , and to do so within a proper legal framework , with proper democratic and parliamentary control .
A number of amendments have been submitted to my report .
Amendments Nos 1 and 5 are identical and they cause me no problem .
Amendment No 2 which comes subsequent to our adoption of the report in committee seems to be slightly out of context and I recommend a vote against .
Amendment No 4 calls for the establishment of a European habeas corpus act .
My group will support this , as we did in committee , although we consider the reintroduction of the amendment to be rather like adding too much monosodium glutamate to the cooking .
But Amendment No 3 is the crux of the debate : the movers say that the European Union should not proceed without the guarantee of adequate standards in procedural law .
That means that the Union cannot respond to the terrorist threat .
I disagree with them .
We must respond .
But , in giving our agreement , we do so on the basis of faith that these measures will be rebalanced with procedural guarantees .
This matter is very poignant to me personally .
Faith is not a comfortable basis on which to proceed in politics .
I am aware that my name , and perhaps the name of my party , may be associated with laws that could be used for repressive purposes .
I appeal to the Council and Commission , in the spirit of the new relationship that we have between our institutions , to move rapidly to consolidate the necessary move forward in security with measures to promote freedom and justice on which the European Union will be judged .
In commending these framework directives to the House , in recommending that we trust the other institutions , I say to them : you are on trial .
The European Union is on trial before the court of world democratic opinion .
Mr President , if we can conclude this debate with a vote that confirms the broad consensus that we have reached to date on this matter , I wish to call on the parliamentary groups not to change the report .
We will be renewing our commitment to the fight against terrorism and we will be ending a process which , as Mr de Miguel has reminded us , began in the European Parliament .
By doing so , we would be turning one of the most illustrious pages in the history of this House .
We now hope to see a rapid transposition of these measures so that they are effective , so that decisions are taken that are able to freeze the assets of European terrorist groups and so that efforts are coordinated in the fight against terrorism , not only between Member States , as has happened most notably between Spain and France in recent times , but also between the competent bodies that have been established within the European Union .
Mr President , I am convinced that with this process , we will not only be responding to a demand expressed very firmly by Europe ' s citizens , but we will also be making an invaluable contribution to the cause of freedom .
There is no greater risk to the freedom of thought , of expression and to the right to life itself , than violence expressed through terrorism .
Every democratic State has an obligation to provide justice with instruments such as those we are discussing today , which will make its work more effective .
Under the Rule of Law , democratic dialogue must be based on mutual trust and non-violence , with the aim of defending democracy , precisely as we stated in one of the report ' s sections on the Union ' s role in the fight against terrorism .
To do anything else , ladies and gentlemen , would be to accept that the laws approved by democratically-elected parliaments should change to please the murderers and for them to stop killing ; this hope , ladies and gentlemen , Mr President , should be rejected because it is antidemocratic and immoral .
Mr President , the Council should realise that it is heading for a great row if it carries on as in its complex package of 27 December , making legal definitions of who is a terrorist without any democratic scrutiny .
I predict that the Council 's next step will be to institute Europe-wide bans .
It would be outrageous to do that in secret and without accountability .
Turning to the framework decisions on combating terrorism and the European arrest warrant , my group will support them .
For a normally sensible British journalist yesterday to say that Europe blindly , on the nod , is about to indulge in its own sinister overreach , really is over the top .
My group will not vote to postpone the entry into force of the European arrest warrant until there are common minimum standards of procedural law .
Urgent action to catch terrorists and criminals cannot be postponed , but the habeas corpus amendment drafted so deftly by Mr MacCormick is very worthwhile .
However , high minimum standards are also urgently needed in parallel .
It is a fiction to say that , since we all have excellent justice systems , mutual recognition is enough .
I could highlight flaws in the system of my own country - for example we have the highest number in prison of any EU State - as well as flaws in other Member States .
The Council , as well as MEPs , must welcome proposals that the Commission is preparing on achieving equivalence in criminal justice standards .
If some of the people who now oppose the European arrest warrant - in particular those on the right , not least in my own country - also cry " shock ! horror ! " at what they might claim is harmonisation of criminal justice systems , they will be guilty of great hypocrisy .
We need the European arrest warrant ; we also need a programme of equivalence in common minimum high standards .
Mr President , the issue of the European arrest warrant is really quite bizarre , not only because important issues remain vague , but also because Parliament lacks the courage to exact what it agrees to in substance .
First of all , I should like to give you a random example of this lack of clarity .
The Council has rightly pared down the Commission proposal , as a result of which a Member State can refuse to extradite someone if that person has not done anything wrong according to that country .
I agree with this .
Accordingly , a Dutch doctor who carries out an abortion on an Irish girl in the Netherlands does not face extradition to Ireland .
However , could this doctor ever go on holiday to Ireland , or any other EU country , if Ireland requests extradition on the grounds of manslaughter ?
This remains unclear , and a lack of clarity in criminal law leads to the sense of justice being eroded .
I should now like to turn to the issue of parliamentary courage .
Mr Watson , ever since the Di Lello report , this Parliament has been of the opinion ' that the Member States have to agree on common minimum standards for certain aspects of procedural law in order to guarantee a common level of protection of the constitutional right across the EU ' .
Since the European arrest warrant has demonstrated the need to protect our citizens across the European Union , and we also have the tool to enforce this protection , then we must also have the courage to use it .
And you need not be frightened .
If the Council is just as dynamic and decisive in guaranteeing citizens ' rights as it is in taking repressive measures , the European arrest warrant will not run into any delays .
Certainly not now the Commission has presented a first version of the minimum standards , by means of which it has demonstrated that these are both necessary and possible .
With regard to the definition of terrorism , my group adheres to a number of guarantees included in the recitals and the Council Declarations of 6 December , including the guarantee that nothing in this framework decision ' can be interpreted in such a way that people who exercise their constitutional right to free expression of opinion can be charged on terrorist grounds , even if they break the law in the process . '
But all good intentions to adopt this text have been seriously hampered by the fact that these guarantees are not included in the Council Decisions of 27 December .
The essence of the definition in this text is identical , but the guarantees have disappeared .
They are not even referred to .
Our amendment to the resolution aims to plug this loophole and , since only time will tell whether I am unnecessarily distrustful or justifiably cautious , I would ask the other groups to give my group this assurance .
Mr President , for a second time , we are rejecting a text which forms part of a campaign conducted by the Bush Administration and which , in the name of the fight against terrorism , merely seeks to place the most basic democratic freedoms in jeopardy throughout the world , with total disregard for international conventions .
To illustrate this , there are still , because of 11 September , 500 immigrants in the United States who were arrested on suspicion of involvement in terrorist activities , are being secretly detained and have never been charged .
Military proceedings have been instigated .
And , several dozen prisoners are now being detained in appalling conditions , at the Guantanamo Bay military base , who have no guarantees and no status .
Here in Parliament , we have been made to endorse a list of terrorists , which was , in fact , drawn up by the CIA on the basis of its own criteria and without justification , whilst England , France and Italy are taking measures to curb freedoms , particularly those of immigrants .
Furthermore , we have had a common definition of terrorism thrust upon us , one that is destructive of freedom and which , if applied to the letter by a leader like Mr Berlusconi , could lead to trade union activities , such as strikes within the public services , being classified as crimes .
The last point I will add is that we do not fight the terrorism of private individuals by supporting terrorism engaged in by a State , as is the case with Mr Sharon - we do so by eradicating poverty , injustice and corruption from the globe .


Mr President , I have just returned from Porto Alegre , and I understand the concerns of Mr Bush and his allies in the face of this huge movement that is fighting rampant globalisation .
I , however , have chosen the camp I support ; I reject a campaign that seeks to criminalise any movement that challenges the established order .
Mr President , I sympathise both with the previous speaker and with all those who , as frequently happens , mention - albeit , in my opinion , inappropriately in some cases - the Italian Prime Minister , Silvio Berlusconi .
To get back to the debate , the European Parliament is , at last , going to vote on two fundamental issues : combating terrorism and the European arrest warrant .
Of course , this vote is only a sort of belated attempt to comply with bureaucratic procedures in respect of decisions which have actually already been taken .
As has already been stressed , this way of going about things is not particularly acceptable , for it represents a genuine political humiliation for the European Parliament , which - and we must not forget it - is the only democratically-elected European institution , the only institution which fully represents the European citizens .
We can be satisfied with the endorsement of the European arrest warrant , a tool which will certainly be effective in legal terms in combating terrorism and international organised crime , replacing the complex , excessively bureaucratic extradition procedures .
However , we must not forget that the fight against terrorism , particularly the sort of terrorism which we have encountered in recent months , cannot be conducted solely by means of arrest warrants , for this would be a hypocritical and wholly inadequate approach .
As Mr Solana stressed yesterday , Europe will only be able to attempt to win genuine international credibility if it is capable of restoring peace and social and political justice to the Mediterranean Basin and the Middle East .
Europe ' s undertaking in these critical areas must not be dictated solely by emergencies and emotion or , even worse , by the selfish desires of those who see their own peace threatened : it must be part of a European project , a practical , ongoing undertaking seeking to secure a fitting economic , political and social future for these areas .
In conclusion , we are confident that the new constituent phase which will be inaugurated with the installation and work of the Convention will genuinely succeed in making Europe a strong , responsible political actor , capable of achieving a single common foreign and security policy and a common European area of freedom and justice .
Thank you , Mr President , the date of 11 September has made it even clearer that a tough battle against terrorism and organised crime is what is needed in order to guarantee the free area of peace and security in the Member States .
Via the present proposals , the Council is making a commendable effort to contribute to this by making rapid extradition possible .
However , I do have some concerns .
In my view , a restricted , positive list of criminal offences should fall under the European arrest warrant .
The criterion is whether there is a European or international definition , as in the case of terrorism , for example .
However , the list which is now before the Council contains many criminal offences for which there are no European definitions available .
The nature of the listed offences is diverse .
They cover fraud , rape and manslaughter .
What is the cross-border aspect of these offences ?
Do the existing extradition treaties not offer sufficient scope in this area ?
However , in order to prevent this welcome initiative from being shelved again , now that a difficult compromise has been struck , I would give it the benefit of doubt .
Mr President , we need to strengthen control at the European Union ' s external borders if we want to combat the menace of terrorism effectively .
I would point out that there is an undertaking made by the Ministers , which commits the Strategic Committee on Immigration to implementing measures such as the joint training of border control officials through the creation of a European Institute for Crime Prevention and Control .
In this connection , we have firmly condemned the activities of a country which is hoping to accede to the Union , Turkey .
People continue to arrive in Italy illegally by boat and Turkey must assume its responsibilities : the international authority has drawn up a list of what are known as ' rogue States ' , but I would like to stress the responsibility of the ' Mafia States ' too , which are making no effort at all to curb this appalling trafficking of people dragged into situations where there is no hope and which have no end .
With regard to the arrest warrant , I must point out that the Italian Government has endeavoured to ensure that this framework decision cannot be enforced until the Constitution has been amended .
Indeed , we need to consider two different requirements simultaneously : the security of the European citizens in the face of severe terrorist threats and the safeguarding of Constitutional freedoms and guarantees - fundamental , inviolable rights - whose sanctity must be defended in the face of all rules , including those of international law .
Mr President , Commissioner , esteemed Presidency of the Council , I take a very positive view of the commitment brought , formerly by the Belgian Presidency and now by the Spanish , to this great issue of combating terrorism .
The added value of this European Union of ours was also shown by the speed with which the European institutions , in particular the Commission and the Council , responded to the terrorist attack on 11 September with a whole package of measures ranging from the definition of the common offence via the European arrest warrant , to facilities such as joint investigation teams in Europol .
This is a very positive response .
What is , however , highly problematic about certain areas of this decision-making process is the circumvention of Parliament - of Parliament , which represents the citizens of our European Union and the involvement of which is required by law and Treaty , indeed it must be involved prior to a resolution of the Council rather than afterwards .
As this is not the first time this has happened , and since there seems to be method in this approach , I would like to take this opportunity to protest in strong terms .
Such modes of action involving circumvention of the Treaty should no longer be tolerated .
I wish to add to this the demand that Parliament be in future more involved in the adoption of third pillar measures .
The Regulation of 27 December stipulated the persons and groups whose accounts were to be frozen .
I would be interested to know whether there is a report evaluating the success or otherwise of this operation , indicating which accounts were actually found and what funds were frozen .
I would like to conclude by repeating my demand that Parliament should be involved in an effective way , as this would , on the one hand , enhance efficiency and , on the other , maintain legal certainty .
Mr President , if any good came out of the events of 11 September - and it would be a brave person who said it did - I would single out two things .
Firstly , it caused the world to look , for the first time perhaps , at the whole question of Islam as a religion - but I will leave that for the moment .
Secondly , it caused Europe , the USA and the West to look again at the whole question of international relations .
We cannot close our eyes and minds to the problems of small countries thousands of kilometres away or impoverished and troubled regions - whether or not we agree with the regimes there - and just think that they do not matter .
If we do , we run the risk that the problems will manifest themselves on our doorsteps .
One way that happens is through terrorism , which obviously we cannot ignore .
We counter it by international cooperation .
Mr Blokland said earlier that we need to be harder and firmer .
In addition to repressive measures , it is fundamental that we look at and try to address the root causes - poverty , war , oppression and a whole range of issues - that lead to terrorism .
We all abhor and condemn terrorism .
These two reports are a first step towards greater international cooperation in addressing terrorism and increasing international police cooperation .
We , as politicians , are elected to monitor at a European level what happens .
We must press for the highest possible standards , for maximum cooperation , and constantly keep the situation under review and monitor progress .

Mr President , I have taken the floor to express both satisfaction and concern : satisfaction at the tangible step forwards taken by the European Community in terms of combating terrorism ; concern at certain inappropriate compromises imposed by some Member States as a condition for them agreeing to endorse our Convention , compromises which we were not able to oppose before it was too late because Parliament was not consulted before the decisions were taken .
The Italian situation is one example : our Italian citizens had to suffer humiliation and dissatisfaction on the part of the other Member States just because our government attempted , without success , to make the scope of the European Convention subject to certain conditions , excluding from it certain offences which are of great importance to our Prime Minister , who - by pure chance , as the State attorney for Milan , Francesco Saverio Borelli , would say - happens to be on trial in Italy for precisely these offences .
I refer in particular to the offences of corruption and fraud .
Failing in that attempt , our government had the gall to request , and this time obtained - a concession made purely to get out of the impasse - another misleading clause , which , in fact , is in danger of rendering the Convention on the European arrest warrant unenforceable in the foreseeable future .
I refer to the clause to the effect that the government deems it necessary to amend the Italian Constitution in order to be able to implement the European rules .
This is not the case : our Constitution does not need to be amended in any way ; it provides all possible guarantees .
My country can therefore now postpone indefinitely the introduction of a major instrument for fighting crime on the pretext that the Constitution has not yet been amended .
I am aware that adopting the amendment we have proposed on this matter would be a superfluous gesture , but it would be the only way to make it clear that Parliament needs to be involved before decisions are taken , not afterwards .
Mr President , all of us in this House are agreed that it is a good thing to move towards the creation of a common European judicial space .
We are also agreed , particularly in respect of the arrest warrant , that it makes the adoption of common and high minimum standards a matter of urgency .
Mr Watson and Mrs Terrón i Cusí have asked us today to take it on trust that it will be done as a matter of urgency .
We have to take some things on trust , but I would be reluctant to take all on trust .
Furthermore , standards alone are never enough because standards can be broken .
The only thing that guarantees high standards being observed is effective remedies .
One of the most effective remedies ever devised was devised by the English common lawyers - I speak as a Scotsman - in the way of making sure that those who are wrongly detained are brought to court and released if the jailer cannot show cause for keeping them there .
That is a really effective remedy .
In adopting the European arrest warrant each of our states makes its own judiciary the instrument of justice in another state .
That is a good thing , that we help each other .
But it should also be the case that if the powers of one country 's courts are abused by misconduct of prosecutors in another country , they can be recalled with an effective remedy .
An effective remedy must be a Europe-wide remedy and one that diminishes the risk of undue detention pre-trial like the old 110-day rule which we celebrate in my country .
Let us have Amendment No 4 and make sure that we have remedies that are effective as well as standards that are high .
Mr President , terrorists acts are now punishable in all EU countries , and it is already possible to extradite criminals from one EU Member State to another .
That means that what is being proposed here is to some extent an empty gesture .
It is clear , however , that it is in danger of weakening legal certainty .
The proposal means that extradition cases would not be examined in the same way as before and that special legislation against crimes specifically classed as terrorism would be implemented on very vague and unclear grounds .
I think it is dubious , on such vague bases , to have a special legal system within a legal system .
We can now already see how people who ended up on the UN ' s and EU ' s terrorist lists have had their assets frozen without discovering why .
As a result , they have no means of defending themselves , either .
I believe that when , as we must , we combat terrorism , we must do so by employing , rather than weakening , the Rule of Law .
Mr President , since the terrorist attacks on New York and Washington on 11 September of last year , we in the European Parliament have debated the threats to our freedom , democracy and values in a more realistic light than before .
Most of us have realised that an attack on the United States is an attack on ourselves .
Just a few months further on , however , there are circles that are busy relativising the threats by distancing Europe from the United States .
None of us likes the restrictions and controls that hit all of us and limit everyone ' s rights to freedom , but we have to accept them because we do not know where , and precisely who , the enemy is .
We must , however , face the fact that until the divisions that divide the world economically , religiously and ideologically have been removed , it is impossible for us to bring about the area of peace , security and justice we want to see .
While I shall vote in favour of the framework decision on combating terrorism , I shall abstain from voting in favour of the framework decision on the European arrest warrant since the latter has not appeared on the scene because of the terrorist threat but serves the overall purposes of federalism and is not limited to striking a blow against terrorists .
In actual fact , I agree with Baroness Ludford that legal certainty is not , in all Member States , at a level that can justify such far-reaching surrender procedures as are at issue here .
Mr President , this is one of the most illiberal and dishonest measures ever to come out of the EU , one with potentially enormous consequences .
It has nothing to do with citizens ' freedoms and rights , and everything to do with a monstrous power-grab by Brussels .
In the book 1984 by George Orwell , the state ministries were given names which represented the exact opposite of their functions .
Thus , the Ministry of Peace was concerned with war , the Ministry of Truth was responsible for propaganda , and so on .
From this stemmed the term " Orwellian inversion " , meaning a description which implies the opposite .
How appropriate it is , therefore , that this measure should be approved by the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs - the ultimate Orwellian inversion .
In approving this decision , the committee should be ashamed of itself and , if this so-called Parliament adopts that decision today , it too should be thoroughly ashamed .
It will be betraying the very principles it claims to support .
Mr President , I would like to tell the rapporteur that he is mistaken .
We are the ones on trial : it is not the Council that is being put to the test today but Parliament .
The Council has taken its decisions , and it took them in meetings held behind closed doors , in secret , decisions partially harmonising criminal law and criminal procedure .
In particular , the European arrest warrant , whose scope is much wider than just terrorism , is an incentive to introduce heavy prison sentences .
Above all , in automatically recognising the decisions and procedures of national penal systems , it fails to lay down any common minimum guarantee safeguarding the rights of the defendant .
These are guarantees that Parliament cannot afford to hope will be put in place just for the future for it is its duty to demand them for the immediate present , to demand , that is - and here I am addressing Mr Pirker - that the procedures be respected rather than merely lamenting the fact that they have not been .
Parliament must demand that , to safeguard the Rule of Law , no fundamental principles are jeopardised .
Mr President , I am sorry that Graham Watson is not present , because I wish to begin by paying tribute to his work on these two reports , in his capacity as chairman of the Committee on Public Freedoms , Citizens ' Rights , Justice and Home Affairs .
As I have inherited this position , I feel , if possible , even more obliged to acknowledge the work that has been undertaken .
I agree fully with what he has said , but with one important difference .
We are talking about minimum guarantees of procedure as if there were none .
There are , and although they are not common , which is the case in many areas , they are equivalent .
They are also adequate for the time being .
Not having - as European citizens who wish to establish a common area of justice - to become involved in discussing how to improve these guarantees is another matter altogether .
We must make a clear distinction between the two issues .
The Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , together with the Socialist Group , will vote against these amendments , not because we are against the issues , as some speakers have claimed , but because we must make it clear that all Member States have minimum guarantees of procedure which are adequate and equivalent .
We must , therefore , act on the basis of this trust .
We all want to be more ambitious for the future , however .
The European Union flies the flag of human rights and guarantees and , therefore , when we establish this area of justice , we shall do so resolutely , in the committee that I chair and in this Parliament , as far as we can in this legislature .
We will never consider it to be enough .
Mr President , I think 11 September woke us all up and made us aware of the need for urgent action .
I also believe that we have acted accordingly .
I am myself from Germany .
Germany , Spain and Great Britain are examples in the field of counter-terrorism , of which they have had experience .
I think that is why we understand each other very well .
It is also for this reason that Parliament has done its homework and always supported the Commission and the Council when they wanted to adopt reasonable measures and submitted sensible proposals .
That has always , to date , been the way we have conducted ourselves .
Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office , my problem is , though , that this is not just about combating terrorist organisations .
It has also become clear since 11 September that the combating of terrorist groupings is not sufficient on its own .
To take Islamic extremism in the European Union as an example , there are groupings that we do not describe as ' terrorist ' but which our security agencies , for example , nonetheless categorise as organisations detrimental to security .
In my country , Germany , there are 30 000 adherents of an Islamic grouping called Milli Görüs , or , in Berlin , ' Islamic Federation ' .
As they enjoy the right to provide Islamic teaching in schools , and thus to engage in the brainwashing of small children , I see them as being in several respects at least as dangerous as the terrorist organisations .
I therefore believe that an arrest warrant and a definition of terrorism cannot be enough on their own , and that it is precisely for this reason that we have to concern ourselves very intensively with the other causes of terrorism as well .
I work on the assumption that the Commissioner and the Presidency , being from Spain , are in a position to examine this danger very closely .
Mr President , the European arrest warrant that is before us is an unqualified political , legal and procedural sham .
It is a procedural sham because the framework decision is already prepared and drafted .
Everything was ratified at the Laeken Summit on 14 December 2001 .
The consultation of Parliament is therefore utterly illusory ; it is worthless and I would even go as far as to say that it is insulting .
It is also a sham in substance , because its original purpose was to combat terrorism following the attacks of 11 September .
In reality , the scope of the future arrest warrant was widened to include 32 offences , which means two things .
The first is that we are proposing to change from using a system of extradition between States , which guarantees individual freedoms , to a single legal system , without the representatives of the people being involved in this change .
The second is that , on the pretext of combating terrorism , the European arrest warrant will provide the basis for cracking down on the convictions that are included on the list in question .
In the future , for example , for having criticised an immigration policy that a judge supports , or for having declared one ' s national preference in one ' s country , or for having expressed an opinion that is deemed politically or historically incorrect , a patriot could be expelled from his country , arrested , and transferred to another country that has an unfamiliar language and legal system .
What you are preparing is , in fact , not the Europe of security , which requires many other measures ; you are preparing the Europe of uniformity , of power systems and of ready-made thinking .
Big Brother is watching you .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mr de Miguel for his statements today .
The Watson report , which has recently been provoking extremely serious debates and has caused a number of clashes , is back on the table today .
Today ' s debate is on the amendments made by the Council after the decision was approved by Parliament ; these amendments include those of the Italian Government , of course .
My respect for Parliament prevents me from focusing on the controversy triggered off by a certain political party .
The passage of time has proved these accusation to be nothing but hot air , hot air which , I regret to say , has been blown this way again today , thanks , not least , to Mr Di Pietro , on whose behalf , as a friend , I take it upon myself to apologise to the House , especially for his grossly inaccurate accusations which are more the product of blind hatred of the individual concerned than proven facts .
The priority of internal security and the protecting external borders must therefore be underscored firmly once again .
Internal security and the fight against organised crime can no longer be matters purely for national competence .
The trafficking of drugs and human beings and terrorism are transnational phenomena which can only be addressed at a higher level .
With regard to the need to create an internal judicial space , the differences between national Constitutions and judicial systems must be taken into account so that national legislation can be genuinely harmonised .
The European arrest warrant must be accepted as an essential tool for combating terrorism and crime but , if it is to be genuinely effective , it needs to be handled in the same way in all the Member States .
Only thus will the citizens be able to have guarantees of effectiveness in the fair handling of individual cases and the certainty of justice rather than the freedom and rights of the powerful - as somebody in this Chamber has insinuated - but the freedom and rights of all the citizens , including citizens of third countries who wish to live and work lawfully in Europe .
We must fight to stop Europe becoming the new forum for attempts to exploit the legal system to persecute political figures or other forms of intolerance which diminish the dignity of the individual .
In conclusion , Mr President , the battle against old and new forms of crime and unlawful activities , against organised crime , money laundering and corruption - combined with a bold fight against terrorism in all its forms - must not be confused with inquisition-like persecution .
Henceforth , we must quickly build a common judicial space , maybe even placing the rules governing penal law under the first pillar again , making the different legal systems consistent and with the objective of combining inflexibility in fighting unlawful activities with firm consolidation of the Rule of Law .
Mr President , we must never forget that our task here is to build , all together , a Europe based on the freedom of the citizens .
Mr President , I should like to begin by reiterating the importance of this debate and of the piece of legislation that has brought us together today , because we have spoken so often of these matters that we sometimes run the risk of losing sight of how important the issues really are .
I should , therefore , like us to be aware of the importance of what we are today deciding on , not only from the point of view of creating a common area of freedom , security and justice , but from the point of view of the political decisions that have led us to this agreement .
In general , we tend to value things once we have lost them .
I should like to value this decision - and I would ask you to do the same - for what we have lost as a result of not having taken this decision before .
If ten years ago we had initiated the arrest warrant , if we had defined the crime of terrorism , if we had made European judges and police forces work together , if Europe had accepted ten years ago that defeating terrorism requires joint action and not only solidarity with those who directly suffer its blows and if we had confronted terrorism with the entire might of European democracy , today ETA would be a thing of the past .
This is why I say I would like you to consider from this point of view the importance of the instruments that we are today debating and which we will be adopting .
If we had introduced them before , we would not have suffered such irreparable losses .
We have lost years of freedom and human lives and we have buried friends , dear friends , who would have been with us here today .
History has shown that human beings can be extraordinarily cruel if their actions go unpunished .
This is why I say that , if we had acted previously , ETA would today be a thing of the past .
We would have fewer orphans , fewer widows , less suffering and less fear .
Think about this when you vote , ladies and gentlemen .
Be proud to be key players in this major decision and do not forget that , above and beyond all the speeches , what you are doing is giving life and freedom a chance .
Mr President , this House is requested to give its approval to the proposal of the Council on a framework decision that concerns directly basic principles of democracy .
This Parliament is merely consulted .
Its opinion is , in the words of Mr Turco , " no more than a costly bureaucratic exercise " .
More than forty years have passed since I learned from Patrick McGuilligham at the Faculty of Law in Dublin what the expression " rubber stamp parliament " means .
In our last sitting in Strasbourg , talking about the area of freedom , security and justice defined in the Amsterdam Treaty , the Spanish presidency put security first , ignoring the fact that the only real guarantee for security is the implementation of freedom and justice .
Mr Watson , on that occasion , stood up to say : " We will push you to make sure that freedom and justice are not far behind . "
Yesterday two more Basque organisations - SEGI and ASKATASUNA - were expelled from the area of freedom and justice in the name of Mr Aznar 's priority - Spanish security .
Can this judicial decision form part of the European judicial space mentioned by Mr Watson ?
Thank you , Mr President .
The European Parliament ' s renewed consultation about the framework decisions on the fight against terrorism and on the European arrest warrant bears the hallmarks of a diversion , although it presents the Dutch members of the PVDA in this Parliament with an opportunity to express our satisfaction with the result achieved in negotiations by the Dutch Minister in the Justice and Internal Affairs Council .
Thanks to this result , an initially unacceptable proposal proved satisfactory after all , a compromise that is nothing to write home about in terms of content but that does secure the important achievements of our criminal law policy .
Moreover , we do support the amendment relating to the European habeas corpus order .
However , viewed in terms of the European Parliament ' s relationship with the Council , this debate and subsequent vote actually constitute a mere show which compromises the credibility not only of Parliament but also of the Council .
Every presidency pronounces touching words about the crucial dialogue with the European Parliament but , in this area , we have been taken for a ride twice .
Firstly , Parliament was consulted about superseded proposals and , secondly , Parliament was allowed to have its say on completed proposals which were already set in stone .
The vital new proposal on criminal procedural law seems to me to be a good opportunity to right this wrong and thus to better organise this dialogue .
Mr President , today we have genuine reason to be pleased , because I am convinced that , with the approval , in a few minutes , of Mr Watson ' s reports , we will be taking another important step towards the creation of the common European area of justice , freedom and security that we all wish to see .
Another reason for this Parliament and , of course , for me personally , to be pleased , is the fact that the decisions adopted by the Council at the Laeken Summit take up the tenor of the positions that this Parliament has expressed on several occasions .
I cannot however , approve the lack of sensitivity that the Council has shown towards Parliament - and this has been recognised by fellow Members and by the Council itself - with regard to consultation on the list approved on 27 December 2001 .
In achieving the difficult balance between freedom and security , a position in which we often find ourselves at the moment , we are taking the appropriate measures .
We cannot postpone the approval of resolutions and democratic standards which protect democrats against the terrorists and against those who prevent the exercise of the democratic freedom of Europe ' s citizens .
At the same time , it is also our duty to acknowledge that we have a certain responsibility to continue to create this area of freedom and security , an aspect that some Members of this House have already put forward in various amendments .
Sometime very soon , we will have to address these issues , but today is not the right time .
Mr President , I too feel that , in adopting the Watson report , we will be taking a step forwards in the creation of that area of freedom , security and justice provided for by the Treaty of Amsterdam and merely accelerated by the tragic attacks of 11 September .
On the one hand , a common definition of terrorist offences is introduced , which has been greatly improved thanks precisely to the intervention of Parliament and which is necessary for the effectiveness of our undertaking in this field .
On the other hand , not least in the area of criminal law , we are starting to implement the principle that Parliament has already upheld by unanimously adopting the Di Lello report on the mutual recognition of judicial measures when it came before Parliament , which is based on the assumption that all the Member States ensure minimum respect for fundamental rights .
Here , we do not have the Guantanamo prisons but the supervision of the Strasbourg Court to safeguard human rights , although there is room for improvement in all our systems , of course .
Thus , we are also bringing the effectiveness brought by joint action into play in the fight against terrorism , while still respecting the national diversities which make European integration unique .
I regret to say that the slow progress of this integration means that the European Parliament is still in the situation where it is merely consulted by the Council .
However , we can be confident that , once the Convention ' s work and the forthcoming Intergovernmental Conference reforming the Treaties are over , this will no longer be the case , and that the Community method , which provides the greatest guarantee of democratic decision-making across the board , will be fully adopted in the Third Pillar too .
Mr President , having heard all the speeches , the Presidency of the Council wishes to join in expressing its pleasure that today a major decision is being taken ; the decision to approve these two Watson reports .
I agree with the speakers who said that this is a great day .
I would say that it represents a huge step forwards in the construction of this area of security , justice and freedom .
Although it has been suggested that we could have done this sooner , the fact is that we are now , at least , on the way to achieving it .
At the same time , I should like also to say , Mr President , in response to the words of some honourable Members of this Parliament , who expressed their concerns that the implementation of these decisions could endanger fundamental rights , human rights and the idea that every European country accepts the primacy of the Rule of Law , I should like to say that this primacy and the safeguard of these fundamental values and human rights are the foremost considerations of the Council and the Member States when implementing these antiterrorist measures .
We are convinced - as I feel sure Parliament is - that the best way to combat the scourge of terrorism is precisely to do so on the basis of our system of values and with the law behind us .
And also to fight resolutely , in order to safeguard this system of values , which terrorism wishes to ignore .
I therefore wish , on behalf of the Council , to offer every guarantee that citizens ' rights will never be violated by the implementation of the decisions taken by the Council , which are also supported by this Parliament in the two Watson reports .
Mr President , Mr de Miguel , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission is pleased to be able to take part in today ' s debate , which we consider politically important for the future of the area of freedom , security and justice .
We have , on several previous occasions , examined the legal configuration of the European arrest warrant and the framework decision on measures for combating terrorism in the light of the Watson report , which was adopted by Parliament on 5 September 2001 .
I would like to reiterate that the Commission was already working on these areas over a year ago , at the request of the Tampere European Council , and I think that Parliament can testify that the Commission treated this subject with the desired importance , so that negotiations could be completed by the deadline we were set by the Extraordinary European Council following the events of 11 September .
Moreover , I would once again like to praise the efforts of the Belgian Presidency to achieve the results that are the subject of our debate today .
The two texts before you are an important step in improving the ability of the European Union and the Member States to fight effectively against organised crime in general and against terrorism in particular .
As we wished , the European arrest warrant will fully replace the extradition process throughout the European Union , something that had been requested by the Tampere European Council in October 1999 , a request that was reiterated by the Extraordinary European Council of September 2001 .
I would also like to stress that , from the outset , the Tampere European Council not only advocated using the European arrest warrant to combat terrorism , but also to make the European arrest warrant an instrument that would replace the entire extradition procedure between Member States .
The requirement of ' dual criminality ' - under which the person accused can only be surrendered if the facts that motivated the issuing of an arrest warrant also constitute a crime in the Member State where the arrest warrant is to be executed - is abolished for 32 offences that are punishable by a term of at least three years ' imprisonment in the Member State which issued the arrest warrant .
This list effectively covers the most serious crimes and the largest part of these was taken from the Europol Convention , which was ratified by all the Member States , meaning that it was subject to the democratic vote of the national parliaments of the 15 Member States .
The European arrest warrant will enable European magistrates to work directly together , with full independence and whilst fully observing fundamental rights .
The administrative phase of the extradition procedure has been abolished , the political nature of the extradition procedure has been abolished , the procedure has been placed entirely under the authority of the magistrates and judges of the Member States , and I think that this plays a crucial part in strengthening the area of freedom , security and justice .
As far as terrorism is concerned , the text will enable us to harmonise the definition of terrorist offences at Member State-level .
The text defines terrorist offences in terms of specific acts , such as attacks upon a person ' s life or upon the physical integrity of a person , kidnapping or hostage taking , causing extensive destruction to a government or public facility and seizure of aircraft , and also in terms of the aim pursued such as intimidating a population , destabilising the structures of a country or an international organisation , unduly compelling a government or an international organisation to perform or abstain from performing any act .
It also provides a definition of a terrorist group , which is inspired by the concept of a criminal organisation established by the Joint Action of 21 December 1998 , and makes it a specific offence to direct a group and participate in a terrorist group .
Furthermore , a mitigation mechanism provides for a system that aims to facilitate the cooperation of reformed terrorists with the police and judicial authorities .
I would like to stress that this definition is particularly important , at a time when the European Union must speak with the same voice at the negotiations that are currently taking place at the United Nations in New York on the adoption of the international convention on global terrorism .
We intended , however , to clarify some aspects of the text , particularly in the light of the many comments by MEPs .
I hope that you will be pleased to see your views brought together by the text which was adopted by the Council , particularly those views regarding trade unions or anti-globalisation demonstrations .
These activities cannot , under any circumstances , be classified as crimes by the framework decision , even when they do occasionally get out of hand .
To claim that the aim of this instrument is to punish such demonstrations would be a purely popularity-seeking exercise .
Everything is now perfectly clear and established in law .
Furthermore , the Council will be issuing a recital and a statement to confirm that the framework decision will not apply to the behaviour of those who are acting in order to preserve or restore democratic values .
As for the respect for fundamental rights , a subject that both Parliament and the Commission treat with particular attention , I believe that the two texts are satisfactory .
Regarding the arrest warrant , it has been repeatedly reiterated , most notably in Article 1 , that in the execution of a European arrest warrant , the Member States and judicial authorities must always ensure that they scrupulously observe the principles recognised by Article 6 of the Treaty and that are reflected in the European Union Charter of Fundamental Rights .
We have also confirmed that it is not possible to expel or extradite a person to a State where there is a serious risk of that person facing the death penalty , torture or other punishment or inhuman or degrading treatment .
I would like to stress , and I understand Mr MacCormick ' s concern on this issue , that your amendment may have the opposite effect .
I am being very honest with you .
I would like to point out that the habeas corpus amendment is contained in the legal system of each Member State and that , in addition , Articles 5 and 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights , taken up by the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights , contain rules on the conditions governing detention and release , where the detention is unlawful .
There is nothing in the European arrest warrant that derogates from the application of the provisions of the national legal system and the European Convention on Human Rights in relation to the definition of conditions governing detention , which exist in the European Union Member States .
The Commission hopes that these texts will be formally adopted in May at the latest , as soon as the Parliament ' s final reservations have been dispelled .
All the Member States must then adapt their national legislation so that the two texts can enter into force on 1 January 2004 for the European arrest warrant and 1 January 2003 for combating terrorism .
The key to the success of the process initiated with the European arrest warrant will be mutual trust in independent and effective legal systems .
That is why , as you advocated in several of the amendments tabled today , and as I announced the last time I came before the House to speak on this matter , the Commission will issue a communication this year on minimum procedural guarantees within the European Union .
The first discussion document is already available electronically via the Commission ' s web site and you can all access this document directly .
The document will enable us to launch a public debate on these issues and to prepare the communication that the Commission will present before the end of the year .
In this communication , we will tackle questions as diverse as the right to language assistance , legal assistance , the rules on appeal , the collection of evidence , and the issue of alternatives to provisional detention or decisions by default .
Our medium-term objective is to propose a legislative instrument in this area , following the public debate .
Mr President , I am still bearing in mind the prospect of implementing these texts within the framework of the enlargement of the European Union .
The key to success in this area will also be mutual trust in independent , reliable and effective legal systems .
People have accused European legal affairs of lagging behind for years .
The two texts before you today are without doubt a major step forward and I am counting on the commitment of the Spanish Presidency and on the commitment and support of the European Parliament to pursue this ambitious integration .
The message is clear .
Violence is unlawful .
We have the legal and legitimate tools to protect democracy because the urgent demand to provide security and to combat terrorism expressed by all European citizens is something we are taking seriously .
( Applause )
Thank you Commissioner .
After the Council statement , I received two motions for resolution pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12.30 p.m.
Financing of development aid with a view to the UN International Conference
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the financing of development aid with a view to the UN International Conference ( Monterrey ( Mexico ) , 21 / 22 March 2002 ] .
Mr President , the Spanish Presidency of the European Union is delighted to appear before Parliament to give details of the current state of preparations for the International Conference on Financing for Development , which is due to take place in Monterrey ( Mexico ) , from 18 to 22 March .
In recent months , the Monterrey Conference has come to occupy a prominent place on the so-called Development Agenda , particularly after the attacks of 11 September and with the realisation that the problems of development in a globalised world require our full , immediate and urgent attention .
This widespread interest justifies the efforts made by everyone who attended the fourth meeting of the Conference ' s Preparatory Committee , which has just been held in New York , and which concluded with the adoption of a text that will be submitted for the approval of the Heads of State and Government that are due to attend the Monterrey Summit .
It is no accident that this document , which I shall discuss briefly a little later , is entitled " The Monterrey Consensus " .
Given that the Conference on Financing for Development in Monterrey is undoubtedly one of the most important events in the field of cooperation during our Presidency , Spain wishes to attach special priority to this event and this priority is reflected in the level of the official representation .
By this I mean that the Community delegation to the Monterrey Summit will be led by the President of the Spanish Government , the President-in-Office of the European Council .
The preparations for the Conference , Mr President , have been extraordinarily complex , given their exhaustive nature and the huge number of individuals that have been involved in the discussions .
I should like to take this opportunity to thank the previous Presidencies of the Union for the considerable effort they have made throughout this process , since it has been a gradual process to bring us up to the point we have now reached .
This ongoing and joint effort now means that , in Monterrey , the European Union can play the leading role it deserves as the world ' s major donor of official development aid .
Before I highlight and discuss the features of the text adopted in New York , I should like , Mr President , to put the Monterrey Conference in the proper context , because it is not an isolated process . Instead , it is part of what was started by the Millennium Declaration , adopted by the United Nations General Assembly in September 2000 , on sustainable development and the fight against world poverty .
We are , therefore , facing three independent but closely related procedures .
Firstly , trade , within the framework of the commitments adopted at the conference of the World Trade Organisation held in Doha .
Secondly , everything that concerns the mobilisation of financial resources , the United Nations Conference on Financing for Development and , thirdly , in the field of the environment , the Conference on sustainable development that is planned to take place in Johannesburg in September of this year .
I shall now refer briefly to the features of the Monterrey document , the famous Monterrey consensus that I mentioned earlier .
This final text , adopted ad referendum , since a formal closing session could not be held in New York , consists of 73 numbered sections and reflects the spirit of consensus in which it was drawn up .
Because it does not contain any unresolved elements , since everything has been agreed on , we hope that the Heads of State and Government will be able to maintain a genuine , frank and open political dialogue on the main issues that affect development and its current challenges .
The agreement that has been concluded lays down that the fundamental pillars of international development cooperation are a series of principles shared by donors and beneficiaries and , in particular , the concept of good governance at all levels , the existence of solid democratic institutions and respect for the Rule of Law , all in the spirit of partnership , on the basis of which the developed States are committed to adopting a series of measures to make financing flows more flexible for developing countries - albeit with a set of conditions - enabling governments to use international cooperation to create domestic conditions favourable to economic growth and social development .
Developed countries also assume the obligation of promoting trade within the terms of the agreements adopted in the World Trade Organisation , which are generally considered to be the main driving force behind all economic activity .
The developed States , after overseeing a reduction of official development aid in recent years , are now committed to increasing it .
This increase of resources is a commitment that applies to all donors , including the United States and Japan .
The text adopted is in line with the Laeken Declaration and the entire document emphasises the private sector ' s role as a driving force for development and as a source of resources .
The text also takes up the need to increase resources to strengthen the institutional capacity of developing countries , and to implement the entire Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative .
With regard to the international financial architecture , the autonomy of the existing institutions and the mandate of their boards of management will be upheld and support will be given to the process currently under way in the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank .
At the same time , we will be insisting on the principles of coordination , of transparency and of the participation of the developing countries in the international financial institutions .
The mechanisms for following up the Conference were also the subject of intense debate , with the decision finally going to various methods of follow-up , at the spring meeting of the Economic and Social Council , with the Bretton Woods Institutions and with the participation of the World Trade Organisation , also including representatives of civil society and the private sector , and with high-level dialogue in the United Nations General Assembly , held every two years .
At the same time , within the United Nations , the Secretariat-General has been asked to support the full use of existing mechanisms for coordinating the specialist agencies of the United Nations and the drawing up of an annual report on the work achieved in this area .
To this we can add a follow-up International Conference , whose concrete procedures will be defined by 2005 .
This set of instruments and these mechanisms are intended to ensure that the Monterrey Conference process remains on the agenda of the main international organisations and institutions , as well as in the fora of the United Nations , and of its specialised programmes and agencies .
I would not wish to end , Mr President , without mentioning some of the contributions made by the European Union , that arise in the text on more than one occasion .
The European Parliament must be very aware , and we must be proud , of the firm position that the European Union has maintained throughout this Monterrey process .
I should like to list these contributions .
Firstly , the concept of partnership and the insistence on the need for solid economic policies , good governance and democratic principles , and the defence of human rights .
At the same time , the European Union has insisted on the participation of civil society in the development process .
Secondly , I should like to highlight the European Union ' s position of emphasising the need for development to be sustainable and to incorporate economic , social and environmental aspects , whilst respecting , in all cases , gender equality and holding the fight against poverty to be a fundamental objective .
The Presidency , therefore , regrets that it was not possible to include a specific reference to the innovative concept of public goods on a global scale , in the face of opposition , to the very last , both from the Group of 77 and from other donors , although it hopes that , given its importance , the discussions on its definition and financing will continue in the appropriate fora .
Thirdly , the European Union has sought to highlight the link between the effectiveness and efficiency of official development aid and the implementation , by the beneficiaries of aid , of appropriate policies in the political , economic and social fields .
These are policies focused on giving aid to those in greatest need , so that maximum benefit can be gained from this official development aid .
In this way , the emphasis is focused not only on increasing the volume of resources , but on its effective use , with the fight against corruption also playing a key role and , furthermore , the commitment to continue with negotiations on the specific United Nations convention applying to this issue .
Similarly , external debt relief has been linked to the effective use of these resources to achieve economic growth and a sustained development that benefits the least-favoured sectors of each country taking part in these mechanisms .
Naturally , the European Union has worked very actively with other major donors , such as the United States and Japan , and with the Group of 77 , to achieve consensus on the objective of contributing 0.7 % of GDP to development , which allows us to include the differing points of view , economic realities and sensitivities .
I wish to emphasise that , precisely because of this work , a similar terminology has been used in the Monterrey consensus to that approved at the Laeken European Council .
Fourthly , the European Union has made efforts , which have been crowned with success , to have explicit references included in the text on multilateral cooperation in light of the new transnational challenges and threats arising from the funding of terrorism and organised crime .
My fifth point is that the European Union has also worked actively to have specific references included in this text to private-sector banking and to the importance of the development of this sector in supporting small and medium-sized businesses in developing countries .
Lastly , the support measures to increase the institutional capacity of the developing countries in the field of trade should also be highlighted .
For this reason , the Presidency sets great store by the package of practical measures that is being prepared by the competent services of the Commission , to increase developing countries ' negotiating power in the field of trade .
To sum up , following the fourth and last preparatory meeting , the Presidency is quite optimistic about the forthcoming Monterrey Conference .
Despite the doubts that remained up until the last moment , we were able to adopt a final text on 27 January , almost two months before this important international meeting .
The fact that this was achieved by consensus - as I have already mentioned - and that we managed to involve all the donors in this consensus , makes the Monterrey consensus a good platform for the future , because it is creating the climate of trust that this complex process requires and which , furthermore , now means that the round tables planned for Monterrey can take place in an atmosphere that is positive and constructive and not one of confrontation .
The Monterrey Conference needs to be an innovative event , by tackling development and the fight against poverty from an all-encompassing position , covering the various aspects and encouraging the participation of all players .
This global vision gives the process as a whole an extraordinary complexity , which we must also tackle pragmatically and realistically , by means of work that makes inclusion - and not exclusion - the main objective of all those who are committed to cooperation development tasks .
We hope that the international campaign that is announced in Article 62 of the document , as one of the Millennium objectives , will also contribute to this .
Mr President , I can ensure this Parliament that the Council Presidency remains firmly committed to this approach and that the success of the Conference is still our main objective , especially if we take account of the fact that development cooperation policy must be one of the pillars on which the European Union ' s external action is based , and must be in perfect harmony with other pillars such as the external and common security policies and trade policy .
For this reason , we are sure that the Monterrey Conference offers us an historic opportunity for the European Union to be able to project and transmit , together with the rest of the participants in that event , a clear message in defence of the values we hold dear .
Therefore , we consider that the defence of the democracy , of good governance , of strengthening the institutional development of aid-receiving countries , the Rule of Law , peace and security , and human rights , are crucial elements of economic and social development as a whole .
Mr President , the EU attaches great importance to the Conference .
We are convinced that in the current international context , we cannot approach the Financing for Development Conference on a business-as-usual basis : this time we need concrete action .
The present crisis will impact on economic development worldwide and it will be once again the poorest who pay the highest price .
We must counter this tendency by trying our best to make globalisation work for the poor and not against the poor .
In this context , the Financing for Development Conference represents a key opportunity for the international community to enter into a new " global deal " on the assumption that a safer world for all will only be possible if there is a strong signal on the renewed commitment in the fight against poverty .
After the agreement reached in the Preparatory Committee on the final document for the Conference , we should focus our attention on positive initiatives that the EU could make in key areas and on the input we can make in the political declaration in Monterrey .
Action is needed on the volume of ODA : we have to agree on concrete steps to double ODA flows within the next five years , in order to be able to achieve the Millennium development goals .
ODA must also be more efficient : we have to complete work on the untying of aid in time for the Conference .
All the themes discussed internationally will remain on the international agenda , whether or not they are specifically included in the Monterrey consensus .
One such case is the discussion on global public goods .
We will continue arguing in order to give some real impetus to international solidarity .
In our view , Monterrey and Johannesburg are closely linked , as both look at ways and means to implement the Millennium Declaration and the International Development targets , which we strongly support .
Also they are both related to the trade negotiations following the launch of these in Doha .
We have an opportunity to work in a comprehensive manner and we look forward to taking part in the conference and making it a success .
Mr President , we live in a world characterised by great material wealth , but the wealth is unevenly distributed .
At present , more than three billion people are trying to survive on less than two dollars per day .
Eradicating poverty is a moral imperative , but it is also an issue directly linked to our common security .
We live in a world in which countries and people are increasingly interdependent , which is more divided and in which there is greater danger of tensions , large-scale migration , damage to the natural environment and increased crime .
All this can of course also be linked to desperate acts that can lead , for example to terrorism .
It is against this background that we must view not only the forthcoming conference in Monterrey , but also this autumn ' s world summit in Johannesburg .
On both occasions , rich and poor countries will have an opportunity to agree upon a long-term plan to eradicate poverty step by step .
The rich nations must offer increased support .
The poor nations must determine their priorities when it comes to work on combating poverty , greater respect for democracy and human rights and a more vigorous fight against corruption etc .
I think the consensus document referred to here today is weak .
No amount of fine words and eloquent rhetoric can eradicate poverty .
The spirit of this resolution is therefore that the EU should make every conceivable effort in Monterrey to ensure that specific pledges are made on increased cooperation and transfers of resources , debt cancellation and generally increased aid in a range of areas .
One particular issue is that of work designed to increase the production of the global , or ' public ' , goods to which Commissioner Nielson refers , that is to say efforts to protect the climate , combat deforestation and develop vaccines and medicines to combat infectious diseases etc .
Through this resolution , we are sending a clear signal to the Commission , to the governments of our Member States and to the international community that , as parliamentarians , we take these issues extremely seriously and desire more than merely words in Monterrey .
We want to see practical results .
Mr President , with the UN Conference in Monterrey around the corner , the world is facing a fundamental choice .
Despite all the fine speeches , international conferences and development programmes , the gap between rich and poor has only widened over the past decades .
1.2 billion people , that is one fifth of the world population , live on less than one dollar a day .
The three richest people together own more than the total income of the world ' s 48 poorest countries , and 130 million children never attend school .
These are the bare facts .
We all have a clear lesson to learn from the disastrous attacks of 11 September . In the Global Village , we have to be prepared to tackle these problems together , but our response falls extremely far short of the mark .
I want to warn against a new international doctrine according to which the western world , having turned its back on these one billion people fighting for their daily existence , withdraws behind barriers made up of weapon shields and expensive technological defence materiel .
The amount of USD 379 billion which , if it were up to President Bush , is being earmarked for the Pentagon next year is more than seven times the total amount of development aid spent last year worldwide .
This situation is all the more poignant when one realises that , despite the worldwide agreement to spend 0.7 % of GNP on development aid , the figure has even dropped to an all time low of 0.24 % .
This is unacceptable because it is precisely a doubling of the worldwide development aid figures that is required in order to meet our international pledge , namely that , by 2015 , all children in the world will be able to attend school and receive medical care .
The pledges for 2015 are clear .
The Member States must now very quickly meet this 0.7 % target in a practical way .
We must not allow the breakthrough at Doha to be watered down .
European agricultural policy must change to benefit the Third World .
Without any serious commitments by the Western countries , the conference in Monterrey will end up in a stalemate .
This is why Europe , as the world ' s largest donor of development cooperation and as the largest international trading power , must be prepared to throw its weight into the balance , building on the successes achieved at Doha , with a view to reaching authentic binding agreements in Monterrey about aid , education , health care and far-reaching debt relief .
Plugging the welfare gap is crucial for attaining stability and peace in the world .
More development aid is not enough but , without extra funding , poverty cannot be eradicated .
Affordable schooling and health care must enable people to develop the economy themselves and attract foreign capital .
In order to achieve the UN development objectives , aid has to be doubled .
Most donors still give far less than the agreed 0.7 % of their GNP .
America could easily contribute far more , but only has an eye for increasing its military expenditure .
Many European partners too are still failing to meet the mark .
The problems involved in granting aid should not be an excuse for doing too little .
Learning from experience and improved international coordination can make development cooperation more effective .
Aid must help set up good governance , democratic structures and a well-functioning market economy .
Access to the global market is essential for developing countries .
Insupportable debts must be substantially lowered , and the Debt Repayment Fund must be adequate for this .
Poverty , Mr President , is the breeding ground for violence and terrorism .
More aid is not only a humanitarian necessity , but also an absolute condition for attaining stability and peace in the world .
Mr President , we must welcome the International Conference on Financing for Development , as this is an essential theme in the debate on reducing aid to developing countries .
For more than 20 years , the UN has told donor countries that they must dedicate 0.7 % of their GNP to state development aid , in accordance with OECD standards , but only four countries are respecting this commitment .
Aid is decreasing in general and the current average is 0.2 % .
Developing countries are suffering badly from the gradual and structural deterioration in trade terms for basic products and are caught up in the vicious cycle of paying back often illegitimate debts , as well as the interest charged on them .
How can we raise financial resources for the human , economic and social development of these people , given these circumstances ?
Our hopes rest on Monterrey therefore , unless the outcome has already been determined and the American positions dominate this conference , as was the case at Doha .
By faithfully following the liberal principles of development that the international institutions and the European Commission have been applying for 20 years , the document before us , just as the Monterrey consensus , never calls neo-liberal globalisation into question .
However , the income of the population of developing countries has continued to fall over the same period , which proves this formula is ineffective and counter-productive .
It is failing , but we carry on regardless .
I do not know if the draft consensus for Monterrey , which does not propose any ambitious objectives , any practical financial measures or a timetable , is set in stone .
If that is the case , and if the conference limits itself to making wonderful statements which will never be followed up , I think that we must cancel it and the millions of euro that have been earmarked to organise the conference must be given directly to the least-advanced countries .
It would be a shame because there are grounds to condemn and criticise , but there are also grounds to discuss and , in relation to mobilising aid , propose cancelling debt , taxing capital and reforming the WTO .
The European Union must seize this opportunity to push through the adoption of ambitious objectives as well as restrictive measures , which could enable poverty levels to be cut in half by 2015 .
The EU must reiterate the commitment made at Gothenburg to request the Member States to increase their aid to 0.7 % .
The governments and parliaments which agreed to the principle of a Tobin-type tax must demonstrate their interest in regulating the financial markets and redistributing wealth towards the south .
Mr President , all those taking part in the summit must ensure that it is a success .
The European Union has a responsibility to do this .
Mr President , the situation of poverty in the world is perfectly well known , as is the deep gulf that separates the northern and southern hemispheres .
Nevertheless , and despite several declarations of good intentions , the formal 1974 commitment to attain the objective of public aid for development at a level of 0.7 % of GDP and despite the fact that the World Bank recently found it necessary to double the resources earmarked for public aid , the truth is that it is no higher than 0.22 % in the OECD countries , the lowest level ever , having fallen by around 25 % in the last decade and not currently exceeding 0.32 % in the Member States of the European Union .
Against this backdrop and with Johannesburg on the horizon , the Monterrey Conference is taking on an undeniable importance .
It is truly time to reverse past actions and negative trends , to look at the problem of the development of poor countries in a different way , a way that demonstrates greater solidarity and to adopt practical and binding measures .
We respect the Council decision of 8 November , but it is crucial that the Spanish Presidency and the Commission spare no effort to ensure that Monterrey results in objective and scheduled commitments that guarantee some progress , even with the awareness of the retrograde and unacceptable positions of the American administration in this field , which cannot impose conformist positions on others , and even with the awareness of the weaknesses of the so-called Monterrey consensus itself .
Monterrey must also result in guidelines that put an end to the devastating effect of foreign debt on the development of developing countries , by putting forward mechanisms that do not hold back the Highly Indebted Poor Countries initiative and which are primarily founded on global recognition of the principle of debt relief .
The appalling situation in which the developing countries find themselves cannot remain as it is and the European Union and its Member States must not only not content themselves with being the largest donor but must also adopt a clear position which helps these countries to find a way out of this situation .
Mr President , the widening gap between the world 's rich and poor represents an enormous potential risk to all concerned .
Traditional development aid , which is taken more or less to be a sort of gift day in which the rich countries give to the poor ones , does not work .
What we need is an all-embracing concept of the peaceful development of the poor countries .
This is , of course , easier said than done , but we must remember that it is the countries with a wealth of raw materials , such as Angola or Nigeria , for example , whose people are the poorest .
That is not by chance ; there is a system behind it .
We need to ask ourselves which , in this instance , are the donor countries and which the recipients - a question which , for me , has not been answered unambiguously .
The position of the developing countries is worse than in the days of colonial rule .
The key is fair world trade , in which raw materials have to be at the prices they deserve , and in which the net product must remain in these countries in order to develop their infrastructure .
Ladies and gentlemen , the debate is adjourned .
It will be resumed this afternoon .
( The sitting was adjourned at 12.25 p.m. and resumed at 12.30 p.m. )

Mr President , given that today is the 50th anniversary of the accession of Her Majesty the Queen to the throne of the United Kingdom , could we not make a special note of that and send her felicitations and congratulations on fifty years of a glorious reign ?
I will pass on your remarks to the President .
Vote
Mr President , I should like to notify you that , at any rate , it is still possible to vote on the second part of Amendment No 1 .
In terms of words , you are probably right , but the spirit of the amendment is in contradiction .
So I would ask the rapporteur , Mr Olsson , for his advice on this matter .
Mr President , I share your view .
We are concerned here with three different alternatives .
We have now voted in favour of one of them , which mean that the others cease to be options .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report Vidal-Quadras Roca ( A5-0465 / 2001 )
Mr President , I voted for Mr Vidal-Quadras Roca ' s extremely important report on methods of saving energy , particularly as regards the construction of buildings that are fit for habitation , where heating costs are the most burdensome for the citizens of the European Union .
On this occasion , as regards the heating costs very often sustained by pensioners and the elderly , I hope that our States decide to allocate pensioners a sum of money , which would differ from region to region , to meet these costs .
There are extremely beautiful areas of Europe such as Sicily where the cost of heating houses is very low , but there are other just as beautiful regions - in Sweden and Finland , for example - where heating costs are much higher .
I would add Scotland to your list of places where heating costs are very high .
Report Kauppi ( A5-0466 / 2001 )
I will talk about Scotland in a minute , Mr President .
With regard to Mrs Kauppi ' s report on cooperation in the field of value added tax , I have to say that I met an old school friend , Mr Bertone , at Genoa airport . He said to me , with regard to the matter at hand : ' How good you are in Europe at making us pay more taxes , at organising yourselves and reaching agreements to improve the way we pay taxes ! '
Just like myself , Carlo Fatuzzo , Mr Bertone is from Genoa and Genoa has a reputation in Italy similar to that of Scotland in the United Kingdom : in other words , we are very thrifty , as they say .
Indeed , my friend , Mr Bertone , of Genoa , said to me : ' Yes , you are good at making us pay out .
Why do you not do something , rather , to make us pay less tax , which would make us Genoese happy and probably the Scots as well ?
I hope this happens as soon as possible ! '
I have voted against this report .
The reason for my having done so is that the report quotes Article 95 of the Treaty as a legal basis , involving majority decision-making in the Council and codecision making for the European Parliament , and this in spite of the fact that Article 95 states that it does not cover ' fiscal provisions ' .
What , therefore , we have here is something so crucially a matter of principle as a reorganisation of the way in which tax issues are dealt with , involving an abandonment of intergovernmental cooperation with its demands for unanimity in accordance with Article 93 of the Treaty .
I cannot support the Commission ' s view that the report only concerns administrative cooperation and that the proposal would not have any fiscal consequences because it does not directly relate to tax collection .
In the past , the Council has always rejected this position , and it changed the legal base to Articles 93 and 94 , which only require that Parliament should be consulted .
The Swedish Christian Democrats fully support the Council ' s approach .
We believe that tax issues should not be decided by majority decision in the Council and by codecision in Parliament .
Our clear position is that , in the future too , unanimity shall be required in connection with decisions on taxes , and this in accordance with Article 93 of the Treaty .
Report Moreira da Silva ( A5-0025 / 2002 )
This report talks about climate change and what we must do to clean up the air .
I totally agree , Mr President .
However , do you remember what a beautiful day it was yesterday here in Strasbourg ?
The temperature was 14-15 degrees and it was as if Spring had come ; we all enjoyed it very much .
Well then , Mr President , I started to wonder whether , ultimately , global warming , which we are all endeavouring to fight and which raises the average temperature of the earth , might not be better than if the earth were getting colder .
Should we not reflect carefully before fulfilling these requirements , for maybe a little more heat in our world would be a good thing ?
Report Watson ( A5-0003 / 2002 )
As you are aware , this document has been the subject of much debate , and it has also provoked opposition , particularly in Italy , as you know , Mr President .
I want to reiterate what I have said when we have voted on the European arrest warrant and combating terrorism in the past .
I agree that there should be rapid procedures for arresting those who ought to be arrested , whatever Member State of Europe they might flee to .
However , my ultimate goal and the ultimate goal of the Pensioners ' Party is genuinely to achieve a single code of civil procedure and a single European penal code because , when all is said and done , if we all agree that a particular deed is a crime , then we must all agree on that without exception and without differences .
This is too important an area for there to be differences within Europe .
Mr President , when we are reflecting on the problems of improving procedures in the House it is worth noticing that an explanation of vote of this kind is one way one can reply to a point taken by the Commissioner at the end of a debate .
At the end of the debate on the Watson report , Mr Vitorino said that the amendment relating to the habeas corpus order would risk confusing the issue and undermine respect for human rights .
In that he completely ignored the point that the first condition stated for the operation of that amendment was for there to be a violation of human rights in the receiving state .
The point I made in my speech in the debate was that it is not enough to have common agreement to respect rights ; you must have effective remedies .
That text of ours would have put in an effective remedy .
Since Parliament in its wisdom ( or unwisdom ) chose not to adopt it , I voted against the Watson report on the Arrest Warrant .
Other Members from the United Kingdom will come to regret that they did not too .
Some of my colleagues in the European Free Alliance - a majority of them - voted for the Watson report ; not that they did not also regret the absence of the habeas corpus amendment , but that they felt a strong commitment in conscience , as we all do , to getting the European judicial space going forward , and thought that necessary .
Mr President , I wish to thank you for enabling us to arrange this properly .
I thought we had submitted the names in time , but there was some misunderstanding .
What is at issue , then , are the anti-terrorist laws and a European arrest warrant .
We are strongly critical of these terrorist laws , and above all of an arrest warrant , in terms both of their content and of the speed with which these laws have been devised .
We are also critical of the fact that there has been no basic examination of the proposed laws or assessment of their impact .
Moreover , the European Parliament has in actual fact dealt with the issue without much in the way of reflection .
We were therefore also extremely anxious that our Amendment No 4 should be voted through today .
Unfortunately , it was not .
I therefore think that Parliament has not accepted its responsibilities when it comes to protecting those deprived of their freedom and safeguarding human rights .
Following the attacks in the United States on 11 September , the work designed to produce new anti-terrorist laws within the EU has proceeded at a furious pace .
These draft laws are extremely far-reaching , and the security of the individual may be in danger .
The same concerns also apply to the interpretations brought to bear upon how a terrorist group is really to be defined .
A majority of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance therefore voted against the arrest warrant .
All this is also having further consequences .
In Sweden , the freezing of the assets of al-Baraka , a not-for-profit association , has directly affected a number of Swedish citizens of Somalian origin .
It has also been made impossible for Somalians to send money to needy families and relatives .
This is a clear example of what can be the indiscriminate effects of these laws , and the fact that measures of this type can be taken without any proof being required is an injustice committed against people .
In my opinion , greater reflection and more impact assessments were needed before we took this decision .
Mr President , I voted against the decision on combating terrorism because I feel it is fundamentally flawed .
I recognise that there have been some improvements - for example in Recital 10 .
A lot of people are putting faith in the Council 's statement , which is not part of the legally binding text .
It is basically only a political promise .
People should be extremely wary of political promises .
The statement protects the right of people to protest , which is one of the fundamental issues that people were very concerned about .
If it had been in the text itself it might have been legally binding .
But there is no guarantee as to how this legislation will be used .
Will it interfere with the rights of people who are unhappy with the status quo and want to change things ?
We also have to look at how it will impact on foreigners , for example people from different cultural and religious backgrounds - some people in Western society are extremely wary of them .
There is a great threat to their fundamental rights .
On the European arrest warrant I would endorse what Mr MacCormick has said .
It was very disappointing to see so many people in this Parliament not support an amendment that would have given people some sort of protection in relation to protecting their basic civil liberties .
The Communist Party of Greece never misses an opportunity to denounce the fact that the capitalist mechanism and police state being built up by the European Union are capitalist society 's response to the rising tide of protest and demands for justice being generated by its own anti-grass roots policy of serving the interests of big business .
The leaders of the ÅU know full well that , despite their efforts , they cannot fool the people by cloaking their policies in pro-grass roots terms .
This tactic was on a slow but sure course up to 11 September .
Now , the horrendous events of that day are being used as a pretext to speed up the application of political decisions taken long ago .
The perpetrators of and accessories to the terrorist attacks have played straight into the hands of the American and European imperialists .
Which is why we are now examining , for the second time , the improved proposals for a Council framework decision on combating terrorism and on the European arrest warrant , the heavy artillery in the capitalist arsenal .
Basically nothing has changed in the draft decisions , apart from a few editorial improvements to appease the reactions , and the addendum stating that " the European Union is founded on the universal values of human dignity , liberty , equality , solidarity and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms ; it is based on the principles of democracy and the Rule of Law " .
The pure hypocrisy of this statement is highlighted by the fact that the framework decisions deal a very severe blow to democracy and collective and individual social rights .
According to article 1 , anyone fighting for fundamental political and social change can easily be labelled a terrorist .
Types of protest , such as symbolic sit-ins , or the results of protests , such as interruptions to the electricity or water supply when workers go on strike , need only cause " significant economic losses " in order to be labelled terrorist crimes .
The same applies to protests by farmers who block the roads .
Extending the responsibilities of the organisations to which the " terrorists " belong may create a handy mechanism for prosecuting troublesome organisations and parties but it also gives them the incentive to engage in provocation .
The only people above all suspicion are the rulers of the ÅU and the USA .
They are in no danger of being tried on the basis of their own law , which labels acts which may " seriously damage " the country as terrorist acts if the perpetrator carries them out with a view to : ( i ) seriously frightening the people or ( ii ) unreasonably forcing the public authorities or an international organisation to carry out or refrain from carrying out an act or ( iii ) seriously destabilising or overturning the fundamental policies or constitutional , economic or social structures of a country or international organisation .
Did the European and American imperialists do any less or any different in Yugoslavia , Iraq , Afghanistan , Chile , Greece and dozens of other countries ?
The people throughout the world know exactly who the terrorists are .
Likewise , they also know that violence and suppression cannot reverse the historic advance of mankind and they will continue their fight until all the terrorist laws have been repealed .
It is for these reasons that the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece voted against the report .
The European Union , and the European Parliament in particular , do not have a very consistent view of the fight against terrorism at all .
I have risen on previous occasions to ask for increased border controls , including those controls at the internal borders of the Union .
But this has not happened .
What has in fact happened is that the policy on phasing out internal controls has been pursued unchanged .
That is why , on Monday , at the debate on the Kessler report , I condemned the scheduled withdrawal of the ' reporting of presence ' which , under the Schengen Convention , should be demanded of third country nationals who wish to move between European Union Member States .
We are today examining the last phase of the plan to create a European arrest warrant , which seeks to abolish , for certain offences , the former extradition system between EU Member States , which gave discretionary power to the executing State , but there is an obvious contradiction as far as this point is concerned .
We have seen the list of offences grow in size with the subsequent versions of the plan .
However , the essential guarantees that we requested in our explanation of vote of 29 November 2001 have still not been included , such as the right for the judge of the executing country to properly check the validity of the request and for the new system not to apply to the nationals of the executing country as they should continue to enjoy maximum protection .
The European Parliament is prepared to turn a blind eye to all these anomalies , because they are helping to build a super-State .
At our previous sitting , however , Parliament did not hesitate to vote in favour of a resolution that refused to facilitate the extradition of terrorists or potential terrorists , who have been arrested in the EU , to the United States .
It would , in fact , have been important to make a gesture in relation to this issue , because the United States is now facing a battle to protect the whole of the western world .
We are , therefore , trying to achieve too much with the European arrest warrant , which is dangerous .
And we are not doing enough to support the United States against terrorism and this is shocking .
. The British Conservatives voted strongly in favour of the framework decision on terrorism in order to underline our continued ongoing support for the war against terrorism , and to confirm our determination to ensure that the European Union presents a united front against those who seek to undermine our values and our way of life .
However , we were obliged to vote against the proposal in relation to the European Arrest Warrant .
As now proposed , the procedures go much further than is either necessary to deal with the terrorist threat , or desirable in terms of both safeguarding human rights or respecting due legal process , as is currently satisfied by the extradition agreement processes .
Nonetheless , let no one be in doubt of our determination not to waver in the long war against terrorism , but we do not believe that the European Arrest Warrant as currently proposed will achieve the ends to which we are all striving .
- ( NL ) The initial perplexity which the attacks of 11 September caused have not only led to unqualified support for American action in a country where the possible mastermind behind those attacks could be hiding , but has also resulted in measures being considered which would seriously affect civil rights deemed obvious hitherto .
All the primitive ideas which guardians of law and order had ever entertained to make it easier to lock up , extradite and condemn opposition forces were suddenly given free rein .
It is not only the American administration that comes up with new inventions such as the introduction of the notion of ' illegal combatants ' , who are subsequently unable to enjoy the protection received by prisoners of war .
Unfortunately , this development also plays a role in Europe .
Anyone who , for a long time , had fought for the right to extradite people to countries where capital punishment still exists , for calling an end to freedoms deemed undesirable in neighbouring countries or for curtailing the rights of suspects , seized their opportunity .
Meanwhile , those who , in panic , allowed themselves to be convinced of the need for such draconian measures are starting to consider the implications .
This morning , the President of the Group of the European People ' s Party and European Democrats rightly said that support for Russian action against Chechnya cannot be justified in the name of combating terrorism .
The fresh proposal by Mr Watson is an improvement , but not yet sufficient to prevent accidents .
.
( DE ) I did not abstain in the final vote on the report through opposition to the European arrest warrant . It was much more the case that I was opposed to the rushed procedure with which this matter was dealt with .
Report Rapkay ( A5-0002 / 2002 )
Mr President , I voted for Mr Rapkay ' s document on State aid in the European Union - both on my own account and on behalf of the Pensioners ' Party - but while I was voting I was thinking , Mr President .
Should we not consider the money that governments use to cover and make good pension fund deficits to be State aid too ?
When the State budget intervenes to make good the balance of pension funds , that , in my opinion , is State aid which distorts competition in the European Union between different systems and procedures for managing pension funds in Europe .
We need greater competition when it comes to pension types available on the market too .
I hope this is achieved in the future .
Mr President , I just want to say , in addition to casting my vote just now , that we need to attempt to make the concept of State aid totally clear .
Today ' s document addresses this subject - which has already been dealt with in the past - in a number of respects , it develops and analyses it and also welcomes in principle the decline of that aid during the period 1997 to 1999 .
It remains to address the issue of regional aid , the money that passes from the State - for regional tax income is not sufficient , at least in Italy - to the regions and from the regions directly to many bodies and companies , which thus break competition rules and distort the market , particularly in respect of other companies which , for example , are not based in regions with a special statute , which are particularly favoured .
. ( PT ) This report on State aid closely follows the line of the previous report , endorsing the observation that there was a reduction in State aid during the period between 1997 and 1999 , specifically due to reduction in aid in Germany and Italy , the two countries that provide the highest levels of State aid .
The rationale of the report is based on defending the reduction of State aid and on stepping up the measures used in this context , specifically tax measures .
The objective , in accordance with the conclusions of the Stockholm Summit , is to achieve a steady reduction in State aid by 2003 , only allowing aid , in exceptional circumstances , specially requested by the Member States .
Existing Community aid will , of course , continue .
Nevertheless , with the creation of the State aid assessment panel , pressure on Member States to reduce aid will increase , with States basing their approach on protecting competition , ignoring the problems suffered by weaker economies and pilfering America ' s own policy , which continues to grant State aid in various economic sectors , in defiance of WTO rules .
This is why we have voted against the report .
- ( NL ) The rapporteur is backing the March 2000 Summit in Lisbon which declared that the EU would be the world ' s most competitive region within ten years .
The high price we need to pay for this will even lead to many Europeans not having a sense of victory when the project proves successful .
In the US and Japan , many people are worse off than in large parts of Europe , despite considerable company profits and growth .
Competition means that those who manage to sell the cheapest products and services at minimum cost survive to the detriment of everyone else .
The latter cannot , therefore , afford to take issues such as human rights , working conditions , public health , the environment and animal welfare too seriously .
State support , government initiatives and Community enterprises are crucial instruments for correcting the adverse effects of the market and for promoting the well-being of people and of the environment .
I condemn state support if it is aimed only at using tax revenue to compete better against others within a free market , as in the case of aviation , but not at maintaining facilities and regional employment in vulnerable regions .
The re-nationalisation of regional policy , feared by the rapporteur , cuts down on red-tape and waste , but does need to be offset by contributions provided , in a spirit of solidarity , by rich Member States for the benefit of the poor .
Report Martens ( A5-0017 / 2002 )
Mr President , I voted for Mr Martens ' important report on education and training , but I hope that the pensioners of the different sectors of European industry will soon stop playing cards or sitting at home in front of the television , counting the days they have left to live , and be used , if they so wish , to pass on their knowledge to workers , especially young workers .
For example , pensioners from the banking sector could teach new employees how to manage the bank ' s money and achieve good results , and a similar process could be introduced in other sectors : there should be more pensioners in vocational training and lifelong learning .
Report Olsson ( A5-0467 / 2001 )
Mr President , I wish to point out with some emphasis that certain items in Parliament 's report on the ongoing handling of BSE are having negative effects on Europe 's farmers and I therefore voted against these unrealistic demands , which had been introduced by some elements in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
To be specific , these were the obligatory reduction to the age of 24 months , the debate on omnivores in connection with BSE , and also aspects of waste management .
I am , furthermore , opposed to the demand for a reform of the CAP with food safety as one of its objectives , as this is already set down very definitely in Agenda 2000 .
Our agricultural policy is founded on the principle of multifunctionality and on family-run farms , and the production of safe and high-quality food is a matter of concern for farmers like us .
By doing this , we would be sending the wrong signal .
The delegation of the Austrian People 's Party in this Parliament has therefore abstained in the final vote .
I want to wish the presidency and all the interpreters ' bon appétit ' before focusing on the matter at hand , which does nothing to whet the appetite , for this is a document on BSE , bovine spongiform encephalopathy .
Mr President , paragraph 5 ' calls on the Member States to step up ... compliance with the temporary ban on MBM ' .
But why , Mr President , is it ' temporary ' ?
If meat-and-bone meal is dangerous , we must make the ban on using it permanent and leave the firms that produce meat-and-bone meal to make something else - maybe they will produce Italian-style spaghetti or spaghetti with pesto , which would be a much more appropriate subject for debate at this precise moment .
In other words , Mr President , meat-and-bone meal should be taken completely off the market once and for all .
On the occasion of the debate on the Olsson report on the monitoring of the BSE crisis , I would like to draw attention to the scandalous decree handed down by the Court of Justice on 13 December 2001 which condemns France for having failed to observe the Commission ' s request to lift the ban on British beef imports .
The decree cites the higher powers of the Commission , which itself refers to the superiority of the freedom of movement .
This raises a question of principles - what sort of Europe do we want ?
A Europe where each nation has the right to exercise its fundamental choices , or a Europe where the Commission determines from on high what is the so-called common good ?
We believe that each nation must be sovereign .
With regard to public health , in particular , if one of the Member States democratically chooses one option , the others must note the choice made , even if they do not agree with it .
We must stress that the French Government has put itself in an impossible situation , by ratifying the Treaty of Amsterdam , which gives the Commission the powers that it is now using against us .
When will governments realise that the texts that they sign will have some consequences ?
When will they realise that their actions will catch up with them ?
When will they stop pulling the wool over their own eyes , and over the eyes of the citizens at the same time ?
In the wake of the decree of 13 December , there is no point in the French Government saying that it will not obey it , the Commission will not go to the trouble of complaining to the Court of Justice to request a penalty payment for each day that the French Government failed to execute the decision .
We will therefore have to pay a ransom for having the right to use - and this is still on a provisional basis - a fundamental competence that we ourselves foolishly abandoned when we signed the Treaty of Amsterdam .
Of course , this absurd situation will only last the length of the election campaign in France .
As soon as the elections are over , our next government will probably rush to obey the decree on the quiet .
What we need is a fundamental reform of the Treaties in order to restore national sovereignty .
. ( FR ) I voted in favour of this own-initiative report .
The European Union must now face its responsibilities in this matter .
I voted in favour of a reform of the common agricultural policy that takes into account the objective of food safety .
It must be clearly understood that this does not involve placing farmers and environmentalists at loggerheads .
The farmers want to provide produce that is of the best possible quality .
Environmentalists want to have renewed confidence in produce that does not pose a threat to their health .
Those who are questioning this principle bear a heavy responsibility for the future .
We must automatically apply the precautionary principle .
The zero tolerance principle must always prevail in any matter regarding the protection of public health .
The report considers that the existing stocks of animal meal and foodstuffs containing such meal must be destroyed and insists upon a ban on feeding animal meal to ruminants .
Furthermore , when a case of BSE is confirmed , removing all livestock herds from the food chain always seems to be the solution that will provide the greatest guarantees for the safety of our fellow citizens .
Alternative methods to destroying all livestock herds can only be implemented once they have been proven to be effective and only if they offer the same level of safety .
We must proceed with maximum caution due to scientific uncertainties about the methods of contamination .
That is why I believe it is necessary to improve and develop research into TSEs and other as yet unknown diseases and infective agents .
I also think that it is essential to monitor the sanctions and measures imposed on Member States that do not observe this legislation .
. BSE undoubtedly triggered a crisis of confidence on the part of consumers and an economic catastrophe in the agriculture and food processing industries .
It is in the interests of all concerned to ensure that lessons are learned and sensible measures put in place to eradicate BSE .
Such measures must of course be justified by sound scientific data .
It seems to me that the 30-month threshold is justifiable , and forecast to succeed in rendering the UK BSE-free within a reasonable timescale .
The main lesson to learn from BSE and other recent food scares surely is that we must favour a return to natural methods of food production and feeding of livestock .
In Scotland for example , the majority of livestock has historically been grass-fed , resulting in a relatively low incidence of BSE in that country .
. ( EL ) The report on the basic technical principles for monitoring BSE tackles the right issues in the right way .
We agree with the proposals addressing the principle of prevention and the proposals containing a final definition of terms and concepts , which will prevent the same issues from being interpreted differently in the Member States , given that the current lack of clarity is delaying the application of legislation .
We also agree with the principle of zero tolerance as regards even traces of dioxins in food and animal feed and the ban on the use of the bones of one species of animal in the feed for the same species of animal .
However , we have acute reservations on a number of other points in the report .
For example , although we do not disagree with the proposal on reforming the common agricultural policy per se , what worries us is that the Commission may use it to cut back on subsidies or the production of basic agricultural products .
This has already happened with cotton , using high nitrate levels and environmental protection as a pretext , and with tobacco , using the anti-smoking campaign and the protection of public health as a pretext .
We likewise disagree with the proposal to give the Community services more powers of control , because we feel that they have yet to prove that they are more sensitive or more efficient than the national authorities in this sector .
The repeated cases of dioxins in chickens , mad cows etc . , which are only discovered with hindsight , to the detriment of public health , confirm our reading and justify our opposition to any increase in Community powers .
Finally , we should like to point out that , as long as reducing production costs , no matter how , and increasing the profits of the huge monopolies in the sector continues to be the primary and decisive criterion for producing which agricultural products and food , the problems will not only not go away , they will multiply .
Any controls , especially preventive controls , however important , cannot reverse these trends , as the fact that most problems are identified with hindsight , once they have taken on tragic proportions and caused massive public health problems , goes to show .
That is why we believe that we cannot achieve complete food safety with communications and resolutions , however progressive they may be , because they cannot and will not touch capitalist methods of production .
We support the report and controls to restrict these problems , albeit critically ; at the same time , we must point out that we shall only have complete food safety if the basic criterion for producing food is consumer protection , animal protection and environmental protection , rather than the profit motive .
- ( NL ) Feeding animal slaughter waste to the surviving animals within the same animal species is something that can only be dreamed up by somebody for whom financial considerations are paramount .
Cows and sheep that normally only eat vegetable feed are turned into cannibals .
It is not surprising that something as unnatural as that should lead to fatal diseases which were hitherto unknown .
People still fail to draw the right conclusions from this .
In a free market , the person who manages to produce in the cheapest manner wins the competitive battle , even if this is at the expense of jobs , the environment , animal welfare and public health .
This is why there remains a great temptation to continue to use animal and bone meal in the traditional way .
Some undertakings , some Member States and some Members of this Parliament are of the opinion that everything can be solved by slaughtering healthy cattle for preventive purposes in the vicinity of a source of infection .
This was the case during the BSE crisis and again with infections caused by foot and mouth disease .
Anyone who attempts to tackle parts of this failing livestock policy has my support .
Rapporteur Olsson and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy rightly call for more monitoring of compliance with bans already introduced , stiffer penalties for infringements and the destruction of existing stocks .
However , in order to take away the temptation to commit an infringement , the economic advantages also need to be systematically removed .
The issue of the French embargo on British beef , which I brought up during yesterday ' s debate on the Olsson report , exemplifies the deeply undemocratic way in which the European institutions operate .
The Court of Justice condemned France in law , in the name of a strictly uniform vision of the single market , whilst acknowledging that France may essentially have valid reasons for protecting its population , given the uncertainties surrounding the traceability and labelling of British bovine carcasses .
The French Government declared its intention not to apply the Court ' s decree and the Commission demonstrated that it was prepared to impose severe penalties upon France .
We are therefore faced with a legal system which forces Member States either to stop implementing the measures that they consider essential for protecting their nation ' s public health , or to buy the right to do this .
Of course , it is primarily the French Government that is to be held responsible for this situation , having cheerfully transferred food safety to Community jurisdiction by signing the Treaty of Amsterdam . The French Government is now discovering , several months later , the regrettable consequences of taking such a decision so lightly .
More generally , however , the Olsson report should have brought into question an entire system that constitutes an attack upon democracy .
This is a system that denies a nation the right to take measures which it considers necessary for ensuring public health , even if other nations have a different view .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
( The sitting was adjourned at 1.13 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Financing of development aid with a view to the UN International Conference ( continuation )
We now continue with the debate on the Council and Commission statements on financing of development aid with a view to the UN International Conference in Monterrey on 21 and 22 March .
Mr President , one of the consequences of globalisation is the emergence of the feeling of belonging to the world .
This means that our citizens increasingly feel that the poverty and underdevelopment in which a large part of the population lives affect them and makes them demand that the public authorities demonstrate greater commitment in the field of development cooperation .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I hope that this message is conveyed to you when you arrive : responding to this request from the citizens for greater solidarity requires giving the least-developed countries the opportunity to implement the changes necessary to achieve the progress and well-being of their peoples and to make the framework that you have described for us this morning and , with which we are very happy , a reality .
It also requires , however , a fixed-term commitment to go beyond what was agreed in Laeken and to establish a strict timetable for States that have not yet done so to achieve , within the deadline set , the objective of allocating 0.7 % of gross domestic product to official development aid and to do so in order to comply with an ethical requirement : we cannot continue to tolerate the living conditions that so many millions of people , who embody our own dignity and our own rights , are forced to endure .
Solidarity is part of our acquis .
We must also make this commitment for the sake of coherence , because the challenge of eradicating poverty , which the European Union has taken up , requires a budgetary effort in line with the magnitude of the task facing us .
And because , without development , democracy and respect for human rights are nothing more than pipe dreams .
And , lastly , because contributing to the progress and development of peoples is the best weapon with which to ensure international peace and security , something that , unfortunately , not all countries seem to understand .
I am sorry the Council is not here too .
They knew that we started at 3 p.m.
Mr President , Mrs Ferreira had good things to say about solidarity and people ' s demands that solidarity be shown with Third World countries .
Unfortunately , that is not the development we are seeing in Denmark at the moment where we are cutting back on development aid in a way that I think is very unfortunate .
Even though we have cut back , we shall of course still be among the largest providers of aid , but it is , at any event , totally the wrong signal that we in Denmark , and the Danish Government , are sending at the moment .
I also fear that the Montreal Conference will just be another conference , with no practical consequences , and I should therefore like to highlight three practical issues in my speech here today .
The first is the demand for development aid .
I think it absolutely crucial that we set practical objectives for when the individual EU countries are to have reached a figure of 0.7 % .
As far as I remember , we have been hearing about this 0.7 % since 1974 , and the vast majority of countries are still a very long way from achieving that goal .
That is why I am also looking forward to hearing what the Commission has elicited from its visit to the different countries in terms of establishing definite time frames .
These are what are needed .
The second thing I should like to urge is that Mr Lamy ' s efforts to remove trade barriers - efforts which have so far been directed towards the least developed countries - should also apply to other countries for , without trade and without the opportunity to trade without customs barriers , no progress can of course be made .
The third thing I should like to emphasise is that we must look at what we can do in the public sector with a view to promoting private investment , and I believe that , in this area , we can bring about more fruitful cooperation than we have done so far .
In that way , it will also be possible to translate the World Economic Forum ' s words into practical action .
Mr President , on 8 November 2001 , the Council of Development Ministers urged the European Union and Member States to increase development aid .
I believe that we must now take firm and visible action .
How do we go about doubling the current level of aid given by industrialised countries to achieve the required USD 50 billion a year , as recommended in several of the preparatory reports for the Monterrey conference , so that we can meet the most basic requirements of developing countries , particularly in terms of education and health ?
What stage has the Commission reached in its negotiations with each Member State on a timetable to enable us to achieve the objective of 0.7 % , which was set some 32 years ago ?
Although the attitude of the United States is placing the very existence of aid for development under serious threat , the Monterrey conference would be an opportunity for the European Union to prepare and set in motion a strict process to rigorously monitor this timetable .
There are still other avenues to be explored .
Firstly , we must cancel debt and go much further than the HIPC initiative . The crisis in Argentina is an urgent reminder - as if it were needed - of the need for us to act .
The world parliamentary forum , held some days ago in Porto Alegre , also recommends , by means of a resolution , that the United Nations establish an international tribunal to combat debt in order to guarantee financing for development .
Furthermore , it is time to seriously consider introducing a tax on international financial transfers .
Lastly , reforms in the financial system and international trade system are obviously needed in order to make them more democratic and to combat the mechanisms which cause poverty in developing countries .
Furthermore , as regards the current situation with aid , we must ensure that payments of sums are made in a swift and efficient manner as , at the end of 2000 , EUR 9 billion remained in the coffers of the European Development Fund and we must also change the focus of the ODA .
It is , first and foremost , private investors who find this attractive , as it helps to further develop each country ' s specialist knowledge of production niches for exporting goods in terms of the requirements of the global market and not of populations .
The commitments made towards developing countries must be honoured .
This is a legitimate expectation of the 2.8 billion people who live on less than USD 2 per day .
Mr President , every time we discuss the issue of the poor countries , out comes the usual catalogue of figures : 800 million people suffering from malnutrition ; 40 % of the world ' s population suffering from malaria ; 2 million people contracting aids each year in Africa alone ; almost a billion children who cannot read or write ; water shortages ; health and social problems and so on and so forth .
It has become almost a customary ritual to trundle out these data each time .
However , Mr President , we need to take action .
There is an urgent need for more practical measures from industrialised countries and international financial institutions , not least through more effective cooperation , without duplication or overlapping of effort . That means more careful monitoring of the allocation of development funds .
In other words , we need practical measures implemented with the greatest transparency and with the minimum bureaucracy necessary for the monitoring process .
Of course , the March 2002 International Conference at Monterrey and the Johannesburg world summit to be held subsequently this September will be extremely important in this respect .
Their success would certainly be a clear signal for further , more general acceleration of measures boosting sustainable development .
Key areas for action include mustering local financial resources for development and international resources , including countries in international trading and so on .
The European Union is certainly the main donor but , together with the individual States , it has a key role to play in this respect .
We need closer cooperation with United Nations organisations such as the FAO in order to ensure that the allocation of these funds genuinely serves to improve the levels of nourishment and living conditions of poor peoples .
Mr President , there is no dispute that the European Union is contributing to the war on poverty , but , as we all know , we fall a long way short of our declared objectives .
The removal of poverty , backwardness and ignorance must be first on the list if we are to combat terrorism .
A new world economic order and a new kind of politics are on the agenda - things that were called for by the more than 60 000 participants in the Second World Social Forum in Porto Alegre .
Argentina is a shocking illustration of where neoliberalism will take us .
Those who want to provide really effective development aid should not close their ears to the message from Porto Alegre , but actively involve those democratic forces that are active in that forum , in the brainstorming process and in the implementation of a new politics of development .
Mr President , I have listened very carefully to all of the opinions expressed here by the honourable Members who have spoken in this debate .
Most of the speeches raised issues which the Council , of course , bore very much in mind when it took the decisions necessary to achieve the Monterrey consensus .
Most of the requests that I have heard are also shared by the European Union and the Council , which represents the European Union , and the Commission , which will also represent the European Union at the Monterrey Conference .
Naturally , I would say that it is highly praiseworthy that these opinions should be expressed in this parliamentary forum , which must be the forum for expressing our ambitions and our aspirations .
I would say , however , that Parliament also well understands and I imagine that it is sensitive to the fact that we are immersed in an international negotiation in which it is not simply enough for the European Union to hold and to express its ideas , of which we are proud , but instead to try to conclude an agreement with everyone else .
I have to say that the European Union is in a very special position at this type of conference .
It often finds itself in the middle , between some partners at the same level of development , which very frequently do not share our ideas and are not quite so generous , and developing countries which , naturally , do not agree with us , because they have the right to demand much of us and , often , much more than we can normally give .
I would say that the Monterrey consensus contains all the basic and fundamental elements and , from everything that we have heard today in Parliament , I would say that we have sufficient baggage , both in the Council Presidency and the Commission , to carry on having faith in our ideas .
We already know that there is consensus and that the consensus is very broad , but this does not exclude us from being more ambitious in Monterrey .
I have already listed these ambitions but I wish to repeat them .
The European Union intends to issue a message in defence of its values , which I listed previously : the defence of democracy , of good governance , of strengthening the institutional development of aid-receiving countries , the Rule of Law , peace and security and human rights .
All of these elements that have been mentioned here in the European Parliament are fundamental values of our culture and civilisation and will be the values that guide us in the debates in Monterrey .
In any event , I would say that we have sufficient grounds to feel satisfied , since the Monterrey consensus takes up all of this , perhaps not as far as we would have liked to see , but it does address these issues in a substantial way .
Let us hope that at this meeting , which will be held in March , the European Union , which has a common and single position and counts on the support of Parliament , can go even further with these principles and these objectives that I have expressed and which , as I have seen , enjoy the support of this Parliament .
I should also like to say , in conclusion , that the Community delegation intends to include five Members of the European Parliament and that , therefore , Parliament will be fully integrated in the delegation and will have first hand information .
Naturally , I remain at the disposition of this House and at your disposition , Mr President , to return here after Monterrey and inform you on the outcome of the Conference .
Mr President , it is very important to stick to the view that volume matters when we talk about these problems .
It is also very important to remember that fighting global poverty is not a short-term repair job in the poor countries .
We often hear the view that , since we have been giving development aid to Africa for 25 or 30 years and they are still poor , maybe the whole approach is wrong .
That is a fundamental mistake .
This is not a short-term project .
Any global society with just a minimum of decency has to understand that the transfer of resources from the rich to the poor must be a permanent feature .
That approach alters the focus of the discussion about what is wrong with development cooperation .
In fact , it holds the key to understanding what globalisation means , and it means taking an inclusive approach to viewing the real world .
We had better get used to the idea that a permanent transfer is part of the challenge facing us .
This is not the same as accepting that development cooperation should simply deteriorate into becoming some sort of social gap-filling .
The whole agenda for structural or political reform vis-à-vis governance is absolutely essential to achieving real progress .
But it makes a big difference if seen as something we will have to do for some more years or as part of the future .
The whole attitude of different countries to the idea of sharing in this and of this being inseparable from the world view in general is crucial .
Mrs Dybkjaer and Mrs Boudjenah mentioned the 0.7 % target for the EU .
This is on our agenda for the first time .
It has never really been discussed at EU level before , either between the Commission and the Member States or between Member States themselves .
So we have made it a new area of discussion .
We have established some sort of peer pressure and the response from the series of discussions in capital cities that we carried out before Laeken was in a sense encouraging because all Member States reacted positively to the need to establish some sort of calendar .
In this area decision-making still lies with the Member States - the Commission has acquired no new powers here - but this discussion is now legitimate and we will bring it to the fore as one aspect of our input for the Conference in Monterrey .
This discussion will not end at Monterrey ; it is a reflection of how Europe sees itself and the role it should play in the world that we want to move forward in this area .
In response to Mr van den Berg and Mr van den Bos , who both commented on the imbalance between military and development spending and the whole philosophy behind this , I would point to the general view that the cradle of European and Western civilisation was ancient Greece .
Personally , I think it was home to the kind of Europe I want to represent and is the part of Greek history with which I want to identify .
I think and hope that for Europe the cradle was in fact Athens rather than Sparta .
This is my response to what Members said about the balance between the military approach and this more humanistic or morally driven way of defining our role and our philosophy in this world .
This is the baggage we will be taking to Monterrey and this is , philosophically speaking , the message we will deliver there .
I have received six motions for resolutions tabled in accordance with Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday .
Preparations for the March 2002 meeting of the UNCHR in Geneva
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the preparations for the March 2002 meeting of the UNCHR in Geneva .
Mr President , this debate provides the opportunity for an exchange of views prior to the deliberations of the 58th session of the UN Commission on Human Rights .
The Human Rights Contact Group has already brought together representatives of non-governmental organisations , Members of Parliament , civil servants from the EU institutions and others to discuss key concerns for Geneva .
The broader the input , the more confident the EU can be in the approach which it adopts at the UN Commission .
As ever , when you invite the Commission to these annual debates , it comes at a time when the EU has not definitively decided upon the initiatives which it will take at the UNCHR and their final form will only be determined after negotiations on the ground in Geneva .
Regrettably , there is all too much choice when looking around the world for examples of human rights violations .
That is why the EU must adopt a coherent approach when determining the best way to promote respect for human rights .
Our communication on human rights of last May , and the subsequent conclusions by the General Affairs Council , set out a strategy for such an approach by an EU that would actively engage with the world in the promotion of human rights through , for example , the human rights clause which forms a regular feature of Community agreements and which finds its most advanced expression in the Cotonou Agreement ; through the dialogue which we have undertaken to conduct in contacts with all third countries , as reinforced in the guidelines on human rights dialogues which were adopted by the Council last December ; through our engagement with NGOs , including the extensive funding for human rights projects channelled through the European initiative for democratisation and human rights and mainstream programmes and through our cooperation with the UN and other organisations .
These factors should be taken into account by those who point to the inevitable element of selectivity in the countries and themes which are the subject of EU initiatives at the UNCHR .
They are not the sum total of the EU ' s human rights policy necessarily , just an element of it .
There are several issues which will feature throughout this year ' s UN Commission .
First , the highly regrettable failure by the US to secure re-election to the Commission and the participation of several states whose human rights records are - to put it very politely - less than acceptable .
This means that the EU will have to work extra hard to ensure that core human rights values are reflected in the decisions taken .
Second , the fight against terrorism , which has rightly permeated every corner of the political debate since 11 September .
Human rights considerations are involved here at several levels .
We must guard against any muddling of concepts .
The EU maintains the important distinction that states are the perpetrators of human rights violations , whilst terrorists are particularly abhorrent criminals .
And it is right that actions by states - whether at a legislative , judicial or penal level - are subject to international law and proper scrutiny .
In fighting terrorism , we and our allies must uphold the values of respect for international human rights and humanitarian law .
The international community must also be alert to opportunistic attempts by states to justify domestic repression and crackdowns by claiming that they are " fighting terrorism " .
Zimbabwe is the most clear example of this .
The fight against racism will also be given due prominence at the 58th session of the UN Commission , and the EU may present a statement on the issue as in previous years .
After a rather bumpy journey from Durban , we now have a solid declaration and programme of action - a welcome development which we must now put to good use .
Combating racism , xenophobia and discrimination against minorities is one of the four priorities under the European initiative for democracy and human rights for the period 2002 to 2004 .
EUR 17 million per year have been set aside in order to support NGOs and other organisations in the promotion of rights and awareness-raising as a concrete follow-up to the World Conference .
Finally , a word on two countries of particular interest , both to me and to this Parliament .
First , China .
This is the only country with which the EU has a dedicated human rights dialogue .
The human rights situation in China rightly gives rise to a great deal of concern - from the extensive application of the death penalty to the suppression of religious and cultural rights in Tibet , Xinjiang and elsewhere and restrictions on the freedom of expression as evidenced in the recent measures on the use of the Internet .
In this difficult context , the EU dialogue and seminars - the last of which , in December 2001 brought together European and Chinese experts to discuss the prevention of torture and the right to education - are one conduit for encouragement , cooperation and criticism .
As the General Affairs Council has underscored , progress on the ground is a necessary corollary of the dialogue and that is why we evaluate the dialogue annually .
Second , in Iran , some progress in reform is offset by continuing serious human rights concerns .
The UN Special Representative on Iran highlighted this at the Third Committee last year , referring in particular to the sharp increase in public hangings and floggings .
The EU is engaging with Iran in an effort to secure improvement .
The positive outcome for the EU resolution at the Third Committee shows that the international community shares our concerns .
The acceptance of a visit by the Special Representative would be a further step in the right direction .
The mandate for an EC trade and cooperation agreement is currently under discussion in the Council .
I can assure honourable Members that human rights considerations will play an important part in any future negotiations .
Parliament ' s resolutions and debates are a crucial stimulus to the process of preparing for the Commission on Human Rights .
I hope that , if possible , representatives from Parliament will , as in previous years , visit the UNCHR in session and that they will contribute to the wider debate .
In the past few years , Mrs Robinson , the High Commissioner , has tried her level best to turn the UN Human Rights Committee into the public conscience , and she deserves all credit for this , in my opinion .
However , that does not detract from the fact that an increasing number of questions arise surrounding this annual high mass in Geneva .
The human rights organisation summed the situation up as follows : it is the foxes that are having to watch over the chicken ' s eggs .
It is indeed suspicious that countries such as Kenya , Sudan , Togo and Congo , which do not have particularly good track records when it comes to respecting human rights , should chair this committee and help determine the standards .
In addition to the composition of the committee , the procedure - notably the system of majority voting - also raises questions .
Governments that are the focus of investigation by NGOs often stick together in order to defend their own common interests , apparently under the motto : if we spare others , we do not run the risk of being condemned ourselves .
That is why I support what Commissioner Nielson said a moment ago .
Now that the US no longer forms part of this Committee , the European Union should take over the helm more than ever before .
Europe must adopt a more assertive and consistent role when defending human rights .
It must support more resolutions , also with regard to large countries , such as China and Russia .
Some European Member States all too easily swallow their principles if economic interests are at stake .
In addition , the Union must insist on the committee ' s recommendations actually being followed up .
A great deal of money is being spent on early warning , but the experts ' reports on this matter are systematically overlooked .
The credibility of the Human Rights Committee in Geneva , and of human rights policy full stop , is at stake today , and I believe that , in this connection , the European Union bears a very heavy responsibility .
Mr President , I am pleased to say that I have attended the UN Commission on two previous occasions , with both Mr van Van Hecke and Mr Wuori , who are taking part in the debate this afternoon .

The Council said that we boast a long tradition in Europe on human rights , but it must be recognised that sometimes we hesitate in condemning the human rights abuses carried out by our so-called friendly states .
I would urge that we must never hesitate ; we must apply the same rules and standards regardless .
Double standards undermine our highest ethics and our aspirations for a world free from human rights abuses .
I agree absolutely with everything the Commission has said .
However , in relation to the Cotonou and Association Agreements , I would say that we must enact the human rights and democracy clauses when human rights abuses occur .
Anything else will be seen as a pitiful endorsement of such abuses .
We cannot , and must not , look the other way , for one day people will look the other way when it happens to us .
The young people and the others who look down on the Chamber today wonder what we talk about .
We talk about a world where we can celebrate difference , where there is no persecution because someone 's colour , creed , belief or sexuality is different from another 's .
I would just like to finish , regardless of any prepared speech , on what is absolutely essential and vital to remember .
Pastor Niemöller said : " When they came for the communists , I did not speak out because I was not a communist .
When they came for the Jews , I did not speak out because I was not a Jew .
When they came for the trade unionists , I did not speak out because I was not a trade unionist .
When they came for me - there was no one left to speak out . "
We must ensure that we are never hypocritical in the defence of human rights , and 11 September must teach us surely that the same rules must be applied regardless of whether a country is our enemy or our friend .
Mr President , Commissioner , President-in-Office of the Council , the European Parliament has lofty ambitions in terms of human rights .
We have a responsibility , or moral duty , always to pay attention to human rights abuses wherever they occur .
We therefore support the meeting of the UN Commission for Human Rights in Geneva .
It is an important forum for promoting these issues to the global arena .
More and more countries are signing fine declarations and international conventions , but these are often not complied with .
Even though more and more countries are officially democracies , we know that - every second of every day , throughout the world - horrific treatment is meted out to human rights campaigners , campaigners for democracy and a variety of leaders .
This year , the focus is very much upon terrorism and the campaign against terrorism . You too have talked about this , Mr President-in-Office of the Council .
These matters are obviously important , but they are extremely closely linked to human rights .
It is a human right not to be affected by terrorism .
Terrorism is also born out of oppression and the lack of freedom , democracy and respect for human rights .
I hope that the meeting in Geneva will be characterised by discussion of these issues .
There is a broad agenda of issues that the EU must tackle in Geneva : violence against women , the situation of children , torture and the death penalty .
Declarations are needed in these areas .
A lot of countries give considerable cause for concern .
Allow me to mention three areas .
First of all , China , which holds the very dubious world record for the number of executions carried out there .
Every day , there are reports of torture , the imprisonment of dissidents and the oppression of the people of Tibet , of the Falun Gong movement and of all those who are fighting for democracy .
Year after year , we appeal for a resolution on China .
Every year the same thing happens , namely that there is no such resolution .
Let there be a resolution this year .
Secondly , Zimbabwe .
Every day , we can observe the vicious spiral of murder and persecution through which this country is sinking ever more deeply and completely into the abyss .
We must show that our patience is at an end .
Finally , Tunisia .
Somewhat away from the main headlines , extremely serious human rights abuses occur there too .
Mr President , the working environment of the UN Commission on Human Rights has been described as a sea of sorrows that knows no shores .
While we are now once again steering our EU vessel into these waters we must avoid the sort of recklessness Odysseus showed when he sailed past the Pillars of Hercules out to the open sea .
Although the EU has no coherent policy or strategy on human rights , with certain exceptions such as torture and the death penalty - in other words it lacks the assurance afforded by a compass and the firm guidance offered by nautical charts - we must steer our course at least with the help of bright stars and reference points .
The United States having failed to join the Commission last year , the EU is now the flagship of the Western European Group in Geneva .
For that reason it is especially important that the Union should have an integrated policy based on clear geographical and thematic priorities , which does not grope about in the dark so much as it once did .
President Cox last stressed the major significance of human rights in the EU and the work of this Parliament this morning .
This should not be allowed to become just a rhetorical commitment .
Undisturbed by commercial considerations and the songs of other such sirens , the EU must be able to allow its celebratory commitments to become a practical reality , and adopt an active position on difficult questions , such as China ' s human rights violations with particular reference to the situation in Mongolia and in Tibet , or Russia ' s behaviour , especially in Chechnya .
In this connection neither can we allow the fight against terrorism in any way to jeopardise human rights and the principle of the Rule of Law , or tolerate their abuse as just an excuse for perhaps otherwise questionable intervention .
Mr President , tomorrow , Parliament is to adopt an excellent decision , proposed by several groups , Article 8 of which mentions a number of countries . However , there are of course countries not mentioned here , and I would call for these not to be forgotten at this meeting .
I would also especially call upon the Council not to forget Turkey , which still holds political prisoners in solitary confinement , when combating torture is discussed .
I would urge that the prisoners in Camp X-Ray , who are being held there in defiance of the Geneva Convention , should not be forgotten .
I would also urge that , when political and social rights are discussed , there should be no forgetting Turkey again , which is now in the process of banning the HADEP party because it is close to winning the minimum 10 % of the votes it needs to be represented in the Turkish Parliament .
I would also again call for the United States and China to be remembered when the death penalty is discussed and for its not to be overlooked that the United States has still not approved the International Criminal Court by ratifying the Statute of Rome .
I would also say to the Commission that I very much approve of these agreements which we draw up in relation to third countries and which have human rights clauses attached .
I just do not understand why observance of the agreements is not rather more strictly enforced , and I am thinking particularly in this context of Israel which has an agreement with the EU that is quite clearly not observed .
I do not understand why such breaches have no repercussions and why the agreement is not cancelled immediately .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in spite of the wonderful speech that Mr de Miguel has given , I believe that we can safely bet that the Council and the European Union will this year adopt , as they did last year and the year before that in Geneva , a scandalous , shameful , cowardly position , which , unfortunately , will not be the one that Parliament defends .
I think that we can be absolutely sure , that we can bet one hundred to one , that there will be no resolution on China , no resolution on Tibet , that there will be no support given to the European Union for resolutions on the situation of women in Saudi Arabia , that there will be no resolution or support from the Union for a resolution on Tunisia .
There will not be anything - like last year , although it is true that , last year , the European Union even came to an arrangement so that it would not have the United States to deal with this year .
I shall not even mention Chechnya .
Commissioner Nielson is still trying to find Chechnya on the world map .
Even within Parliament , Mr Oostlander and his accomplice , Mr Sakellariou - but this will not come a surprise to anyone - have even sabotaged an initiative to organise a meeting between two negotiators , one Chechen and one Russian .
This is how the situation of human rights really stands .
I do not think that we can turn a blind eye to this .
Mr President , the United Nations Human Rights Convention meets in Geneva every year , and every year the Chinese leadership puts pressure on its trading partners in order to prevent Peking 's human rights violations getting on the agenda .
A lot has changed this year .
The USA was not re-elected to membership of the Human Rights Convention and now has only observer status .
The EU can no longer , then , hide behind the Americans .
The misery of the Tibetans , the stifling of their religious and cultural life , the merciless persecutions and arrests that have gone on for decades are not forgotten .
Because these people refrain from every kind of terrorism , they are not permanently on the front pages of newspapers , and yet they are very much present with us .
As long as one and a half years ago , Parliament called for the Tibetan government-in-exile to be recognised in the event of the UN-sponsored Sino-Tibetan negotiations not leading to Tibet 's autonomy .
An EU Special Envoy for Tibet was able to assume important coordination roles .
In his great October speech to this House , the Dalai Lama again expounded his concept of the middle way and urged Peking to take part in direct negotiations without preconditions .
It is , then , high time that the European Union itself got involved in Geneva , in order to bring in a resolution and win the support of responsible members of the Convention .
The Chinese must not deceive themselves .
We welcome their membership of the WTO and their contributions to the international coalition against terrorism .
Nothing , though , can justify the brutal treatment they mete out to religious and ethnic minorities in Tibet as well as in Inner Mongolia and in Eastern Turkestan .
Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office , the Europeans ' time has come !
Let us at last give substance and life to our commitment to uphold human rights absolutely .
Mr President , in spite of Mr Dupuis ' gloomy forecast , the UN Commission on Human Rights conference in Geneva is a new opportunity to make progress on ensuring that human rights are respected , promoted and safeguarded .
We have known for quite a while now that suffering , poverty , human rights violations , persecution on the grounds of sex , sexual orientation , religion , culture or race are global phenomena .
Millions of human beings have to suffer these affronts every single day .
11 September reminded us that the breakdown of security is also a global phenomenon .
This latest conference in Geneva , the first since that fateful day , should not , therefore , cause us to lose sight of our aims .
We have to continue working to defend citizens ' rights : the right to life , to democracy , to breathe clean air and to live in an environment in which economic and social rights are respected as an inseparable element of human rights .
We must not forget that the balance between security and freedom is not only a demand that is coherent with our shared history , but that it is the only thing that can guarantee stability and , therefore , democracy .
Europe must play a leading role in this conference .
We have to be capable of defending a common position .
Now , more than ever before , human rights must effectively be the backbone of EU policy .
If we want to achieve this goal we need to have more political ambition and a single , forceful and radical voice against those who violate human rights .
A voice that will be heard in Geneva and which makes us proud to be European .
I know that this seems to be a Utopian vision , and appears difficult to achieve , and it is , but , as Guy Verhofstadt reminded us when he took office as President-in-Office of the Council under the Belgian Presidency : ' he who does not believe in Utopia does not deserve to be called European ' .
Mr President , the United Nations Conference opens a week after the presidential elections in Zimbabwe .
By then hand-wringing resolutions deploring human rights abuses by a re-elected Mugabe government would be no more meaningful than were the protests of the then League of Nations following Mussolini 's invasion of Abyssinia .
The European Union has issued deadlines and ultimata .
We must now gather support from the international community for those measures .
We should thank President Mbeki and other African leaders for their work behind the scenes , but now is the time for them to speak out publicly and firmly against Mugabe 's oppressive regime .
We must make sure that the conditions of our ultimata are met in full .
We must be sure that Mugabe will allow an EU team to observe the election process and the EU must be allowed to choose the make-up of that team , which should include British Members .
Our observers must be free to move where they wish and free to report back .
A genuine free press must be restored and recent media laws must be repealed .
Above all , the murder , maiming and intimidation of political opponents must stop now .
It is time for the world to judge Mugabe by his actions , not by his promises .
By the same token , the world will judge the EU by its effectiveness , not by its rhetoric .
Mr President , I have listened very carefully to the honourable Members ' speeches , and , in my opinion , the wide variety of concerns that have been expressed here today clearly shows the complexity of the extraordinary task that is facing us in coordinating the European Union ' s action in the Human Rights Commission .
I am the first to recognise that the Human Rights Commission , being an international body in which compromises have to be made , is not exactly a forum in which the European Union can impose its principles and criteria ; we have to reach agreement with others in order to pass effective resolutions , because we do not have a large enough majority to get approval for resolutions on all points , particularly on those we want approved .
Although I recognise that many of the resolutions made by the Human Rights Commission leave much to be desired , I do not totally agree with Mr Dupuis ' chaotic and pessimistic view ; I share , instead , the optimistic , positive , idealistic and utopian vision that Mrs Rosa Díez is encouraging the Council to pursue in the defence of these values , which are our own and which Parliament advocates on a daily basis .
Many issues have been mentioned , all of them extremely problematic : China , Tunisia , Zimbabwe and Turkey .
All of these issues are on the agenda .
We deal with them every day and significant progress has , of course , been made over the last few years .
Without a doubt , the Human Rights Commission gets results every year , even though these may not be as far-reaching as our own ambitions and aspirations .
However , there can be no doubt that the European Union should always be inspired by the desire to keep alive the flame of the fight for its basic principles and the defence of these , which I described in my opening speech .
The Council feels encouraged and supported by Parliament in knowing that this is the true home of the desire to uphold these principles which are inseparable from our project , the European project .
I would just like to make one specific comment to Mr Stockton with regard to Zimbabwe .
Naturally , what takes place in the Human Rights Commission is important for Zimbabwe , but I would like to remind you that the General Affairs Council took decisions last Monday , which we are going to implement in Zimbabwe , to declare , through our actions and not through our words or aspirations , our policy , which has Parliament ' s full support and which has been decided unanimously by the Council of Ministers of the European Union , as regards not permitting or tolerating the anti-democratic behaviour of Mr Mugabe ' s government .
And , consequently , all of the measures agreed upon by the Council will be implemented jointly by the Council and the Commission .
I assure you , Mr President , that the Council is fully committed to the defence of the values and principles that are inherent to our culture , civilisation and to the Community acquis .
The European Union and all of its countries that have a place on the Human Rights Commission are the bastion , the vanguard of the defence of these rights .
This is our interpretation .
I would only ask Parliament to give us the necessary room for manoeuvre and confidence to defend these interests , which are our own , those of our culture and civilisation , and to do so as forcefully as possible , so that this can be made a reality in international society , which is , of course , very complex and which , unfortunately , the European Union cannot manage completely on its own .
It goes without saying that our contribution and our determination will never falter .
I can agree with practically everything that has been said in this debate .
Moving forward on the human rights agenda is basically no different from any other activity in international politics .
This has to be understood .
What can be done in a given situation in a given case is part of the broader political progress or lack of progress made at any given time .
The reality is that we do not have a separate entity in international society in which we can discuss human rights only on their own merit .
Politics never goes away .
It is always part of this discussion , especially when we talk about it internationally .
For that reason we have to equip ourselves with something one might call robust pragmatism in order to be strong enough to stay on course and pragmatic enough to know whether or not we can make headway in a given case .
As for Zimbabwe , I can inform Parliament that we are now positioning the first electoral observers .
We already have people in Harare who are being groomed to act as electoral observers .
We will thus have ten to fifteen people who will form the long-term team of observers .
I am also pleased to inform Parliament that Mr Pierre Schori will head the observation team for Europe during the election in Zimbabwe .
We should not take it for granted that we will be able to carry out effective electoral observation .
We are giving priority to positioning ourselves so that we can do this as well as possible and with as broad a representation as possible from Europe in our team as a whole .
But the main priority is to actually do our work and not be marginalised by some tactical or political manoeuvre .
Without this observation work the basis for us to give a final judgment will not be satisfactory .
Nothing about Zimbabwe is easy .
I am not in a position to express optimism or pessimism , but so far we are doing our utmost to ensure that we will be there with an effective team to observe the elections next month .
I have received six motions for resolutions , pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure :
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon .
Relations between the EP and national parliaments
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0023 / 2002 ) by Mr Napolitano , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on relations between the European Parliament and the national parliaments in European integration ( 2001 / 2023 ( INI ) )
Mr President , the forthcoming Convention will only fulfil its mandate if it provides convincing responses on a key point : how to guarantee the democratic legitimacy of the process of European integration .
This is the starting point for the report which has been adopted by the Committee on Constitutional Affairs and is now before the plenary .
We are , of course , all aware that the Convention has to redefine the Union ' s missions , its role on the world stage , in global development and in working for peace , its growth and cohesion policies and its policy of security in freedom and justice .
However , it would be a mistake to dismiss all the rest as pure institutional technicalities , as abstract exercises in institutional engineering of no interest whatsoever to the citizens .
One reason why the European cause has lost the citizens ' support is because the difficulty of influencing or even understanding the Union ' s decisions makes them feel removed from too many of them .
To regain support , it is vital to make it absolutely clear who is taking the decisions in the Union , how the decisions can be made transparent and comprehensible and how they can be monitored , and by which institutions the citizens can be effectively represented in Europe .
All these points are questions precisely of democracy , indeed they are questions which are crucial to democracy .
The role of the parliamentary institution with regard to these issues is vital , although not decisive in itself .
We must therefore take a firm decision to strengthen the role of the parliamentary institution in the Union ' s structure , to further parliamentarise the Union , supplementing the progress achieved during the 90s .
Parliamentarisation must occur in two areas : the European Parliament and the national parliaments .
Both contribute equally to the democratic legitimisation of the European Union as a Union of citizens and peoples rather than just States .
To spell it out , if , as the European Parliament , we have been guilty of a certain exclusivism , we must change our attitude .
We need to eliminate any mutual mistrust between the European Parliament and national parliaments ; we need to understand the concerns of national parliaments and propose appropriate solutions .
The report I am presenting to you sets forth three paths for action : Firstly , national parliaments should have greater guidance and supervisory powers over their respective governments and should be able to exercise these powers effectively .
Secondly , there needs to be increasingly close , systematic cooperation between the European Parliament and national parliaments , including through interparliamentary agreements signed by the respective leaders .
This is an innovative idea whose development I entrust chiefly to the initiative of the President of the European Parliament .
Thirdly , both national and European Members of Parliament should be endowed with a constituent power , to be shared with the governments and the Commission - as in the Convention , which is about to start work - to work on revising the Treaties with a view , we can now say , to producing a genuine European Constitution .
These are the appropriate solutions to pursue , not those which would lead to confusion of the roles of the European Parliament and national parliaments and add to the unwieldiness of the Union ' s institutional structure and decision-making mechanisms .
In particular , as a House of Lords report has regretfully shown , a second Chamber made up of members of national parliaments ' would be an unreal solution to some real problems ' .
It is my firm hope that the spirit of this report will be properly interpreted and welcomed and that , with your support , the Convention will have the benefit of our contribution .
Mr President , as Mr Napolitano pointed out , the issue of relations between national parliaments and the European Parliament is one of the key issues on the agenda of the Convention that is about to begin its work .
Hence the timeliness of the debate on this report tabled by the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , which includes the opinion of the Committee on External Affairs for which I had the honour of drafting its opinion .
In my personal view , Mr Napolitano ' s report has many merits , and on this I congratulate him , but it also advocates some options that can be criticised from a political point of view .
In the capacity in which I am speaking today , however , I must limit myself to listing the objectives pursued in the opinion delivered by my Committee , which have been partially echoed in the motions for resolutions we are now discussing , specifically in Nos 13 , 14 and 15 .

With regard to external policy and common security , including defence , which , as is well known , remains essentially in the intergovernmental sphere , listing the issues is relatively simple : on the one hand , the European Parliament currently performs its supervisory role by means of the right to be informed and the right to be consulted conferred on it by Article 21 of the Treaty on European Union and by means of its budgetary powers to approve operational expenditure on civilian crisis management and on associated administrative tasks ; on the other , national parliaments do not enjoy genuine participation in the drafting of such policy , although they do have decisive powers over the military expenditure of their respective countries , which then have a major influence on the operational resources made available to the CFSP .
The provisions of Title V of the Treaty on European Union require the Member States to observe the principles of coordination and mutual solidarity when defining and implementing the CFSP , so this democratic and parliamentary deficit must be corrected .
Because of its significance and importance , I would highlight the proposal for a Parliamentary Conference on the CFSP to be held on a regular basis , to be convened jointly by the parliament of the Member State holding the presidency and by the European Parliament , in which Members of the European Parliament and of the national parliaments would participate , with the specific intention of improving the essential exchange of information in this field .
Within the current institutional framework , this conference would enable the various Parliaments to undertake their work more effectively in accordance with their respective competences .
What is more , however , with this proposal we are also giving form to the principle that both the European Parliament and the national parliaments represent the peoples of the European Union , since both are directly elected by the citizens and both provide full guarantees of the exercise of democracy .
Mr President , I should like to say , as draftsperson of an opinion , what a very great pleasure it has been to work alongside such a distinguished parliamentarian as Mr Napolitano , the author of this excellent report .
There are few differences between the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs and his report .
In particular we want to endorse firmly the point in his conclusion that the so-called second chamber of the European legislature would be an unworkable third chamber and we are very glad that the suggestion has been so carefully refuted from inside one of the countries from which it emerged , namely the United Kingdom .
On the report itself , the recommendations of the Committee on Legal Affairs were largely adopted by the rapporteur in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs .
Our paragraph 1 , dealing with collaboration among the parliaments of the Union , is well covered in his paragraph 10 ; our paragraph 2 , on the importance of participation of representatives of the European Parliament and national parliaments in the future Convention , has been adopted by Mr Napolitano .

This is very important because it speaks of the need for vigorous debate in the Convention to see whether we can produce a consensus .
Some rumours emanating from the direction of Mr Giscard d 'Estaing suggest that his idea is that there need not be a debate because all will be clear from the presidency .
If that is so , we must disabuse him of that notion .
This has to be a Convention that will debate .
In paragraph 4 , that reappears as paragraph 12 in the Napolitano report .
Finally , the one point of difference between the Committee on Legal Affairs and Mr Napolitano was whether there ought to be articulate and express mention of the role of regional parliaments with legislative power in this report .
I think strongly there ought to be .
The Committee on Legal Affairs voted for it clearly and my own group has tabled some amendments .
Mr Napolitano said to me privately that he thinks this could be taken up on a different occasion through the Committee on Constitutional Affairs .
If he were able to make an assurance to that effect tomorrow , it might be possible for us to reconsider things .
I shall speak to him privately about that .
It would be good if we could go forward with maximum agreement .
I ask , in the mean time , that Parliament concentrate on this paragraph 3 and the parallel amendments tabled by myself and colleagues .
Mr President , as colleagues know , today across Europe there is popular discontent with regard to Europe 's apparent disconnection from ordinary life .
The European political process is widely seen as an elite preoccupation of little or no relevance to many outside the political classes .
Quite rightly concern about this crosses national boundaries and the ideological divide .
It is a wish to try to remedy this discontent that lies behind Mr Napolitano 's report , which we in the PPE-DE Group support .
There have been a number of responses to this unhappy and unacceptable state of affairs , one of which included the suggestion of establishing a second European parliamentary chamber comprising national parliamentarians .
The conclusions of this report , as the rapporteur has already mentioned , echo a recently published report from the House of Lords in my own country .
They recognise the important role of national parliaments , but reject the argument for a further second chamber .
Rather than further encumbering the European political process , this report recognises that it is for the European Parliament in its sphere , and national parliaments in theirs , in accordance with their own national traditions , to scrutinise their own governments ' conduct of European business and activities in the Council of Ministers .
Consensus has rightly emerged that an important component of the way to reconnect Europe with national political life , and through that with European citizens , is through an alliance between the European Parliament and national parliaments and national politics , which at present seem to give insufficient weight to thorough and comprehensive scrutiny of European matters .
In this report Mr Napolitano , as befits the distinguished chairman of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs and rapporteur , has most skilfully woven together an approach to improving relations between the European Parliament and national parliaments and to strengthening cooperation between them .
The pedantic constitutional purist from any one Member State might cavil at some of the detail , but this report provides a template for action which cannot be carried out by any single parliament .
Changes must take place in a wider framework of change and democratic openness on all sides .
If political and democratic openness and acceptability matter - and no political group in this House believes in them more than we in the PPE-DE Group do - the Napolitano report represents an important starting point .
But we must not complacently rest on our laurels now .
This report represents words ; we must now see action .
Change , in line with the thrust of the report 's conclusions and catalysed by the Laeken Convention as the rapporteur himself pointed out , is needed to start to remedy these democratic deficiencies in the European political system which , if left unattended , could be so damaging .
Mr President , Commissioner , judging by the results of the latest Eurobarometer , the people of Europe have more trust in their police force than in their parliaments .
This is an alarming sign , which should compel the people ' s elected representatives to work together to eliminate the reasons for this .
The legitimacy of democratic regimes is at stake .
It is up to the MPs of each Member State to reduce the democratic deficits that are appearing at national level , and which also exist at this level .
In the report before us today , MEPs are being called on to examine how the role played by the national parliaments in European integration could be strengthened .
Not to the detriment of the role of the European Parliament , but to complement it .
Mr Napolitano , the rapporteur , is proposing a number of specific measures which have been approved by the Group of the Party of European Socialists and which could , in my view , easily receive the unanimous approval of the Convention .
Mr Napolitano quite rightly calls for the powers of the national parliament vis-à-vis their respective governments to be strengthened , prior to decisions being taken in the Council .
In some of our Member States , the procedure of influencing decisions is well organised .
In other States , it does not even exist in embryonic form .
To put it simply , the national parliaments let their government get on with things and complain afterwards .
The rapporteur , quite rightly , also rules out the idea of a second or even a third legislative chamber .
A new institution such as this falls at the stumbling block posed by the question ' why set up a new institution ? '
If we ' institutionalise ' the Convention with the participation of the national parliaments , this is another way of exerting a much-needed influence at the preparatory stage of the extensive reforms .
It is clear that the method advocated by the European Parliament must henceforth be used to reform the Treaty and it could even go beyond constitutional matters .
For example , why not call a convention to prepare the next European Union multi-annual financial programme ?
If this financial envelope must incorporate a new specific resource in the form of a European tax , I think it is essential that the representatives of the national parliaments deliberate it from the outset .
Mr President , the essential message of this splendid report , which the Liberal Group strongly supports , the central message really is that national parliaments could , and should , contribute more to the political system of the European Union .
But they ought to focus on what they do best and not tread upon the prerogatives of the European Parliament .
What national parliaments must improve on doing is to scrutinise and check the executive power of the Council .
What they do worst is to second-guess the legislative powers of the European Parliament .
That is why we firmly reject the British proposals to insert a third legislative chamber composed of national MPs , whose function would be " to police subsidiarity " .
Such a national cuckoo inside the federal nest would shatter the codecision procedure , which is the key formula in the Union 's own march towards becoming a mature post-national parliamentary democracy .
Such a chamber would be stuffed with dutiful poodles of the Council , making a mockery of parliamentary involvement in European affairs at the national level .
I trust the British government will listen to the debate on this question in the Convention and then withdraw its dangerous and obscurantist proposal .
Mr President , we Greens especially welcome the report .
It is an excellent report , explaining without ambiguity the national parliaments ' tasks and role in the area of legitimising and monitoring national governments ' legislative activities in the Council , in intergovernmental cooperation , where this monitoring function is not at all adequate , but also in the involvement of the national parliaments in the development of a European constitution , summed up in the word ' Convention ' .
It is interesting to note , in this context , how this issue keeps appearing on the agenda , for there is no conflict between Parliament and national parliaments , nor is their task unclear .
It occurs to me that this conflict is always engendered when the Council and the national governments want to resist Parliament 's claim that it should become a fully-developed legislature .
It is then that the impression is conveyed that parliamentary democracy at European level would be to the detriment of the national parliaments .
It is a false argument , but a systematic one and a deception in the true sense of the word .
This discord between the parliaments is intended to maintain the Council 's position of power .
Parliamentarianism in Europe is , however , indivisible .
The commitment to parliamentary democracy is made at the European level .
Parliament should therefore give a serious but wary reception to certain announcements made in advance by the Convention 's president-designate , who has for weeks , via the press rather than by direct contact , and without yet being confirmed in office by the Convention , been giving voice to ideas about this constituent assembly which bear little relation to what Parliament demands or to the development of European democracy and parliamentarianism .
I strongly appeal to this House to play its part in making the Convention a working , parliamentary and public convention and not , as it has been to date , a legitimising façade for the Council .
Mr President , the role of the national parliaments is admittedly laid down in the Treaties , but the democratic deficit , which is essentially a failure to monitor the relevant national government , has got greater as European integration has moved forward .
Deficient monitoring facilities and the governments ' failure to supply appropriate briefings often make it impossible for the national parliaments to perform their function .
This development must be brought to a halt , and the authority of national parliaments to keep tabs on their governments must be reinforced .
That is why I particularly support the statements in item 1 of the report .
Improved cooperation between the national parliaments and our own is indeed necessary , especially in areas such as policy on the EU , which are founded on collaboration between one State and another .
There is one statement in the report which I , as a member of the Constitutional Convention , would like to emphatically underline , and that is item 17 .
Proposals such as that made by the German Foreign Minister get no support from me .
The problem is the preponderance of the executive .
We need the European Union to be made , in a far-reaching way , more democratic and parliamentary , we need definite constitutional reinforcement of the existing parliaments , but we do not need another chamber .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I and my delegation feel that it was a wise decision to entrust the drafting of this report to Mr Napolitano . In the concern at the imbalance between the powers conferred on the executive institutions and the scope afforded to the parliaments as a whole , he has found a key factor on which to base his report .
In effect , Mr President , the European Parliament has been expressing its concern for years .
Mr Napolitano ' s report proposes an initial , effective solution which is perfectly in line and in harmony with the Maastricht Treaty and the Treaty of Amsterdam .
The second key element of the report concerns the matter I had occasion to highlight months ago to the Italian Ambassador himself , even before anyone else , for it is primarily an Italian issue : the incompatibility between holding the office of Member of the European Parliament , on the one hand , and that of member of a national parliament , regional councillor or - I would add sotto voce , calling on Mr Napolitano to take note of the fact - mayor of a big city , on the other .
Moreover , if the European Parliament is to regain its political role , there will have to be an increase not only in the quality of the debates but also in MEPs ' attendance in Brussels and Strasbourg .
The third element which I have to mention is the report ' s wise , categorical refusal of a Chamber composed of representatives of national parliaments , thus avoiding making the decision-making process more unwieldy and , most importantly , preserving the distinction between the competences of national and European parliaments .
Our goal is therefore an institutional agreement , and we hope that President Cox will respond to Mr Napolitano ' s call to initiate it .
We are moving towards a process of strengthening the institutional role of the parliaments , which are elected to play a political and governing role , rejecting any decidedly antiquated element of concentration of executive power in the hands of institutions which are not at all legitimised by the people ' s vote .
I would therefore like to take this opportunity to thank Mr Napolitano for his excellent , brilliant work .
Mr President , Commissioner , since the outset , Europe - well , what we call Europe in actual fact means the quasi-State , which passes legislation in Brussels and occasionally in Strasbourg , which hands down justice in Luxembourg and which produces currency in Frankfurt - is desperately seeking some legitimacy , a lack of which means its existence is in question .
The best evidence of this lack of legitimacy is that the people of Europe , when they are consulted , send this Europe back to the drawing board , as the people of Denmark and Ireland forcefully , and on successive occasions , did not long ago .

The report by Chairman Napolitano , whom I would like thank , seeks the answer to this existential question that we occasionally deliberate ( and that we could term ' democratic remorse ' ) in a sort of hybrid parliamentarisation , a risky experiment where the national parliaments and the European Parliament bargain between them in a sort of democratic no man ' s land that is both vague and opaque .
Mr President , Commissioner , legitimacy can only be conferred by the people themselves , when they are directly consulted , and cannot descend in the manner of the Holy Spirit out of such a distinguished Areopagus as our future Convention and , even more so , its praesidium , the most recent embodiment of what used to be called out-and-out despotism .
European integration must involve the people and not the institutions .
If it fails to do so , what we are continuing to call Europe will remain an increasingly foreign abstraction to Europeans , as the latest Eurobarometer has just demonstrated in a compelling manner .
Mr President , the Napolitano report on relations between the European Parliament and the national parliaments is based on the fair observation that there is a serious imbalance in the European Union between the executive bodies that have extensive jurisdiction and a parliamentary power that is still too weak .
The report concludes , again quite rightly , that there is a risk of a growing democratic deficit .
What can we do , therefore , to correct this deficit ?
Although Mr Napolitano has shown some openness in relation to the traditional positions of the European Parliament , I do not think that his report has yet reached the correct balance in its demands for the extension of the powers of the House , and that it confines the national parliaments to an indirect and , in most cases , illusory role , by placing everything under the vague term of ' parliamentarisation ' .
In our view , this lack of balance is a result of an omission .
The report does not mention that the European Parliament is merely an assembly with implementing powers and that the national parliaments alone have full sovereignty .
On a more serious note , it does not mention that this legal inequality is increased two-fold by unequal political legitimacy in the eyes of the citizens .
We cannot undertake any worthwhile reforms in the European Union if we hide from such huge realities .
That is why I added a minority opinion to the Napolitano report in order to explain that there will not be any true democratisation of the Union unless we reassess the value of the national parliaments , and unless they acquire direct power in the European decision-making process .
I described how this could be done in a report submitted to the Intergroup SOS Democracy , which will be assessed at the next Convention .
Mr President , I would firstly like to congratulate Mr Napolitano on his report , which has been deservedly praised today , and to which my group has not tabled radical amendments , just a few for the sake of fine tuning .
This report starts by making it very clear that the European Parliament and the national parliaments , in their own contexts , fully represent the peoples of the European Union who are , Mr Berthu , sovereign peoples , as stated , amongst other things , in their constitutions for more than a century .
In this regard , I would like to thank Mr Napolitano for accepting my amendment , with which I wanted to highlight this extreme situation , which is almost always invoked by those who want to strengthen a particular institution at the expense of others .
At the end of the day , this approach is , frankly , ridiculous .
European citizens need a European Parliament , in the same way that they need their national parliaments , and the relationship between these should not be based on rivalry but on cooperation .
The report not only reaffirms the need for this cooperation , but also , in my opinion , very realistically calls for it to be organised through an interparliamentary agreement in order to make better use of resources .
It deals with improving the exchange of information and avoiding overlapping between various activities for cooperation .
It also recognises the competences of the national parliaments , not only with regard to the governments of the Member States , but in the application of Community Law .
It shows that these powers are much greater than those which are often known or spoken about .
If the national parliaments do not want to exercise these powers , that is their own business .
Mr President , the national parliaments and the European Parliament have to cooperate , not compete with one other .
Mr Napolitano ' s report , as we would say in Spain , ' gets things straight ' .
From the point of view of cordiality and solidarity with the national parliaments it makes things very clear and lends support to deep , solid and substantial cooperation .
Let us support it with our vote .
Mr President , Commissioner , the fact that the European institutions are democratic does not just strengthen our Europe of principles ; with the prospect of enlargement , it is the sine qua non for its very existence .
If the gap between the institutions and our citizens gets any wider , the time will come , sooner rather than later , when they turn their backs on us .
The role of the national parliaments is predicated on the philosophy that the European Union is a union of states and a union of nations .
As a union of nations , it expresses itself through the European Parliament and , as a union of states , it expresses itself through the national executives , which in turn rely on the trust placed in them by their national parliaments .
A strong European Parliament and strong national parliaments .
The involvement of the national parliaments in the decisions taken by the Council of Ministers must be visible , subject to control and sanctioned by the national parliaments .
It is the national parliaments which will keep their citizens in touch with developments in the European Union and make them feel that they are European citizens .
What all this means is that we urgently need national constitutional reforms , as Giorgio Napolitano explains in his exceptional report , so that the Member States ' European policy can be constantly baptised in the waters of the national parliaments .
This in turn means that we need new mechanisms for information to flow from the Union to the national parliaments and to ensure that , institutionally , they are up to scratch .
The high profile of the national parliaments at the Convention convened to prepare the next round of Treaty reforms is , I think , of historic importance .
And even if the proposals made by the Convention will not be legally binding on the next Intergovernmental Conference , its democratic credentials will be such that they will be hard to ignore .
However , what we do not need is for the national parliaments to be represented in a new European institution which gets bogged down in what is , whichever way you look at it , a lot of European red tape .
Upgrading the role of the national parliaments in giving credence to European decisions will strengthen the procedure in question ; at the same time , however , it honours the role of the nation states as the legal and cultural expression of their people in this exciting unifying structure .
Once again , my warmest thanks to Giorgio Napolitano for his excellent report .
Mr President , I too should like to add to the list of congratulations issued to the chairman of the committee , who is therefore also the rapporteur for this report .
A good report has been drawn up , providing a sound basis partly for continued dialogue with the national parliaments but also for an influential role for the committee in cooperating with the Convention . That is because there will be a real need for everyone of first-rate ability , whether they be in the European Parliament ' s delegation to the Convention or on the committee .
I therefore very much hope that this can continue .
These are , of course , years in which we are , in actual fact , involved in an incredibly exciting project aimed at developing an international democracy that is also supported by the people for , despite our having been cooperating for 50 years , we have of course to acknowledge , firstly , that we are only at the development phase and , secondly , that we still do not have full support and understanding for the project .
This is , of course , something that we have experienced many times in Denmark , where it has been difficult to obtain people ' s acceptance of new treaties , and it has now also been experienced in Ireland . I believe that the referendums are merely symptomatic of what is happening in Europe as a whole , and that is what we must take seriously .
We should not perhaps attach too much importance to what has happened in those two countries .
It is up to the national authorities to be serious in their response , but I believe we must acknowledge that what is at issue here is more than just isolated Danish / Irish scepticism .
There is nothing strange about the fact that acceptance is difficult to obtain , for we have been accustomed to using the national parliaments as the basis for our democracy , and now we suddenly have to demonstrate that there is nothing to stop our having both the national democracies and an international democracy and , above all , that they can operate in tandem .
That is what the challenge is and , in a certain sense , I think we can tell ourselves that we have perhaps been ahead of our time .
If we did not have the EU that we know today , we should have had to prepare something as a response to the global challenge .
In reality , it might have been simpler if we had started from scratch , but I now think we must proceed on the basis we already have .
It is true , Mr President , that involving the national parliaments in the European structure does not imply new institutions , it implies increasing their powers of control and information vis-à-vis their own people .
As you know , honourable members , there is to be a Convention , the involvement of the national parliaments in which is of historic importance .
But that is not enough .
They need clear guidelines on the issues which the Convention will address and which are tantamount to drafting a European constitution .
In-depth debates are needed , either in plenary or in special parliamentary committees , so that delegates come here to state not just their own personal opinions but the more general line of thinking of their parliaments .
This is something I have yet to see in the parliaments of the Member States of the European Union , in Greece at least .
If those responsible for national parliamentary work are not interested in organising this sort of debate , I fear that our debate here will be of limited interest .
Mr President , among the four Post-Nice topics , I consider the role of the national parliaments particularly important because it can prepare a way into the hearts of Europe 's citizens .
When important speeches are made to this House - even when they are made to better-attended sittings than this one - I often regret the fact that they do not evoke the interest they deserve on the part of the public , and that we tend to be talking to each other .
What matters , though , is that we should evoke this interest , and , moreover , give the EU democratic legitimacy .
We will only succeed in this , though , if we can get the public to understand that what is happening in Europe is not just any old thing , but that their future is affected , in real terms , by whether those to whom they have given a mandate can share in decisions about the future and whether their national parliaments can resist it when the EU oversteps the bounds of its competence .
This report could play an essential part in bringing this about .
Let me congratulate the rapporteur and , therefore , express my support for him .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the democratic deficit in Europe is being presented as the main problem .
It is an unfortunate fact that the competences ceded by the national parliaments to Europe have not all as yet arrived at the European Parliament , the only European institution to be legitimised by elections .
Responsibility for this must be borne by all the Member States that have to date refused to pass on these competences to the co-legislator , Parliament , in the form of codecision in the legislative sphere .
The governments have thus gained for themselves at European level legislative and executive powers that would have been inconceivable in their national legal system .
That is the real scandal of the democratic deficit in Europe .
Are we then to commend the Heads of State and Government for , at the Nice Summit , setting out relations between the European Parliament and the national parliaments as being one of the four topics for the forthcoming Convention and the new Intergovernmental Conference ?
That would be to put off the governments ' lack of capacity and willingness for yet another day .
This is the fundamental misunderstanding that Mr Berthu has described in his minority opinion .
Parliament must indeed seek to stand shoulder to shoulder with the national parliaments in order together to compel the governments to act in a democratic way .
Parliament 's two great groups are very much as one in this demand , and I am grateful to our group 's Mr Gil Robles for his contribution to the Napolitano report , and to our rapporteur for his Amendment No 21 .
These show the right way ahead into the future .
That which is feasible and appropriate must be done at every level .
The national parliaments can and must monitor their national governments better and more effectively than before .
We wish to encourage them to do so , both as regards the governments ' conduct when European legislation is drafted in Council and in terms of the financial management and monitoring of funds granted by the EU .
The European Parliament must monitor legislation at European level and play a part in shaping it .
In conclusion , I can only say that we are grateful for the report and hope that it will also be taken seriously by the Convention .
Mr President , the Napolitano Report does indeed take us one important step towards greater clarity in this debate on the role of the parliaments in the EU , and thus also a step towards greater democracy in it .
Our objective is , in my judgement , the creation of a parliamentary democracy in the European Union .
Only then will these issues of legitimisation , transparency and monitoring be able to be satisfactorily resolved .
' Parliamentarising ' the EU means reinforcing all elected assemblies in their relations with their executives at both national and European level .
Intellectual and political clarity is needed for the debate on their respective roles .
Some in this House have got all this a bit mixed up together .
We need to separate the levels at which the national parliaments and the European Parliament will have their roles to play .
The parliaments have a joint role in the introduction of a constitution , which is a primary role of parliaments rather than of governments .
Because of this too , we are glad that we have the Convention , and can rejoice that over two-thirds of the Convention 's members will be coming from the parliaments .
For secondary legislation and for the enactment of laws , on the other hand , we have the institutions - the European Parliament and the Council of Ministers .
I also say that we do not need a third chamber , something that would bring no added value and would only make the decision-making arrangements as a whole more complicated .
That popular trust is at all likely to be increased by such ideas is something I simply doubt .
What is important is the strengthening of the national parliaments in their dealings with their national governments .
Much can be done in this area and there is much still to do , so I believe we should come to an agreement and work together .
I thank Mr Napolitano for bringing clarity with his report and also for achieving , in the hearings we have had here , greater understanding between the parliaments .
Congratulations on this report , which I hope will be adopted by a large majority !
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I should like to congratulate Mr Napolitano on his report .
The issue of relations between the national Parliaments and the European Parliament is one of the central issues of the European debate and will be one of the key aspects of the work of the Convention and it is absolutely crucial that , apart from any delays that might occur and the normal diversity of opinions , this House addresses the issue calmly and intelligently .
There is no point in sweeping the difficulties arising from the construction of a democratic Europe under the carpet , especially at an historic moment when , even at national level , it is crucial to reinvent and strengthen representative democracy .
At this stage on the path we have been following together for many years and which we wish to continue to follow with equal commitment on many others , we have an obligation to understand , not to shirk and to claim a special responsibility that comes from the fact that we , the members of the national and European parliaments , are the representatives elected directly by the citizens .
It is , therefore , crucial that we move towards the national Parliaments and the European Parliament having greater participation and control , both in drafting legislative decisions and in establishing the political guidelines of the European Union .
As this report clearly acknowledges , none of these parliamentary institutions has exclusive rights to represent Europe ' s citizens .
And hence the need for greater cooperation from the institutions , in an organised and if possible involved way , whilst due respect is given to their autonomy and their specific responsibilities .
In order to achieve this , we do not need to complicate the decision-making process , to impose competences or to continue to foster suspicion .
We are simply asking each of the institutions to play their own role better and better .
We also hope to see greater involvement by the national Parliaments in the political and legislative process of the European Union , and we are , therefore , committed to helping establish conditions for the effective national monitoring of each government in their capacity as a Member of the Council of the Union .
To conclude , the assessment and the ways forward indicated in this report offer good prospects for the joint work that we will be undertaking in the Convention being able to make this new Europe more democratic , easier to understand and closer to all European citizens .
Mr President , our new President , Pat Cox , has called on us to show understanding for each other in debate if possible .
I will try to do so even though I only have one and a half minutes .
Mr Voggenhuber spoke about how the issue of the national parliaments was brought into play again and again , and I think one must add in the factor that there is of course understandable jealousy and frustration in the national parliaments , which leads to those who come to us joining in an artificial protest .
A clear delimitation of competences would help there .
The Convention is also urged to ensure that the parliamentarians are not played off against each other , but that in what is done they should follow the lead we have consistently given .
To Mr Abitbol , who is constantly lamenting the democratic deficit in the EU , I would like to say that there the argument is being turned around precisely the wrong way .
The fact that we have this democratic deficit does not mean that we have to bring the national aspect more into play , but that we need all the things we are demanding in this House , such as more democratic institutions , or else we will come to utterly false conclusions and hand Europe 's citizens over to precisely those things that the European democracies and the people who care about diversity do not want , that is , being ruled unilaterally by powers subject to no control , in this instance economic forces .
My final point is that that it is remarkable that the chairman of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs has not entered any objection to item 17 of the report .
That shows that there is something we agree on .
But the amendments tabled by the Greens , which one feels are about regional institutions as much as national parliaments , merit your consideration and , in my view , your vote as well .
Mr President , Mr Napolitano has written a sound report on one of the most sensitive themes of the forthcoming Convention , namely the relationship between the European Parliament and national parliaments .
This topic is sensitive because national parliaments increasingly have the impression that competences are being taken away from them and given to the European Parliament . And if we are being honest , that is true to a certain extent .
Since the transfer of a number of tasks of the Member States to the European Union , especially in the last ten to twenty years , and since the introduction of the codecision procedure - in other words since co-legislative powers were granted to Parliament - competences have indeed been transferred .
However , this does not mean that national parliaments no longer have any important tasks to fulfil .
Paragraph 1 of the resolution is explicit on this score .
National parliaments must guide their Ministers in the Council .
In addition , they must check up on their Ministers when they leave the Council , they must ensure that the European directives and regulations are implemented correctly , and they must also ensure that European programmes are executed correctly , both in terms of content and in terms of finance .
If this is not done properly - as we see it is not in my country in the European Social Fund , inter alia - the European Commission will be claiming back hundreds of millions of guilders .
In that case , national parliaments have not carried out their work properly either .
In my opinion , the distribution of the competences between national parliaments and the European Parliament should not become the most important point of discussion in the Convention .
As Mrs Schleicher has already indicated , particular attention must be paid to the points on which national parliaments have lost competences which have not been passed on to the European Parliament .
After all , that is where the democratic loophole is , and this is where we should mainly focus our activities in the Convention .
We must check this very carefully , and we must ensure once again that these competences are returned either to national parliaments or to the European Parliament .
Indeed , this translates , in my view , into the parliamentarisation and democratisation of the European Union , rather than to a situation in which matters which really belong with the parliaments are left to the Council .
Mr President , Mr Napolitano has hit the nail on the head on this issue .
Competence in the legislative and budgetary fields , and in the area of national control , belongs to national parliaments .
In the supranational context , these competences can only be exercised by a supranational parliament , whatever structure the Convention or the next Intergovernmental Conference may give to this body .
Mr Napolitano has emphasised the importance of maintaining this difference in powers , and most importantly has underlined the real danger of certain powers bypassing the competence of the national parliaments , in the field of foreign affairs and within the third pillar , for example , which should not be entrusted to a supranational Parliament .
There is another , much more subtle , way of eroding parliamentary power , which we are now considering , the so-called open method of coordination that is commitology , which is used , for example , in the Lamfalussy report , with few opportunities for parliamentary control , self-regulation or co-regulation .
I believe that this is an issue that the Napolitano report has also highlighted and to which we should give our full attention .
Mr President , I would like to start by saying that I join in the congratulations that have been offered to Mr Napolitano on his magnificent report .
It is clear that we need to give the EU a constitution , that we need to put an end to the current democratic deficit , and that we need to set up a division of powers that has its own characteristics , and that this , naturally , will result in the parliamentarisation of the Union , increasing the competences of the European Parliament and the national parliaments .
But in what fields ?
The competences of the European Parliament , logically , in the field of control and legislation on Community affairs , and the national parliaments in the field of control of their own governments .
This control is certainly absent in many Member States and this is a hindrance to the participation of the national parliaments in active control and in the proposal of European issues in each State .
But there is also another issue : in the debate on the Convention on the future of Europe , I believe that the role of the autonomous communities with legislative powers should also be discussed , in order to produce a coherent and constructive definition of their role within the Union , with the aim , amongst other things , of bringing the process of European integration closer to its citizens and increasing its efficiency .
This is also what I believe the role of the national parliaments with legislative powers within the Union should be .
Mr President , I have taken the floor not just to thank all the Members for the support they have expressed , for their suggestions , such as Mrs Maij-Weggen ' s suggestion , on the issues which need further analysis and for their well-structured , stimulating expression of reservations .
I have taken the floor principally to confirm what Mr MacCormick said , that is to make public an undertaking which I had mentioned in private .
I am fully aware - and I beg Mr MacCormick and the other Members who have signed the amendments to believe me - of the importance of the issue of regional parliaments with legislative powers .
However , I do not feel that it is appropriate to address this issue now in the context of a report which is expressly dedicated to the roles of national parliaments and Member States .
In any case , as Chairman of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs as well as your rapporteur , I hereby undertake to ensure that this issue is addressed specifically in an appropriate manner .
Moreover , I would not wish the importance of this issue to be masked by a rejection in Parliament of the amendments tabled .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the report we have just discussed indicates that cooperation between the national parliaments and the European Parliament has reached a new level .
I would even go as far to say that a new frame of mind has taken hold .
Mr Napolitano , I would like to thank you and congratulate you on behalf of the Commission .
The question of national parliaments , of the role that they must play , that they can be asked to play , in the future architecture of the Union , is related to the question of subsidiarity .
It is also related to the question of shared legitimacy which goes hand in hand with shared sovereignty .
In this respect , through the question of national parliaments and through the delimitation of competences on which your fellow Member , Mr Lamassoure , is working , it is essentially the problem of subsidiarity which is raised and this will be one of the key issues for the Convention to deal with via the constitutional process that will be launched in a few days ' time .
It is therefore from this very useful perspective , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , that we now have the extremely high quality findings of the European Parliament , which are telling us why and how we must take better account of the national parliaments .
Why must we do this ?
Perhaps because the European Union has not taken proper account of this question , from both its national and regional angles , nor has it taken this question seriously enough in the past .
I say this with the benefit of hindsight and with the benefit of my experience , given that I have been a member of a national parliament for some 22 years .
I can testify , as several of you can too , I am sure , to feeling a sense of helplessness as a national politician , when faced with so many texts from Brussels , which are merely to be implemented rather than discussed .
Due to this feeling of fait accompli , the frustration of national politicians - a word that one of you used - is not only directed at the Commission , but also at the Council and the European Parliament .
Parliament ' s desire , as you stressed , Mr Napolitano , to embark upon a new stage in its relations with the national parliaments , is demonstrated by what I would call significant and courageous action .
This action has been apparent , for some time already , through the active role that the House plays within COSAC , in the many formal and informal contacts between MEPs and national politicians - I can testify to this during the preparation of the Treaty of Nice - and in increased administrative cooperation .
The Commission is naturally in favour of this new phase , because it is aware of the contribution that the national parliaments can make to the Union ' s integration .
The further we move forward with integration - and we hope that it does progress , in the sensitive areas of national sovereignty , and particularly the second and third pillars - the more pressing the question of the legitimacy of the whole system will be .
From an objective point of view , there is , for example , a shared interest in having better control of what happens under the third pillar , which is of so much interest to the citizens , and this control could be strengthened by the communitarisation that both the Commission and Parliament desire .
I therefore think that the approach of the Union institutions must respect two broad principles .
First of all , it must not bring their legitimacies into conflict , as universal suffrage runs through European integration in several ways ; in a direct way for this House and in an indirect way for the Council and the European Council .
I think that this is one of our assets .
Then , it must take into account the division of powers which is specific to each State , as well as the prerogatives and the requirements of each individual country ' s national parliament .
You are reflecting on how to better involve the national parliaments .
The imminent launch of the Convention , which most of you have mentioned , is in itself an initial response to the desires expressed by the national parliaments .
As I said , the Convention is a result of the effort made by both Parliament and the Commission and the will expressed by the 23rd COSAC meeting in Versailles in October 2000 .
However , ladies and gentlemen , although no one is questioning the importance or the nature of the contribution of the national parliaments , there is - at least , not yet - no consensus on the form that this could take .

The recent report by Mr Chevalier and Mr Mahou , which was presented to the Laeken European Council , states this quite clearly .
We now know that we may have two options : either indirectly , by improving the prerogatives of each national parliament in each of the Member States , or directly , by introducing new procedures to enable the national parliaments to intervene more directly in the European decision-making process .
It is clear that we must underline and strengthen the national and indirect option and it is also obvious that this is the majority ' s preferred option .
The Commission does not have to judge the value of each institutional system .
On the other hand , it can state its interest in favour of disseminating all the good practices - and we are well aware that some practices in some Member States are better than in others - in terms of information and consultation .
The Commission can state whether it is willing to examine amending the protocol to the Treaty of Amsterdam , in order to take into account these good practices .
The European option is more direct and certainly the more difficult to take , because , at the moment , the national parliaments themselves do not agree on specific issues .
However , ladies and gentlemen , we will have to consider the more direct European option when we discuss , for example , the clarification of legislative tasks of the Council , or when we assess the experiments which have already been carried out collectively as part of the work with the European Parliament and the national parliaments .
For its part , and like the House , the Commission does not support the idea of a new chamber , which would , in reality , be a third chamber .
The European decision-making process is already sufficiently complicated , not to mention , of course , the risks of institutional conflicts that might arise between the third chamber and this House , with which the Commission has , for many years , shared and defended a certain vision and ambition for the Community model .
To sum up , and as you put it so well , Mr Napolitano , the Convention , which has not yet begun , will deal , in particular , with this key question , which is the subject of your report .

Some subjects may therefore be raised immediately and , although I do not imagine that we will issue a specific opinion on subjects as closely related to the institutional autonomy of each Member State , Mr Vitorino and myself , who will represent the Commission at the Convention , would like to say that we are ready and willing to provide our ideas and our support to this in-depth examination .
This may well be what we will do , for example , as regards the role of the constituent power of the national parliaments or even their role in interpreting the subsidiarity principle .
Ladies and gentlemen , almost all of you have mentioned the Convention , which will take up a great deal of our attention as of 28 February .
Be that as it may , I repeat , one of the key issues that will determine the success of the Convention , to bring it up to the highest possible level of ambition , will be our common ability to convince , to lead , to work openly with the national parliaments and from this perspective , Mr Napolitano , I believe that your report is not only courageous but that it will also be very useful .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at noon .
Management of regional policy and the Structural Funds
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0006 / 2002 ) by Mr Pohjamo , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the management of regional policy and Structural Funds ( 2001 / 2066 ( INI ) ] .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first I would like to thank everyone for their active involvement in preparing this report .
The subject gave rise to some lively debate in committee and there were some good amendments to the report .
The representatives of the Commission also brought their input to the discussion .
I am delighted that the committee was in full agreement with the main aims of my report .
In my opinion , the Union ' s economic , social and territorial cohesion is an aim that is as essential as the single market or monetary union .
The forthcoming enlargement is a major challenge , and it will also bring pressure for reform in the administration of regional policy and the Structural Funds .
The purpose of this report is to analyse the problems of practical implementation and put forward proposals on how the operation of the Structural Funds might be improved within the framework of the existing rules and what facts should be taken into account in preparing the next reform .
The report brings a practical viewpoint to the debate on regional policy kindled by the Commission .
In order to obtain background information for my report , I sent a bulky questionnaire to a number of regions in each Member State .
Replies have come in from almost every Member State , and , as a result , I learnt of the practical experience gained , directly from the regions and people who had implemented programmes .
Now I wish to focus on the report ' s most important conclusions .
The first is the increase in effectiveness and results .
In the practical implementation of the Structural Funds one should be aiming at effective and result-oriented use of appropriations , execution of projects according to timetable , and optimum project quality .
In the regions , the administration of the Structural Funds is often felt to have become more difficult , and bureaucracy seems to have increased .
The regions feel the financing provisions are complicated , partly unclear and open to interpretation , although the aim has certainly been otherwise .
Funding should be channelled as directly as possible to the regions , which should be allowed to differentiate themselves from one another in order to be able to make effective use of the aid from the Structural Funds .
With cooperation from the regions , Member States and the Union , administration should be improved so that the right actions target the right regions at the right time in terms of getting results .
Management and its follow-up must be flexible and proportionate to the size of the programmes or projects .
The n + 2 rule for financing must be kept in force .
The key aim of the report is the simplification and clarification of practices and administration , and increased results .
The Court of Auditors has also criticised the complicated practices associated with the Structural Funds and called for simplification and better results , and this has also been the Commission ' s aim , although there is still much to be done regarding this both by the Commission and the Member States .
The second conclusion of the report was that programmes should not take so long to get started .
The new programming period has got off the ground very slowly , with programmes taking as much as two years to be approved .
The Member States have not been able to forward their documents on time , and the Commission was slow to process documents .
Simplification and clarification will also help to avoid delays .
As a possible remedy , the report suggests separating the periods covered by Objective Programmes and Community initiatives so that their preparation is not scheduled for the same time .
In this way there would be more preparation time for both the Commission and the regions and the sort of delays that are occurring at present would not arise as we move into the next programming period .
The third important conclusion of the report is that the principle of additionality should be applied .
The Union ' s regional policy has weakened the situation where EU funding replaces national funding : the regions have even seen more national money withdrawn from them that they have received from the Union .
The Commission should review and clarify the rules for compliance with additionality so that this principle would also apply at programme and regional level .
The fourth conclusion of the report is more effective evaluation and monitoring of the Structural Funds .
Monitoring should be more concerned with results : what has been achieved with funding and how .
Parliament should have open and transparent channels for obtaining information and arranging follow-up .
The Commission should produce the necessary background information and reports in a clear form so that the committee and Parliament can use them effectively .
When I was drafting the recommendations for voting , I supported the amendments that reinforced the conclusions of the report .
My colleagues also tabled amendments regarding the content , which in themselves were worthy of support , but fell outside the scope of this report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , this European Parliament own-initiative report now under our consideration is completely right .
It makes perfect sense for the European Parliament to study , discuss and propose ways of improving the practical implementation and the management of the Structural Funds with a view to achieving greater efficiency .
Despite the fact that the reform of the Structural Funds culminated in the 1999 Berlin Summit , which made substantial improvements to the way in which it is run , the experience of the last two-and-a-half years tells us that there is room for further improvements .
The importance of the objectives of the policy of economic and social cohesion , of which the Structural Funds are a fundamental instrument , forces us to make continual efforts to improve . And we are all obliged to make this effort : the European institutions , specifically the Commission , but also the Member States and the beneficiary regions .
What we really need is a continuation of the work to simplify and to minimise the bureaucracy of the functioning of the Structural Funds , which makes it necessary to improve management methods in areas such as the funding , monitoring , following-up and implementation of the programmes we support .
By the same token , the Member States and the regions must be more selective in their choices of projects to support and ensure that appropriations are put to the best use and , for this reason , the ' performance reserve ' -type mechanisms must be improved in order to encourage and reward the regions that have made the best use of the Structural Funds .
Furthermore , national economic policies must never neglect the objectives of economic and social cohesion at domestic level , and I would want them to be coherent and not contradict these objectives .
The same applies to the other Community policies , specifically the common agricultural policy , competition policy and State aid , which could be of enormous value , because of the importance of the legal and financial instruments that underpin them and if they were better directed towards other plans for cohesion .
Let us focus , lastly , on the need for greater decentralisation , or a more effective implementation of the principle of subsidiarity in the context of the European Union ' s policy for economic and social cohesion .
Obviously , there is still scope in this field to give the Member States and the regions more responsibility .
The principles of decentralisation and subsidiarity must be taken as far as possible .
We must , however , be careful .
Let us not confuse , where the Structural Funds are concerned , the implementation of the principle of subsidiarity with a hypothetical and absurd renationalisation of the European Union ' s economic and social cohesion policy .
The principle of subsidiarity must never be used as an instrument with which to attempt to drain the financial resources of the European Union ' s economic and social cohesion policy .
What this principle requires instead is an effective policy , at European level , of economic and social cohesion , and it also calls for an improvement in the resources allocated to this genuine pillar of European integration , in light of the challenge posed by enlargement and by the drastic increase in the consequent regional asymmetries .
Let us not forget that countries such as the United States of America allocate more resources to redistribution policies than the European Union .
Mr President , to sum up , I say ' yes ' to greater decentralisation of the management of the Structural Funds ; but ' yes ' also to maintaining and improving the essential functions of the European Union ' s economic and social cohesion policy , which are the redistribution of resources and the promotion of development in its least-favoured regions .
Mr President , I would like to start by congratulating Mr Pohjamo on his work and his initiative , for I believe that we are not dealing with a joint report here .
This is an own-initiative report by Parliament in which we are attempting to introduce new ideas that will improve the management of the Structural Funds at a crucial time for both the European Union as a whole and for the future of this Fund .
This report has arisen from the obvious need to improve the management of regional policy , as a whole , and that of the Structural Funds , which needs to be managed in a more flexible way . It also responds to the widespread sense of unease in the European Parliament .
The room for manoeuvre and involvement of this Parliament when the Commission presents its reports is practically zero .
Therefore , we believe that it is time to give both the Funds , on the one hand , and Parliament on the other , a greater political role to play .
It is time to ensure that the delays which currently afflict the management of these important Funds are not ignored ; it is time to correct them and to add new features .
We need to differentiate between the budgetary efficiency of the Funds and their real effectiveness .
Flexibility is , without a doubt , a factor that will increase the real impact of the Structural Funds on society and on the greater cohesion that we are all looking for .
We need to introduce new measures for the assessment of these Funds and more socioeconomic parameters , good practices , greater visibility and , of course , better monitoring of the principle of additionality .
We believe that initiatives such as this , which will hopefully be approved in tomorrow ' s vote , will bring new ideas that will improve the management of the Structural Funds and regional policy as a whole .
This will ensure that we arrive at the new Agenda 2006 with a major element of added value for everyone .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the own-initiative report by Mr Pohjamo , whom I would like to congratulate on his clear approach , once again highlights the objectives that must be met by regional policy and Structural Funds .
They are the result , no more , no less , of the observation of failures in previous programmes .
How can we therefore fail to agree with a number of proposals , which are declarations of intent that seek to make the programming system more efficient ?
I would , however , like to highlight some priorities which appear important , particularly on the ground , when I visit my citizens .
I hear the first comment time and time again , which concerns the limitation of small projects .
General simplification is , of course , a laudable objective , but it must not automatically lead to large projects being favoured ; only the good projects and those which are useful in terms of development and that are economically viable should be favoured .
The second comment relates to the political will to increase the involvement of Member States and their local and regional authorities in monitoring , but also , prior to this , in drawing up programmes , because we must bear in mind and remember that the most appropriate level from which to properly judge a project is the level that is closest to the person responsible for its initiation .
Lastly , every aspect of this subject , whether it be the definition of programmes in the regions , the way they are monitored or developed , or , above all , the way various assessments are completed , reminds me - and I hope that you will forgive me for using this expression - of a labyrinth .
We must ensure that excessive collaboration and a surfeit of technocratic barriers do not put the projects at risk and do not result , as in France , in the funds being only partially used .
I cannot conclude without giving my thoughts on paragraph 12 of the report .
It is curious , to say the least , to see the Commission being asked to interfere in the legal and administrative affairs of the Member States .
In answer to whether to be more or less regionalised , this is their problem .
To sum up , it is all the more difficult to allow Europe , on the pretext of regionalisation , to once again assume a right that belongs to it because it results in the Member States being stripped of their substance .
Mr President , Commissioner , the report before us clearly shows that , now as ever , the management of structural policy is deficient in various respects and , above all , that there is much room for improvement in it .
I have been carefully reading these reports for years , and the catalogue of defects is always basically the same .
Admittedly , an attempt was made to simplify regional policy under Agenda 2000 , yet I still have criticisms of four key areas : first , a lack of efficiency ; secondly , high administrative expenditure ; thirdly , high liability to fraud and fourthly , a lack of evaluation .
I am committed to the fundamental European concept of solidarity .
It is also in the interests of the prosperous States to bring the poorer ones up to the Community level .
Despite that belief , I call for a far-reaching reform of the EU 's regional policy , without critical examination of which the future of the enlarged EU , especially as regards its post-2006 financial arrangements , will be uncertain .
Do not misunderstand me : enlargement will cost a fair bit and people have to be told that .
How sensible is it , though , in reality , for the Commission , for example , on the one hand , to propose cuts in the CAP to the candidates for enlargement and , on the other hand , to make available more extensive structural aid by way of compensation ?
These Structural Funds can only be used to their fullest extent if the applicant countries take on board the fact that their budgets are going to incur new debts .
Has the Commission really thought this through ?
As it is now time for Question Time , we will suspend the debate .
It will resume at 9 p.m.
Question Time ( Council )
Question No 1 by ( H-0950 / 01 ) :
Subject : Inhuman conditions in Egyptian prisons Since 1989 , Costas Kastanias has been serving a life sentence with hard labour in maximum security prisons in Egypt in connection with the case of the motor boat , the ' Thanasis ' .
He is the sole survivor after the other two Greeks convicted and imprisoned in the same case died under the harsh and inhuman conditions in Egyptian prisons .
The last person involved in the case to die , Tasos Kontoyannis , did so under controversial circumstances .
Questions concerning this case have already been put to the Council in the past .
There is intense public concern about this case in Greece owing to the inhuman conditions in Egyptian prisons ( 3 by 4 metre cells housing 20 people ) and the fact that Costas Kastanias ' health has been irreparably damaged . Will the Council therefore say whether it will exert its influence to enable Mr Kastanias to serve the remainder of his sentence in Greek prisons ?
I am also very pleased to be able , on behalf of the Presidency-in-Office of the Council , to participate in Question Time in the European Parliament , and furthermore in a parliament which has such a dignified President .
With regard to Mr Alavanos ' oral question , I would like to state that the Council has not had the opportunity to study the matter to which the honourable Member refers .
This is an issue which essentially falls within the competence of the Member States , and which Greece is dealing with directly with the Egyptian authorities .
There also appears to be a bilateral agreement between Egypt and Greece on the exchange of prisoners , which aims to enable prisoners to complete their sentence in their country of origin .
The Council knows that conditions in Egyptian prisons can be harsh .
Spain also knows this to be true , for its own part and as a Member State of the European Union , because it also has problems with Spanish prisoners in Egyptian prisons .
Although financial cooperation under the Association Agreement between the EU and Egypt does not directly deal with the issue of the situation in prisons , these two instruments can serve to promote awareness of the conditions in detention centres and the treatment of prisoners . Other Member States have in fact used it to this end .
The Association Agreement , which was signed on 25 June 2001 in Luxembourg , and which has still not entered into force because some of the ratification instruments have yet to be put in place , establishes respect for human rights as one of its essential features .
The protection of detained or imprisoned persons features in the international human rights instruments and the National Indicative Programme for Egypt for 2000 to 2004 , which comprises a financial package worth EUR 351 million and also provides support for the development of civil society , education and for increasing social protection and the rights of the most disadvantaged and marginalised groups in Egyptian society .
I believe that , in effect , the Council should use the instruments provided by this Association Agreement to put pressure on Egypt , to become more involved with the fate of EU prisoners in Egyptian prisons , but , naturally , we cannot rely on an instrument that will allow this to take place when it is not ratified and when the ratification instruments are not even in place .
Therefore , I think that it is a good time to call upon Member States to ensure that this and other Mediterranean agreements that are awaiting ratification are ratified as soon as possible .
I thank the Minister for his reply .
My question is an SÏS .
This is literally the chronicle of a death foretold .
Three men were imprisoned in 1989 .
Two have died , the most recent from tonsillitis in October 2001 .
Twenty prisoners are kept in cells measuring 3 by 4 metres .
I call on the Minister , on behalf of this prisoner suffering a living death and on behalf of any Spaniards or other Community citizens , to intervene politically with the Egyptian authorities so that they can serve out their sentences in prisons in the Member States of the European Union .
Otherwise , Minister , if they get buried in bureaucracy or under the numerous other demands on our attention , we shall end up as accomplices .
It is a matter for the Greek Government , but the Greek Government does not have the necessary clout , whereas the European Union has a much greater chance of succeeding .
I have taken good note of the request made once again by Mr Alavanos and I would like to tell him that this matter will be referred to the Council to see if the Presidency-in-Office of the Council of the European Union can take immediate action in Cairo , taking into account the state of health of the prisoner Kostas Kastanias , to whom Mr Alavanos was referring .
Question No 2 by ( H-0952 / 01 ) :
Subject : Binding nature of Article 19 ( 2 ) of the Charter of Fundamental Rights in any agreement between the EU and the USA on extradition According to media reports , Spain ( which is to take over the Council Presidency on 1 January 2002 ) has proposed a comprehensive EU-USA pact on extradition .
The author of this question takes the view that the essential cooperation between the EU and the USA in the fight against terrorism must be based scrupulously on observation of the basic principles and values of a constitutional state .
For the EU Member States , these values include abolition of the death penalty .
For this reason the author of this question - in line with the main human rights organisations - considers that any future agreement between the EU and the USA must observe the spirit and the letter of Article 19 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights , since the death penalty remains in force in the USA and , furthermore , military tribunals are to be set up .
Does the Council undertake to regard Article 19 ( 2 ) of the Charter of Fundamental rights as fully binding in any agreement with the USA on extradition ?
The Council would remind honourable Members that in item 2 of the conclusions of the Action Plan from the extraordinary European Council of 21 September , the European Council calls for the implementation , as soon as possible , of all the international agreements in force in the fight against terrorism , that is to say , all those produced by the United Nations , the OECD and other international organisations .
The European Union supports the Indian proposal for drawing up , within the United Nations , a general convention against international terrorism , which should enhance the impact of the measures taken over the last 25 years under the auspices of the UN .
Within the context of its own programme , the Presidency considered it vitally important to create a common area in which the fight against any form of crime , and its more serious forms in particular , such as terrorism , the trafficking in human beings , drug trafficking and money laundering , is undertaken with criteria for regulation and by means of common activities in which all Member States should participate .
In this context , the Presidency proposes that objectives as important as the European arrest warrant and the abolition of formal extradition procedures should be defined .
The Presidency also thinks that strengthening relations between the European Union and the United States is highly important and a matter of priority , specifically within the framework of judicial cooperation in criminal matters within the fight against terrorism .
The Council would like to take this opportunity to state that the question of the status of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union must be resolved within the framework of the debate on the future of the Union .
The European Council , at its meeting in Laeken on 14 and 15 December 2001 , entrusted a Convention with the task of responding to any issues that might arise during this debate , especially with regard to whether the Charter of Fundamental Rights should be integrated into the basic Treaty and to the issue of the European Community ' s signing up to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms .
Without prejudging the answer to this question , the Council would like , all the same , to remind you that Article 6 ( 2 ) of the Treaty on European Union states that " the Union will respect fundamental freedoms in compliance with the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms , signed in Rome on 4 November 1950 " .
However , Article 3 of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms , as deduced from the case law of the European Court of Human Rights , allows it to be established that no-one can be removed , expelled or extradited to a State in which they could be subject to the death penalty , to torture or to inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , thank you for your answer , but , with all due respect , I would like to ask you the question once again .
We are all aware that the necessary cooperation between democracies , and therefore between the European Union and the United States , in the fight against terrorism , is taking place , but this cannot act as an obstacle to the European Union ' s vigorously defending the application of its inherent values : in this case , its defence of the abolition of the death penalty .
Regrettably , in the United States , as we all know , the death penalty is still in force .
We are also aware that the Convention will deal with the integration of the Charter of Fundamental Rights into the future European Constitution , but the Charter was also proclaimed by the Nice European Council and I believe that a proclamation is politically binding on those who proclaim it .
In these terms , Mr President-in-Office , and taking up the reference you made to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms , I ask you : will the European Union extradite any person accused of serious crimes , including terrorism , if there is a possibility that they would be condemned to death or executed in the United States ?
Mr Carnero González was present in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy when I said , quite clearly and unambiguously , and I am honoured to be able to repeat this here today , that the European Union will never - I repeat - never , allow any European citizen to be extradited , under any kind of agreement with the United States , whilst there is no guarantee of two things - not one , but two - that the death penalty would never be applied , and that they would never be judged by one of these military tribunals that have recently been set up since 11 September .
I said this in Committee and I am repeating it today in Plenary .
And certainly , with regard to the abolition of the death penalty , we also said , in a debate that took place right here in Parliament very recently on the position of the European Union in the Human Rights Commission , that one of the main standpoints of the Delegation from the European Union and its Member States in the Human Rights Commission is precisely to fight for the abolition of the death penalty in every country in the world , regardless of religion , culture , etc .
As the author is not present , Question No 3 lapses .
Question No 4 by ( H-0958 / 01 ) :
Subject : Revision of the common position on Cuba At its meeting in Brussels on 6 and 7 December 2001 the ACP Council of Ministers adopted a resolution which reads as follows : ' The ACP Council of Ministers ... 2 .
Calls on the European Union to translate this spirit [ the entente which emerged during the recent ( 30 November ) visit by the Community troika , as acknowledged in the first paragraph of the resolution ] into a substantive revision of its common position on Cuba so as to treat Cuba in a fair and impartial manner ; 3 . Expresses the firm expectation that such revision of the EU ' s common position will lead to Cuba ' s accession to the ACP-EC Cotonou Agreement without any special or inequitable conditions whatsoever ; ... ' .
What action is the Council of the European Union going to take in response to the ACP countries ' repeated request for the common position on Cuba to be revised and for Cuba to be allowed to accede to the Cotonou Agreement on the same terms as the other ACP countries ?
Has the Council already replied ( or is it intending to reply ) in any way to this request from the ACP Council of Ministers ?
The European Parliament is well aware of the dialogue between the European Union and Cuba , which was interrupted by the Cuban authorities when they cancelled the meeting with the EU troika that was scheduled for April 2000 .
The dialogue resumed on 1 and 2 December 2001 with the visit of the troika to Havana .
The resumption of dialogue is the result of a great deal of hard work by the Presidency , and on which the Council fully informed this House , in its November and December part-sessions in particular .
The Council also had the opportunity to broach this subject at the meeting of the Joint ACP-EU Assembly in Brussels between 29 October and 1 November 2001 .
On that occasion , the Council stated , amongst other things , that it had never vetoed the inclusion of Cuba in the Cotonou Agreement , but that it was Cuba itself that had withdrawn its request to join in May 2000 .
The Council announced that it was ready to look into the matter once Cuba had officially put forward its application in accordance with the provisions laid down in the agreement .
On 10 and 11 December , the General Affairs Council carried out its tenth evaluation of the EU Common Position on Cuba and considered that it would continue to be valid , and was the basis for European Union policy on Cuba .
The Council also considered it essential to pursue the dialogue that had been started in order to achieve tangible results , particularly with regard to future cooperation based on the respect for the democratic principles of human rights , fundamental freedoms and the Rule of Law .
In this regard , the Council stated that it was waiting for significant signs from the Cuban Government that it was meeting the objectives of the common position .
The Council also reiterated that EU objectives with regard to Cuba would still consist of promoting the transition to democratic pluralism and the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms , sustainable economic recovery and an improvement in the standard of living of the Cuban people .
After a detailed study and various exchanges of information , the Council also noted serious shortcomings in the recognition and implementation of civil and political liberties , as well as the Cuban authorities ' refusal to consider the possibility of introducing reforms that would result in a political system based on these values .
In spite of this , the Council also noted some positive signs , such as greater religious freedom and the non-application of the death penalty for the last two years , which takes us back to the previous question , concerning EU policy matters .
Where it is not possible to abolish the death penalty , we need to at least reach at a situation in which it is not applied , as well as a considerable reduction in the number of political prisoners and an increase in the number of ratifications of United Nations Human Rights instruments .
These are the positive signs .
The Council was also pleased with the Cuban Government ' s decision to agree to sign up to all United Nations Conventions against terrorism , adopted at the sitting of 4 October .
The Council also noted the importance that the European Union attaches to Cuba ' s acceptance of the principles included in the United Nations Pact on Civil and Political Liberties and also of the agreement on Economic , Social and Cultural Rights , and expresses its wish for Cuba to sign both Pacts as soon as possible .
Finally , I think it is important to point out that in the context of the tenth evaluation of the EU Common Position on Cuba , the German delegation made a statement in which it approves the Council ' s conclusions , but calls on the Commission to produce a framework for cooperation that will be effective in the short term .
The Council intends to evaluate its common position on Cuba within the next six months in light of developments during this period .
We would like to once again express our friendship and personal respect for the President-in-Office of the Council , but I have to say that we think it was a mistake to ratify the common position .
We believe that the common position is a negative thing , that everybody in Cuba , from the authorities to the opposition and the church perceives it to be negative , and that practically all the ambassadors from EU States in Havana consider it to be ineffectual and even counterproductive .
I certainly believe that this ratification of the common position has acted as a major stumbling block for the reopened process of dialogue that we , like you , wanted and looked upon with a great deal of hope .
My question is this : How will the Council respond to the repeated requests from the ACP countries for Cuba to be treated like all of the other countries and for it to be offered a guaranteed place as a signatory to the Cotonou agreement ?
This is the question , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , with no disrespect , that we will be asking once again in Cape Town , in the Joint Assembly , in the presence of all the speakers from ACP countries , who have unanimously asked on numerous occasions for Cuba to be included as a member of their community .
Thank you and , once again , welcome , Mr de Miguel .
Ladies and gentlemen , Mr Martínez , my dear friend , when I am asked this question in Cape Town , I shall give the same answer I am going to give you now .
The EU ' s position on this issue has always been positive .
As I told you , Mr Martínez , during the negotiations on the Cotonou agreement now in force , which were held in February 2000 , if my memory serves me correctly , there was already a formal proposal by the ACP committee for Cuba to join when the new Convention was signed , with the total agreement of the Council of the European Union .
To the surprise of the Council and the ACP countries , the Cuban delegate - at the time the Minister for Industry - disappeared from the meeting , and there was no way this matter could be formalised because Cuba was not present to give its consent .
When Cuba is ready to take on not only the benefits but also the obligations inherent to the Cotonou Convention , I guarantee that the Presidency of the Union and the Council will agree to it unreservedly .
There will be no lack of opportunity for this to happen .
You mentioned the Joint Assembly , and I am talking about the ministerial meeting that is planned under the Spanish Presidency , between the ACP countries and the Ministers of the Council of the European Union , which will take place in Santo Domingo .
This could be as good an occasion as any .
We are always willing to give a positive response , if and when Cuba can commit itself to accepting not only the benefits , but also the obligations inherent to the Cotonou Agreement .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Miguel Ángel Martínez and myself , who have both been in politics since 1977 , have discussed these matters a great deal and I would like to make one or two comments .
Firstly , what Cuba wants - as the Minister for Foreign Affairs , Mr Pérez Roque , stated to the parliamentary delegation - is for the European Union to guarantee that if Cuba applies for entry into the ACP there will be no opposition on their part .
Before they make their request to join they want a formal guarantee it will not be opposed .
Secondly , Mr Martínez and myself have different perceptions of Cuba .
I met members of the opposition , dissidents , who literally told me that those who are not part of the regime simply do not exist .
Secondly , there was an amicable debate on the ambassadors ' assessments - at least in the meeting I attended - but I would like to know how the opinion of all the governments , with the slight reservation of Germany , can be contrary to the opinion which , according to Mr Martínez , was expressed by the ambassadors : these are keen to establish unconditional dialogue , whilst the governments are keen to uphold the common position and have been since as far back as December .

I would like to ask the President-in-Office of the Council if he agrees with me in his assessment that the Cuban government has a long way to go before it can fulfil the obligations of the democratic clause , both for an Association Agreement and to establish other links with the European Union , and I would like him to expand on the subject of economic freedom , fundamental rights - which was previously called formal democracy , that we now all share - and above all political pluralism , which are the prerequisites of the common position .
Mr de Miguel , I am afraid I shall ask you not to give the detailed examination of this issue that Mr Garcia is asking for , but to answer this question with the brevity we are used to in this House .
As briefly as possible , I would like to tell Mr García-Margallo that I basically agree with the line he has adopted .
I told him previously in my answer that the European Union takes a positive view of Cuba ' s joining , as and when Cuba is ready to accept the obligations laid down in the Cotonou agreement , and to build a relationship with the European Union with certain conditions , as everybody is aware .
Question No 5 by ( H-0959 / 01 ) :
Subject : Spanish Presidency and the subhuman situation of women in Afghanistan What action is to be taken by the Spanish Presidency in order to improve the subhuman situation of women in Afghanistan ?
Mr President , the Spanish Presidency is going to continue with the current Union policy , which is aimed at systematically improving the human rights situation in Afghanistan , particularly in relation to Afghan women .
In its sitting of 10 December , the Council expressed its support for the Petersberg Agreement , which defined the provisional agreements applicable in Afghanistan and repeated its promise to play an important role in the international effort to contribute to the reconstruction of the Afghan society and economy .
On that occasion , the Ministers also stressed the particular need to promote the role of women within Afghan society .
During the ministerial conference on the reconstruction of Afghanistan which took place recently in Tokyo - on 20 and 22 January - the Presidency of the European Commission , in its capacity as co-presidents of the Union in the steering group for the reconstruction of Afghanistan , set out the Union ' s position to the other international donors and the provisional Afghan authority .
The Union ' s delegation stated , amongst other things , that the European Union ' s assistance would be conditional upon all the Afghan groups unreservedly applying the spirit and the letter of the Petersburg Agreement , the objective of which is the creation of a broad-based , multi-ethnic , fully-representative government committed to acting in favour of sex equality and improving the situation of women .
Also in Tokyo , the European Union stressed the importance of Afghanistan taking on the work of emergency aid , rehabilitation and development , and that people of all regions , ethnic groups , and in particular women should participate in it .
The Council will continue to closely monitor compliance with these criteria over the coming months and years .
In this regard , the Council wishes to point out that the European Union ' s special representative in Afghanistan , Ambassador Kleiber , has begun his work in Kabul , assisted by a special representative of the Presidency , Ambassador López Nadal .
The Council will take special care to ensure that women may participate , and participate fully , in building the country ' s future .
In this same context , the Council would also cite the reply given to oral question H-0897 / 2001 .
Over recent years , Taliban fundamentalism has hit women , and today its effects are still ruining the lives of Afghan women .
Men are still armed and this poses an obvious threat .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , the day before yesterday a seven-year-old girl was sold into marriage in order for her family to deal with hunger and meet their needs .
The President-in-Office of the Council has given me a very committed answer , which we already knew .
To expand on it , and without returning to past questions , would the Spanish Presidency be prepared to adopt any measures to ensure that seven-year-old girls do not continue to be sold into marriage ?
Would you at least be willing to communicate the urgent need to adopt measures to prevent this horror ?
. ( ES ) Mr President , I would like to reply to Mrs Izquierdo Rojo by saying that the Union ' s policy with regard to Afghanistan on this issue is absolutely indivisible and applies to all possible violations of human rights and of women ' s rights in particular .
The case she mentions is but one more on the list of horrors and suffering experienced by many human beings in Afghanistan , children and adults , men and women .
And the Union ' s policy on all these issues has therefore been , and will always be , the same .
I can guarantee that we will implement and try to strengthen our political action in Afghanistan and any aid will be conditional upon the safeguarding of these rights , which includes preventing the selling of children into marriage .
Mr President , I would like to underline , in my capacity as a member of the Committee on Budgets , that Europe is meant not just to be a payer , but also , and in particular , a player .
I believe , in particular , that social conditions in Afghanistan are anything but satisfactory .
What matters is that women should be integrated into working life . To do that , you of course need businesses , above all small and medium-sized enterprises and family firms .
Do you believe it might be possible for us , by means of our payments , to stimulate such things as the setting-up of businesses ?
. ( ES ) What we are trying to create is an integral development plan in Afghanistan , which we have just begun to do .
We now have the financial means , which , by the way , are very considerable , since the contribution of the European Union has been , as you know , very significant , the most significant of the contributions of the international community .
But other members of the international community have also contributed .
We now have the sum we need to carry out the necessary development plans and naturally the development of small and medium-sized businesses is , in everybody ' s view , one of the fundamental elements of the development of Afghanistan , where , in the short term , we cannot expect to see significant investments in large industries and large projects and , therefore , we are going to begin to create all these programmes in conjunction with the Commission .
We are naturally very aware that women play a very important role in small and medium-sized businesses and this is going to revitalise the role of women within Afghanistan .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , during the Taliban presence in Afghanistan , and before that , the situation of women has been horrendous .
They have been marginalized , humiliated and persecuted .
Furthermore , it has been instilled into their beliefs and their way of thinking that this was a normal situation , which makes change difficult .
We clearly cannot accept the sale of girls , the continuing marginalisation and the lack of recognition of women ' s human rights .
Parliament therefore believes that the Spanish Presidency of the Union could do something more , create some special support programme for these women who have suffered particular marginalisation , because the current situation in Afghanistan cannot in reality be compared with the reconstruction of other war-torn countries .
Could you expand on the answer which the President-in-Office of the Council has given us on this situation ?
. ( ES ) I would like to remind you that the responsibility for creating development programmes aimed at making the necessary investments with the money acquired at the Tokyo Summit falls to the European Commission , which has to create all these programmes , which not only relate to the development of small and medium-sized businesses , but above all to education .
The total exclusion of women from the Afghan education system is well known ; by depriving them of education they have been completely denied access to all the assets of society .
Commissioner Patten and the corresponding Directorate-General of the Commission are creating all these programmes , one of the fundamental objectives of which is - I repeat - recovering the role of women within Afghan society .
I am not currently in a position to give you any details but naturally I will communicate the concern expressed here in the European Parliament to the Commission , so that the funds may be dedicated in particular to programmes aimed directly at recovering the role of Afghan women in society .
Question No 6 by ( H-0963 / 01 ) :
Subject : Presence of regional governments at Council meetings The federal , regional or decentralised structure in a number of Member States has led them to include representatives of those regions or Länder in their delegations for meetings of the Council of Ministers , as provided for by the Treaty of European Union since the Maastricht reform ten years ago .
Regional representatives have sometimes led the Member State delegation and , during the Belgian Presidency , have even chaired Council meetings dealing with matters falling within the competence of their regions .
However , in the case of other Member States such as Spain , which also have regions or autonomous communities with wide legislative powers , the central government prevents the regions or autonomous communities from taking part in their delegations for the various Council meetings , even when competence rests exclusively with the regions rather than the central government .
How does the Council view this state of affairs ?
Which Member States with a federal or autonomous political structure similar to Spain 's include representatives of their nationalities and regions in their delegations ?
Which Member States do not do so ?
Will the Spanish Presidency boost the participation of those regions or autonomous communities in the wake of the recognition given to the regions at the Laeken summit ?
The Council would remind the honourable Member that Article 203 of the Treaty establishing the European Community lays down that the Council will consist of a representative of each Member State , of Ministerial rank , empowered to make commitments on behalf of that Member State .
In accordance with this provision , it is the exclusive competence of each State to decide how it is to be represented in the meetings of the Council and who is going to be included in its delegation .
This decision will inevitably depend on national constitutional agreements which differ between one Member State and another , because each Member State has its own Constitution and its own territorial organisation .
Consequently , the Council cannot comment on decisions taken individually by a Member State in relation to representation .
Mr President , nothing could be more true than what the representative of the Council has just pointed out : each Member State clearly has the power to decide the composition of its delegation at each Council meeting .
Nevertheless , I believe that when , in these Council meetings , the national delegation does not include representatives of the regional governments which have exclusive competence , it creates distancing between the Community and the citizens , on the one hand , and its representatives on the other .
Some people will call it distancing , others of us call it democratic deficit , especially when some communities do have that opportunity to be represented in the regions and others do not .
In certain Member States , such as mine , the regions , the Autonomous Communities , are as much States as the central governments , as laid down in the Constitution .
The President of my region , Galicia , is strongly in favour of this regional participation .
Nevertheless , it is stated that it is the national government which is represented in relation to external policy , and I would ask : does the Council believe that internal Community policy decisions , in areas such as fishing , agricultural policy and consumer policy , fall within external or international policy or do you believe that they are internal Community issues ?
Mrs Miguélez Ramos , I cannot agree with your assertion that the regions are as much States as the States of the Union , because the latter are the only members of the Union and the only ones that have the right to participate in the Council of Ministers .
The regions may have their competences within a context of decentralisation and the concession of competences by the State to territorial regions .
That concession of competences varies from one State to another and , furthermore , they vary greatly in many countries .
Even in the case of countries which have made significant concessions of competences , such as Germany , Austria or Spain , the systems are completely different .
You cannot compare the German federal system with the Spanish system of Autonomous Communities .
Therefore , the representation of the State essentially takes place by means of internal cooperation and each State can , within this context , represent the interests of the territorial regions of its territory in the way that best suits the general interests of the whole country .
Community policies are not external policy matters , but Community policy matters , but I would remind you that according to Community policy , the representatives in the Council are the Member States of the European Union and it falls to them to defend the positions which affect all of those countries according to their constitutional system .
We therefore work on the principle that each State applies its constitution as it stands and that in no way means that the quality of the representation of the interests of the territorial communities depends on any particular system .
I am grateful for the Council ' s reply since it demonstrates that the Council cannot violate the principle of institutional autonomy by which we are governed .
Secondly , I would like to point out that Spain has been a Member of the European Union since 1986 and since then this institutional framework has been respected .
And also throughout the period of Socialist government .
Thirdly , I will say that there are no homogenous positions in relation to this debate , even in the academic field , in the views that the different Autonomous Communities advocate .
Therefore , I would like to ask you whether you think that it would be more fruitful to improve the role of the Committee of the Regions in the Union ' s work .
I have already said that the essential thing is to strengthen the system of internal cooperation .
Furthermore , I have not referred exclusively to the country I represent , but to all of the Union ' s countries .
I do not believe that the interests of the Autonomous Communities are sufficiently incorporated into the definition of the policies that the States put to the Council .
This is essentially done through dialogue , via the established institutional channels .
I believe that this must be the objective of all the governments of the Union : to have increasingly intense internal cooperation with the territorial communities , above all with those with legislative powers .
President-in-Office , I represent one of Europe 's most ancient and longest surviving kingdoms - Scotland - which is a largely autonomous part of the United Kingdom , to which it belongs .
Indeed , Scottish ministers sometimes attend and even represent the United Kingdom at Council meetings .
However , my question refers to the Convention which is being set up to look at the future of Europe , at which no Scottish minister or Member of the Scottish Parliament will be present .
Do you feel that it would be appropriate for regional assemblies , parliaments and governments to be represented at this very important Convention that is going to decide the future shape of the Europe , of which Scotland and your regions in Spain are very much a part ?
Mr Purvis , the European Convention is about to get under way .
It will include representatives from the governments , from national parliaments , from the European Parliament and from the Commission .
Representatives from the Committee of the Regions and the Economic and Social Committee are also invited .
Nothing is preventing any country from including within their parliamentary or governmental delegation people who are particularly concerned with the problems of the regions .
Therefore each country is free to include who it likes in the Convention .
Neither the Presidency nor the Council intend to dictate the debate within the Convention .
The debate will be open and free .
All issues relating to the regions may be dealt with within the Convention and the latter will make what it feels are the appropriate recommendations to the Intergovernmental Conference on the importance of the role of the regions in the Union ' s decision-making process .
The Intergovernmental Conference will decide on this issue at the appropriate time .
You know that only supplementary questions may be asked .
Points of order have been raised and I am going to allow them , but I would ask you not to abuse points of order .
Mr President , I believe it would have been more appropriate if you had given me the floor first , since in other similar debates , when there have been questions from Members which are similar to each other , you , sitting as President , have combined them all .

I have Question No 13 which is practically identical to No 6 , and I would have liked you , as on other occasions , to have combined questions so that we do not have to debate the same issue twice .
I do not know if there is still time for you to allow me to put Question No 13 .
I am going to tell you as carefully as possible how the Rules of Procedure work .
I have never combined questions because that is done by the Presidency of Parliament .
I am simply presiding over the sitting and I do not have that competence .
It is something that is decided in advance .
Otherwise I would very gladly have done so .
We are going to wait until Question No 13 arrives - I am going to make an effort - so that you , even though it may be a reiteration , can ask it .
They are important questions .
Mr President , on a point of order : Mr Purvis has covered much of what I was going to say .
It is interesting to hear the points of view of Mr Purvis and other colleagues on the issue of Scotland 's representation on this Constitutional Convention when the Conservative Party and the Nationalist Party could not even get it together to be part of the Scottish Constitutional Convention which set up and made room for the Scottish Parliament .
I would like to ask the Minister whether there is a list available to the public and to colleagues here , showing how regional governments are represented in the various Council meetings .
Mr Purvis touched upon the fact that Scottish ministers attend Council meetings in accordance with their areas of expertise and the areas they are involved with .
I wondered how other regional governments work in this connection and whether such a list would be available to colleagues .
In my capacity as President for this sitting and guardian of the Rules of Procedure , I am not going to allow more than the permitted two questions , because that would set a dreadful precedent and deprive the other Members , who have Questions Nos 13 or 14 , of being able to speak .
Put questions in writing , raise your hand at the beginning , quickly and with the reflexes of a parliamentarian , or use the corridor when the President-in-Office of the Council leaves .
I am requesting the floor for a point of order , if you will allow me , although I have no intention of taking up any debating time .
I simply wanted to say that , without going into the pros or cons of the system for listing questions and putting them in order , I believe that my question and the question from Mr Ortuondo are very different , despite what he said a moment ago , although I admit that they involve the same issue .
I agree , Mrs Miguélez , but , as I have said , there is a body for establishing whether questions coincide , and this is predetermined under the authority of the President of this House , not myself , since I am merely in the chair for this sitting .
Question No 7 by ( H-0966 / 01 ) :
Subject : Unacceptable decision to refuse to issue visas to members of FARC-EP At the Laeken Council it was decided that the EU Member States would refuse to issue visas to representatives of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia ( FARC-EP ) .
This decision is a serious new violation of international law and democratic freedoms , since it is directed against a large popular movement in Colombia which has considerable support not only inside the country but also abroad , including in many EU Member States , because of its long-standing struggle for a political settlement to the conflict in Colombia , democratic agricultural reform , democratic and trade-union freedoms and an end to the death squads ' reign of terror .
In view of the fact that the representatives of FARC-EP are participating alongside official Colombian Government representatives in the peace process , which enjoys the support of the EU , can the Council say whether this decision has anything to do with the recent ' law to combat terrorism ' and whether it intends to reconsider this antidemocratic decision and to back the process to achieve peace based on a political solution in Colombia ?
The decision referred to by the Member who asked the question was not taken at the European Council in Laeken , which did not deal with the situation in Colombia , but appears in the declaration of the Presidency , on behalf of the European Union , in relation to the peace process in Colombia of 7 December .
In it , the European Union indicates that , until further orders , the Member States of the Union will not issue new visas or residency permits to representatives of armed groups , not only of FARC , but all armed groups , without prejudice to the continuation of the efforts of the Member States of the Union which are participating in the dialogue between the Colombian parties .
The European Union has also expressed its support for the efforts of the Member States of the Union which , on the request of the Colombian Government and the parties in conflict , are taking part in the talks which the President , Andrés Pastrana , has entered into with the ELN and FARC in order to reach a negotiated solution to the conflict .
This decision has nothing to do with the framework decision on the fight against terrorism which you refer to , but is a part of the strong condemnation from the whole international community of the practices of armed groups , which carry out activities such as kidnaps , extortion and other types of crime which are violations of human rights and of international humanitarian law , and endanger the peace process which is not yet secured in that country .
The European Union insists that its position in relation to the armed groups in Colombia will be studied and reviewed in accordance with respect for human rights , international humanitarian law and diplomatic immunity .
The European Union unreservedly supports the efforts to encourage all the parties involved to respect human rights and international humanitarian law , and calls on all of them to condemn the violations of them .
It also asks the armed groups to free all hostages , foreigners and Colombians , and to immediately renounce these practices .
The European Union has also urged FARC to return to the negotiating table in order , amongst other things , to deal with the issues agreed in San Francisco de la Sombra in October 2001 .
It is pleased at the resumption of the dialogue between the government and the ELN , and hopes that these two movements will show signs of their determination to seek concrete results aimed at a lasting and peaceful solution to the conflict .
In its declaration , the European Union also insists that the Colombian Government continues and intensifies its efforts to disarm the paramilitaries and bring the people responsible for the crimes perpetrated , whoever they may be , fully to justice , so that they may pursue - both at a local and regional level , and respecting biodiversity and the environment - the efforts already started to combat illegal crops , the production and trafficking of drugs and that , independently of the peace process , a programme of decisive socio-economic reforms be created and applied urgently .
As this Parliament knows , the peace process in Colombia is at an uncertain stage .
The European Union is still actively supporting the peace process and the laudable efforts of President Pastrana and considers that there is no alternative to a negotiated solution to the internal conflict .
The European Union will make an effort to apply the autonomous commitments adopted within the framework of the European support programme for the peace process in Colombia , provided that security problems do not prevent it .
Mr President , I should like to say the following to the President-in-Office of the Council : as you know , negotiations are continuing in Colombia . In other words , the two parties involved , the government and FARC , have pursued the negotiating process and FARC has made a considerable effort to find a solution to the problem .
However , the solution clearly lies in disarming the paramilitary groups , the so-called ' death squads ' , which are still operating with impunity in Colombia .
The solution also lies in guaranteeing the freedoms and the democratic rights of all citizens , in combating poverty , in moving ahead with agricultural reform and lastly , in guaranteeing the social rights of the Colombian people
Now that FARC is sitting at the negotiating table with the Colombian Government , why does it appear that the countries of the European Union are not making an effort to ensure that these negotiations are successfully concluded and provide members of FARC with the necessary visas so that they can , as they must , maintain contact with countries involved in the peace process , and we know that some countries in the European Union are interested in seeing a positive outcome to this peace process .
This , then , is my question to you , Mr President-in-Office .
I believe that in my reply I gave a full explanation of the Council ' s position and our firm position on not issuing visas to FARC , since we do not believe that they are used for making contacts relating to peace , but for other activities .
I share the Council ' s view that FARC-EP can justifiably be criticised , especially for murders and kidnappings of Indian leaders .
At the same time , it is absolutely clear that it is the paramilitaries who , aided by Colombia ' s military , are responsible for most , by far , of the violence in Colombia .
If those responsible for the violence are to be deported , it would have made just as much sense to have expelled Colombia ' s ambassador .
Nor must we forget that those on the legal Left in Colombia are systematically executed if they appear in public .
My practical question to the Council is as follows : did the United States exert pressure and demand that FARC representatives ' visas be withdrawn before the EU decided to do this ?
I also said in my first intervention that the Council is deeply concerned about the activities of the paramilitaries and is putting all the necessary pressure on the Colombian Government so that there is no cooperation of any type on the part of Colombian armed forces with these groups and in order to prevent the general belief that the paramilitaries are in some way acting in connivance with the government , which is not true at all , at least not with the government of Mr Pastrana .
I therefore agree with what the honourable Member said .
We do not agree with the activities of the paramilitaries and of course we are putting every necessary pressure on the central government to ensure that it does not in any way aid or collaborate in the activities of these groups .
I am afraid that the Council did not understand my specific question .
Perhaps there was an interpreting problem .
My question was as to whether the United States put any pressure on the EU to withdraw the FARC representative ' s visa .
No , Mr President .
Question No 8 by ( H-0967 / 01 ) :
Subject : Arrests of demonstrators and police brutality during demonstrations on 14 and 15 December During the unprecedentedly large-scale demonstrations in Brussels on the occasion of the European Council Summit at Laeken , on 14 and 15 December , the police violently and provocatively charged peaceful demonstrators and even mere bystanders .
Undercover secret police officers dressed as demonstrators mounted particularly brutal attacks .
They beat demonstrators and bystanders savagely , apprehended dozens of citizens without any justification , tied them up and kept them lying on the ground for an hour - even those who were injured and bleeding - and humiliated women by stripping them in front of male police officers posing as interpreters .
They rode roughshod over fundamental rights which the people had struggled for decades to win .
The Belgian Presidency and the media tried to cover up the events exposed by legal teams ( teams of lawyers working to defend the demonstrators ' rights ) and by victims of the attacks themselves .
Is the Council aware of these incidents and , if so , how does it view them ?
Article 33 of the European Union Treaty clearly stresses that individual measures adopted by police authorities are the sole competence of the relevant Member States .
Therefore , the Council is not in a position to comment on the issues mentioned by the Member who has asked the question .
The fact that demonstrations take place at the same time as a sitting of the European Council is completely irrelevant in this case .
I realise that it was hard to tell when the Belgian Government was acting in its capacity of President of the European Union and when it was simply acting as a Member State , but I would like to know what really happened and why all these measures were adopted despite being condemned by various speakers as breaching the rights of citizens who were demonstrating peacefully in Belgium during the last summit .
I have already said that I am not in a position to reply to that question , but what I am certainly not prepared to do is agree with the statement by Mrs Figueiredo that the demonstrations were peaceful .
I was there and I saw it , and many of the demonstrations which took place in Brussels were in no way peaceful .
There was extremely clear damage in the city and if that is Mrs Figueiredo ' s idea of a peaceful demonstration , neither I nor the Presidency-in-Office of the Council agree with her .
There is no possibility of a reply , Mrs Figuereido .
I know that you have differing opinions , that has been made very clear , but there is no possibility of a reply since that would lead us into a debate and this is Question Time .
Mr President , I was , of course , referring to all the peaceful demonstrations and not to the other kind and it is on these that I would like to have an answer , precisely because they were peaceful .
The President-in-Office of the Council has stated that it is not within his competence to reply to this question and I respect that .
You have made your clarification and we take note of it .
Question No 9 by ( H-0968 / 01 ) :
Subject : Dismantling of Islamic terrorist group Laskar Jihad in Indonesia Parliament 's resolution on Papua ( Irian Jaya ) and Sulawesi in Indonesia adopted on 13 December 2001 points out that ' the fighters of the Islamic terror group Laskar Jihad , after leaving behind a trail of blood and destruction on the Moluccan islands from 1999 onwards , have now become active on Sulawesi ' .
The result of this situation is that 300 000 of the Moluccas ' population of 10 million are now refugees , most of whom are Christians .
On the island of Sulawesi , the largest Christian town of Tentana , with a population of 50 000 , has been besieged by Laskar Jihad fighters .
Jafar Umar Talib , the leader of Laskar Jihad who was trained in religious warfare in Pakistan , claims that he has 10 000 fighters under his command .
Afghans and other foreigners form part of the Muslim militia against the Christians .
What progress has the EU made through the Council on the resolution 's appeal to the Indonesian authorities ' to dismantle the Laskar Jihad terror organisation , which is for the most part responsible for the cruelties of the past years in the Moluccas , and to bring the perpetrators to justice ' ?
Has there been collaboration with the USA and what action has the Council taken to secure an end to terrorist violence against the Christians of the Moluccas and Sulawesi ?
. ( ES ) Mr President , the Council is deeply concerned about the sectarian violence in Indonesia , regardless of the religious or ethnic origin of the victims .
The Council has expressed this concern to the Indonesian Government and the Union ' s other partners , as well as the United States , on several occasions .
The Council has urged the government to prevent more members of Laskar Jihad from reaching Malaca and central Sulawesi and ensure that those who are already there leave those areas .
There is still work to do and the Council will continue to take advantage of the cooperation and frank dialogue it has established with the Indonesian Government on these issues to work for an improvement in the situation .
I wish to thank the Spanish Presidency for its answer .
I also want to take the opportunity sincerely to welcome Spain to the European Parliament as the country holding the presidency of the European Union for the first half of this year .
I nonetheless want to ask a number of follow-up questions .
Does the Council believe that the Indonesian authorities have taken the necessary , adequate measures for dismantling the Islamic terrorist group , Laskar Jihad ?
Is it the Council ' s view that Laskar Jihad is continuing with its terrorist activities , or is any form of de-escalation now to be seen , with the prospect of a cessation of this violence against innocent people , mainly Christians in the Moluccas ?
Last of all , I wonder if the Council considers there to have been close cooperation between the United States and the European Union in combating this Muslim terrorist group .
. ( ES ) Unfortunately , Mr Sacrédeus , the measures taken are never sufficient to beat the terrorist threat .
Naturally , the Laskar Jihad organisation can be classed as an organisation of this type .
Therefore , I do not believe that the threat has been contained and nor do I believe that the Indonesian Government , however many measures it has taken , is able to deal with the threat to Indonesia posed by this very large organisation .
You ask me whether the European Union and the United States should cooperate .
I believe that this cooperation is at the heart of all the political declarations made since 11 September .
The European Union and the United States now have a common front in the fight against terrorist threats in any part of the world where they may take place and we are holding dialogue with the United States precisely in order to help Indonesia to contain the threat posed by this terrorist organisation .

Question No 10 , by Guido Podestà , which has been taken over by Mrs Sartori .
Question No 10 by ( H-0969 / 01 ) :
Subject : The situation of women in Nigeria - the case of Safia Husaini Tungar Tudu The case of a thirty-year-old Nigerian woman , who was married at the age of 12 and has four children , the last of whom was conceived as the result of rape , for which she has been sentenced to death by stoning , arouses serious concerns regarding the situation of women in many African countries , including Nigeria .
According to Sharia law a married or divorced woman is guilty of adultery if she has sexual intercourse with another man , even if , as in this case , she is the victim of rape .
The political and military power established under undemocratic regimes entails control over the private lives of those subject to it .
This control extends to the birth of children and hence women are more exposed to punitive and often inhumane laws .
Can the Council say what new steps it intends to take to ensure the abolition of practices which violate fundamental human rights ?
Can it also say what steps it intends to take to promote a process of democratisation and secularisation in countries such as Nigeria , where the interpretation given to religious law ( which in fact distorts the true meaning of the religion concerned ) adversely affects the rights of women in particular ?
What action will the Council take as soon as possible to ensure protection for the life and dignity of the Nigerian woman referred to above ?
Mr President , the Member States of the European Union and the European Commission have decisively supported , in a coordinated fashion , the international efforts in favour of Mrs Safia Husaini .
The European Union has studied the possibility of taking formal action in the event that the Islamic Court of Appeal , the Sokoto Sharia , confirms the sentence .
The European Union has already expressed its concern at sentences passed in accordance with Islamic criminal law , the Sharia , during the 57th sitting of the UN Human Rights Commission in 2001 .
The Member States of the Union and the European Commission - in coordination - have decisively supported international efforts in favour of Safia Husaini , in accordance with the meeting organised by the European Union ' s Heads of Mission in Abuja on 23 January .
The Spanish Presidency proposed to the Member States that we make a representation to the Nigerian Foreign Affairs Minister , in order to express the European Union ' s new position in the field of the application of the death penalty .
This representation was formally approved by the Council of Ministers of the Union , which took place last Monday , and has been carried out by the Presidency of the Council of the Union to the Government of the Federal Republic of Nigeria .

With regard to the broader issue of respect for fundamental rights and specifically women ' s rights in Nigeria and the rest of Africa , the Council is determined to pursue the policy which it has long been implementing in this field and , in particular , by means of the following instruments : the Cotonou Agreement , Article 9 ( 2 ) which lays down the parties ' obligations , their international commitments , in relation to the respect for human rights , and reaffirms the equality between men and women , the Cairo declaration and action plan approved at the Africa-Europe Summit held in Cairo in April 2000 , which insists on respect for human rights , the Common Position relating to human rights , democratic principles , the Rule of Law and good government in Africa 98 / 350 / PESC and Council Regulation ( EC ) 965 / 99 , which establishes the requirements for the application of Community development cooperation actions which contribute to achieving the general objective of development and consolidating democracy under the Rule of Law , as well as respecting human rights and fundamental freedoms and specifically Common Position 01 / 373 / PESC on Nigeria , which expressly mentions the respect for human rights .
Thank you , Mr President , for your comprehensive response to our question .
The events of recent days compel us , however , to call for a further Council initiative , for , as you will know , not only has another woman , in addition to Safiya Yakubu Hussaini , been sentenced to death by stoning - Aishatu Abubakar , whom the same court in the same region of Nigeria condemned to a similar sentence on similar grounds a few weeks ago - but the news has arrived today that , in the Sudan , a young 18-year old Christian woman named Abok Alfa Akok , who does not speak Arabic , has also been sentenced to stoning by what is , in this case , a civil , not a religious court , without being permitted a defence and without being given a linguistic translation either .


Well then , I believe that the undertakings assumed by the Council are important but that , alongside them , there should also be constant protection in individual cases .
I therefore place in your hands these two new cases as well as that of Safiya .
I fully agree with you that the Council must continuously monitor all these humanitarian cases which affect individuals and countries with which the European Union has a preferential relationship by means of the Cotonou Agreements , in this case Sudan and Nigeria .
I take very good note of both cases which , naturally , I am unaware of . But I will do what I can to obtain all the necessary information through the services of the Commission and through our own diplomatic services .
I assure you that the Presidency of the Council of the European Union will make the Member States aware of these facts , we will take the necessary measures and we will take immediate diplomatic action to protect the rights of the two poor women you have mentioned .
President-in-Office , the justice minister of Afghanistan recently announced that the new interim government would maintain the Sharia law sanctions of stoning women to death for adultery and of limb amputation for theft .
The latter penalty was even supported by Prime Minister Karzai in a statement made at a press interview in America .
The EU has just pledged EUR 1.5bn in aid to Afghanistan over five years at the Tokyo Conference .
Should this not be made conditional on the disapplication of internationally unacceptable , cruel and unusual punishments such as those I have just referred to ?
In fact , our aid to Afghanistan , for the development of the country , and the payment of the significant sums you have mentioned , which were laid down at the Tokyo Summit , are conditional from the outset , according to the Council ' s declarations , upon respect for human rights in Afghanistan and in particular the application of equal treatment between men and women .
I believe that in the case you have mentioned , the European Union must state that , although we respect the traditions and the religion of Afghanistan , we also demand that human rights be respected in that country .
And the execution of Islamic sentences is not compatible with our notion of respect for human rights .
Nevertheless , I would like to remind you that it is common practice in all Islamic countries to apply the Sharia , the Islamic law .
Afghanistan is not the only country where these violations are committed .
We have already heard what happens in some African countries .
It would take a very long time to list all the cases of application of Islamic sentences in other countries of the Middle East which there are genuine violations of human rights and in particular the rights of women .
I believe that the European Union must be a pioneer in terms of defending these rights , but we must take the necessary precautions not to offend religious feelings since , as you know , there is currently a debate about the clash between the Islamic and Christian civilisations and we need to apply the necessary prudence .
However , the case you mention must be taken into account and I will certainly raise it in the Council and the Commission so that it may be monitored and we will try to prevent this sentence being carried out .
Question No 11 by ( H-0971 / 01 ) :
Subject : Turkish ban on the foundation and operation of parties with the word ' communist ' in their name Human and democratic rights are systematically and persistently violated in Turkey , a country which is a candidate for membership of the EU .
One such instance is the ban on the foundation and operation of parties with the word ' communist ' in their name based on the antiquated provisions of Article 96 of the Law on political parties , which dates from 1920 .
The Socialist Power Party of Turkey was founded in 1993 and operates legally .
It has fought vigorously for democratic rights and takes part in elections .
At its last congress , it decided to change its name to the Communist Party of Turkey but , because of the abovementioned undemocratic law , it is in danger of being banned .
At the moment , the Turkish Parliament is in fact debating amending the law on political parties , which may provide an opportunity to abolish the undemocratic ban .
What is the Council 's view of the ban under Turkish law on the foundation and operation of communist parties ?
Does it consider that Turkey can become a member of the EU without first having lifted the ban ?
Will it raise the question of amending this undemocratic and reactionary law with the regime in Ankara so that the Communist Party can engage freely in political activity ?
In fact , Turkey is drawing up a draft amendment of the law on political parties .
However , the truth is that we do not know the exact content of this draft law because it has yet to be submitted to the Turkish Government .
We therefore only have references .
The Council is not aware , even from these references , that the activities of the Turkish Communist Party are being hindered nor that there is any threat to ban it on the basis of an obsolete provision of the former law on political parties .
In terms of human rights and fundamental freedoms in Turkey more generally , the Laeken European Council concluded that Turkey had made progress towards complying with the criteria set for accession , particular by recently amending its Constitution , and that there was therefore now more possibility of opening accession negotiations with that country .
Turkey is being encouraged to make more progress towards compliance with the accession criteria - the famous Copenhagen criteria - particularly in relation to human rights .
The Council is closely monitoring the efforts for institutional political reform currently being made by Turkey and is especially focussing on whether those reforms will lead to real improvements in relation to human rights and fundamental freedoms in that country .
As we all know , this situation is still highly unsatisfactory in many respects .
The Council will be sure to question Turkey in the event that the intended amendment of the law on political parties in any way threatens democratic freedoms .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I am astounded that the Council knows far less about this than the Turkish press .
For example , it is a known fact that the relevant committee of the Turkish National Assembly has submitted a bill on parties in which no changes have been made as regards the ban on the word ' communist ' .
I also find it hard to understand why the Council does not know that members of the Communist Party of Turkey are being prosecuted , given that 150 members have been arrested and their offices have been raided , all from the day it opened for business .
But apart from all that , there were one or two quite specific points in my question , to which I have not received a reply .
Does the Council consider that Turkey can be a candidate country , or rather can it become a member of the European Union without first having lifted the ban ?
I did not receive a reply to this specific question .
. ( ES ) I think I have made it clear , Mr President , that the Copenhagen criteria are absolutely fundamental before we can think about starting any type of negotiation on any hypothetical future Turkish membership of the Union .
I think I have made that clear . I am sure that the Member who asked the question is perfectly aware of the Copenhagen criteria and I therefore believe that this statement by the Council makes it absolutely clear that our view is that no type of negotiation can begin with Turkey until the Copenhagen criteria have been fully respected .
Question No 12 by ( H-0001 / 02 ) :
Subject : European Council support for a United Nations Convention on Disability Has the European Council discussed support for the proposed United Nations Convention on Disability , and which Member States are expected to vote in support ?
Will the President-in-Office arrange for this issue to be tabled for further discussion at the High Level Group on Disability ?
And will he use the Office of the Presidency to promote support in third countries outside of the EU ?
Mr President , the European Council did not debate the issue mentioned by Mr Howitt .
The Commission has taken no initiative in this area in relation to the Council .
I would also like to remind Mr Howitt that the high level group on disability does not belong to the Council but to the Commission , and it would therefore be both more practical and more appropriate for the Commission to provide information on its debates .
In it contacts with third countries , the Presidency will raise all the issues it considers important and appropriate to deal with .
Mr President , I do not think that is the most helpful answer a Member of the European Parliament has ever been given in this Chamber so perhaps I can ask the President-in-Office whether he could give me a little more encouragement .
Is he aware , for example , of the request from 37 million disabled people in Europe and many outside our borders that the United Nations should enforce better rights for disabled people ?
Is he aware that next year is going to be the European Year of Disabled People , and is he taking an interest in that ?
Is he aware that since 1996 we have had a rights approach to disability that would suggest that we should support such a Convention ?
In his answer he has given no evidence whatsoever that he is aware of those facts .
Given that he has admitted to this Chamber today that he and his colleagues have not even discussed this issue , at the very least will he respond to the request from this Parliament that he should table such a discussion ?
If the members of the high level group on disabilities convened by the Commission are all members of the Council , it is within his power to do that if he wishes .
Perhaps he will now answer the point .
I feel I have given you a clear answer to your question , Mr Howitt .
This does not in any way mean that the Council has no concern for disabled people .
But you asked me whether the European Council has discussed this issue and I have told you that it has not .
I have simply said that it has not discussed it , which does not mean that it is not going to discuss it or that it has no desire to , but simply that it has not yet done so because it has not had the opportunity so far .
This does not mean that the Council is unaware of the problems of disabled people or the coming events and international meetings on the disabled in which Member States and the European Union itself will have to adopt a position .
I have suggested that you address this question to the Commission , which , since it leads the high level group on the disabled , will be in a better position than me to give you a concrete answer .
As we all know in this House , disability rights feature prominently within the Spanish system .
Indeed , in many areas of disability rights Spanish law is a model that other Member States could usefully follow with regard to integration , access and equal treatment .
Following on from that , could I urge firstly the President-in-Office to use his good offices and his benign influence on his colleagues within the Council to ensure that there is a strong European Union voice and presence at the United Nations Convention on Disability ?
Secondly will the Spanish presidency guarantee that it will put equal access and equal rights for all disabled people in the European Union at the top of the agenda ?
Thirdly and finally , in preparing for 2003 as the International Year of the Disabled , will it also give extra support to the Special Olympics , which will take place within the European Union in 2003 ?
I simply want to reply to the honourable Member that I have taken good note of his suggestions to the Presidency and that we will always be prepared to contribute to the European Union taking on an increasingly active role in relation to disabled people and , in particular , in relation to the United Nations Convention on disability .
Question No 13 by ( H-0005 / 02 ) :
Subject : Appearances before the European Parliament and involvement in its business on the part of Spanish ministers during the Spanish Presidency The year 2002 has just begun and Spain has taken over the rotating EU Presidency .
The previous incumbent was Belgium and during its six-month term of office not only the country ' s Prime Minister and other government ministers , but also the government leaders and ministers of the various Belgian regions , appeared before the European Parliament and chaired some of its meetings .
Since it is laid down in the Spanish Constitution that the Kingdom of Spain is a state comprising autonomous communities which have exclusive powers that in certain cases are similar to and even greater than those of Belgium ' s regions , would the Spanish Presidency say why no plans have been made for representatives of any of Spain ' s autonomous communities to appear before the European Parliament and to take part in its proceedings ?
The Council would remind Mr Ortuondo that Article 203 of the Treaty establishing the European Union lays down that " The Council shall consist of a representative of each Member State at ministerial level , authorised to commit the government of that Member State " .
Apart from this provision , it falls to each Member State to decide the composition of its representation and , therefore , it falls to the Presidency to establish , in its capacity as such , how it will be represented in its appearances and parliamentary acts .
This decision will inevitably depend partly on national constitutional provisions , which differ from one Member State to another .
It therefore follows that the Council cannot make any comment on the decisions taken by the Presidency in relation to its representation , and in particular , to the contacts it maintains with the European Parliament .
I would firstly like to thank you for your answer to the previous question on this same subject .
As you will have realised , the reply just given by the President-in-Office of the Council is the same as the one he gave to Question No 6 .
I would like to point out that Article 203 of the Treaty establishing the European Communities speaks of ' ministerial rank ' and , both in the meetings of the Councils of Ministers and during the Presidency , there is quite naturally participation by representatives of the Belgian regions or autonomous communities , or whatever you want to call them , and also - as the MEP who spoke about this said earlier - the region or nation of Scotland , the German Länder or the Austrian States and other such examples within the Community .
In this regard , I would like to ask whether you consider the Spanish Government ' s action in this respect to be appropriate .
When talking about , for example , economic and financial affairs , or a plan for budgetary stability , it reaches agreements with the other governments of the Union , but when the same is to be raised on the level of the Spanish State , you impose it by law , instead of seeking agreement and consensus with the Communities which have exclusive competence in these areas .
I can only reply be repeating my previous answer on this issue .
It falls to each State to organise its representation in the Councils of Ministers and in Parliament in accordance with their own internal laws and constitutions .
Mr Ortuondo gives some correct examples and some less correct ones , because it is true that there may have been some Belgian representation or , in some cases , some representation from a German Land , but I do not remember ever seeing Scottish Ministers in any Council .
Perhaps he is confusing the Scottish Secretary , who is a Minister of the Central British Government , with a representative of the Scottish Government .
That is a great mistake .
There should not be any confusion on this issue and I would like to make it perfectly clear that it is the governments which decide on their representation and there is therefore nothing more to say on this issue .
With regard to Mr Ortuondo ' s question , there are two aspects which I would like to mention .
The first is the invoking of the constitutional foundations of a State , which are constantly being called into question by Mr Ortuondo ' s party , demonstrating its irresponsible and destabilising attitude .
The second is the curious analogy we have heard about other States of the Union , Belgium for example , when it is well known , except amongst those displaying ignorance or bad faith , that the territorial organisation of the Belgian State obeys a very complex and unique system , involving the interlinking of cultural and linguistic communities with political communities , and a system of compatibilities between federal responsibilities and regional responsibilities which is completely different to the situation of the Autonomous Communities in Spain .
In this context , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I would like to know whether you agree with the view that this rich diversity in the territorial organisation of the States making up the Union is something which stimulates , enriches and strengthens European democracy , which prevents homogenising reductionism - despite what Mr Ortuondo seems to think - and that , of course , it must be fully respected by the Community institutions .
Mr President , I have nothing to add to what I have already said .
I believe that the diversity of the Union is guaranteed by the respect for the constitutional systems of each country , and each country organises its presence in Councils , and during its presidency , and in other institutions , in accordance with its internal laws and constitutional provisions .
Mr Vidal-Quadras said that the party I represent , and I myself , want to subvert the Spanish Constitution .
The positions we advocate have nothing to do with subversion .
According to the Spanish Constitution , the Autonomous Community of the Basque Country , to which I belong , has certain exclusive competences in certain areas . On tax issues , for example .
Decisions are habitually made in the Council of Ministers of the European Union on fiscal issues while the interested parties are not represented there to defend themselves , as is the case with our Autonomous Community of the Basque Country and the Autonomous Community of Navarre .
We do not feel represented by the Madrid government because we have frequent differences on the issue of sovereignty ; a sovereignty which has not been granted us as a result of the generosity of the Madrid government , but which originates from the historic rights of the Basque people .
I would ask Members not to enter into debates on situations relating to their respective countries , but rather to put questions to the Council .
On the other hand , all opinions have the right to be expressed in this House as long as they end with a question , as has been the case with Mr Vidal-Quadras and other Members .
All I ask is that the Rules of Procedure be respected ; otherwise , the danger is that , during the Presidency of a particular country , questions will focus on problems and debates specific to that country .
As the author is not present , Question No 14 lapses .
Question No 15 by ( H-0010 / 02 ) :
Subject : Biological and toxin weapons On 15 November 2001 , Parliament adopted a resolution ( B5-0708 / 2001 ) on negotiations within the framework of the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention following the recent anthrax attacks .
At the fifth review conference of the Convention held in Geneva last November , the US delegation was the only one of the 144 countries represented which refused to recognise the legal commitments ensuing from the Convention . Will the Council , therefore , say what steps it will take in response to Parliament 's resolution to secure multilateral disarmament and the non-proliferation of biological and toxin weapons by way of a legally binding protocol ?
Do not worry , Mr President , I am pleased to answer this question .
As Mr Papayannakis no doubt knows , the European Union has been playing an active role in the negotiations with the ad hoc group of States which are parties to the Convention on Biological and Toxin Weapons and in the 5th review conference , held in Geneva from 19 November to 7 December 2001 .
This activity was based on the common positions adopted in 1996 , 1998 and 1999 and on the conclusions of the Council of 11 June 2001 .
The European Union therefore regrets that , after six years of negotiations on the basis of a unanimously agreed mandate , the 5th review conference of the Convention on Biological and Toxin Weapons has not managed to adopt either a final declaration or a document with concrete measures to strengthen that Convention .
To strengthen the Convention on Biological and Toxin Weapons is still one of the Council ' s priorities in the field of health .
In accordance with the conclusions of 10 December 2001 , on the repercussions of the terrorist threat on the European Union ' s non-proliferation , disarmament and arms control policies , the Union intends to actively promote the global and effective application of multilateral instruments in the field of non-proliferation , disarmament and arms control .
With regard to the Convention on Biological and Toxin Weapons , the European Union confirms that the mandate of the ad hoc group of States which are parties to the Convention is still valid .
The Union has decided to continue its work towards a successful conclusion of a 5th review conference of the Convention , newly convened for November of this year .
Thank you for your reply , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , and for your statements as to what the Council and the Union intend to do about these terrible weapons .
However , the problem which we are up against , Mr President-in-Office , is this : the United States wants out of the agreement because it is legally binding .
You say that we shall keep trying to achieve something more specific in the future .
My question is this : what talks are you holding with the United States , what can you do to make them change their mind and what information do you have on the matter ?
Because everything else depends on this .
I do not question your good intentions , what I do question is the analysis of the situation which the President-in-Office 's statement appears to contain .
In fact , we have one particular hope : that in November 2002 we may have an agreement at this 5th review conference of the Convention .
But that agreement will not naturally be complete if the United States does not participate , and this issue is therefore one of the issues included in the current dialogue with the United States , with a view to the preparation of the summit between the European Union and the United States which is expected to take place before the end of the Presidency - certainly in June , if not in April , since the date is yet to be decided .
Our argument with the United States is that , not only would the non-participation of the United States in this 5th review conference of the Convention and its new agreement damage the credibility of the whole international effort , but that to have a clear position on the Convention on Biological and Toxin Weapons is also one of the agreed actions which can be carried out jointly by the European Union and the United States in order to implement measures to combat the terrorist threat .
Because it is well know that these biological and toxin weapons may be used for criminal purposes by international terrorist organisations .
Therefore , the more committed the whole of international society is to this issue , and the United States in particular , - since it is one of the top producers of biological and toxin weapons - the better .
I believe that this is being included in the dialogue we are holding with the United States in the Senior Level Group and in the agreements we want to reach with the United States at the summit between the United States and the European Union , which is going to take place during this six-month period .
As the time allotted to Questions to the Council has elapsed , Questions Nos 16 to 37 will be replied to in writing , apart from Question No 36 which deals with an issue which is on the agenda .

That concludes Questions to the Council .
( The sitting was adjourned at 7.15 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Management of regional policy and the Structural Funds ( continued )
The next item is the continuation of the debate on the report ( A5-0006 / 2002 ) by Mr Pohjamo , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the management of regional policy and the Structural Funds ( 2001 / 2066 ( INI ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this own-initiative report is concerned with analysing problems in the use actually made of the Structural Funds and with submitting proposals as to how their management and effectiveness could be improved , not least with a view to the next pending revision of post-2006 regional policy .
The rapporteur has succeeded both in highlighting the improvements achieved in the wake of the 2000 reform of the Structural Funds and also in drawing our attention to difficulties in their application , especially the problems in connection with the delayed implementation of the programme .
It is these to which I wish to give particular attention .
Although it was an essential objective of the pre-2000 reform of the Structural Funds to avoid repetition of mistakes from the beginning of the 1994 planning period , but rather to get fully involved in the first year , this has only partly succeeded .
Negotiations on the programme still took up too much time .
The guidelines set out by the Commission were not always understood in the regions .
Negotiations were often delayed through the pace at which the Commission worked and through slow response times , which were sometimes contingent on new requirements imposed by the Commission . It is reported from the regions that these in turn were seen there as merely petty .
On the other hand , the Member States were not always prompt in sending in the programme documents and the additional items of information that had been requested .
All these things , Mr President , are facts - facts of which I had warned when I was the rapporteur presenting an own-initiative report in the same terms , appealing urgently for the start of a new planning period not to again be delayed as it had been in 1994 .
Let us then now draw the right and necessary conclusions for 2006 , or else reports of that sort will in fact be nothing more than wastepaper .
There should be no gaps occurring between programming periods .
That is why I support the rapporteur 's proposal that we should also examine whether in future there should not also be separation and limitation of the periods for which project-oriented programmes and Community initiatives run .
Ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , Mr Pohjamo ' s resolution included some amendments tabled by the Group of the Party of European Socialists and some tabled by Mr Fava and myself .

I would like to draw your attention to two amendments which I feel to be important : the amendment on the principle of additionality and the amendment clarifying the concept of cross-border region .
Additionality is essential so that Structural Funds appropriations supplement national funds rather than replacing them .
I would add that Parliament cannot and must not be a spectator in the management of structural expenditure .
In this respect , I would put forward two guidelines : firstly , the reform and modernisation of the public administration ; and secondly , the establishment of development banks consistent with PEP and SPD parameters .
I will end by calling upon Commissioner Barnier to take note of the fact that there needs to be some flexibility in the application of automatic decommitment in that the process must recognise those who are working successfully in the same Member State .
It is right that the idle should not be allowed to get away with it , but it is also right that those who benefit should be the best , the most far-sighted and the most modern .
Mr President , Parliament must make an assessment of the quality of projects according to the results achieved a priority , and the Commission must ensure that Parliament is in a position genuinely to carry out careful monitoring .
In this sense , the proposed informal working group will be useful .
Sometimes , however , the Commission does not respond within the time allowed and certain States are guilty of this too , particularly in the negotiation phases .
It is therefore appropriate to pause and take stock of the situation in order to enable the Commission to provide responses more quickly , to achieve uniformity of provisions on the different funds as quickly as possible , to ensure that we progress along the road of streamlining bureaucracy - making increasing numbers of regions and local communities accountable and providing them with consultancy services - and to speed up the automatic decommitment mechanisms so as to allow swift reallocation of funds and the drawing up of an annual detailed , specific report which will make it possible to proceed with full knowledge of the facts from evaluation to programming .
Moreover , a bridge programme should be envisaged allowing certain States , including Italy , to make use of the unused funds from the 1994-99 programming period , similarly to what happened at the end of the 1993 programming period .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Structural Funds were designed to support the effort that the Member States put into their regional development policy and thus to strengthen the economic , social and territorial cohesion of the European Union .
It must be noted that the aid provided by the Structural Funds to the most disadvantaged regions is absolutely vital and that the contribution of these funds has become essential in enabling certain regions , which are lagging behind in development , to catch up , particularly the outermost regions , which I know well .
The start of the new 2000-2006 programming period has once again shown us the problems in the practical implementation of the Structural Funds , with the Member States regretting the time taken by the Commission to approve the general programme guidelines and the Commission criticising the time taken by the Member States to submit their programming plans and the additional information requested .
It is essential that the next programme negotiations are kept within strictly limited , precise and binding time limits , so that the Member States and the Commission respect the rules laid down .
The time that elapsed between setting up the programmes is , without doubt , one of the reasons that explains why the initial figures on their execution are so disappointing , but this is , of course , not the only explanation .
Following Agenda 2000 , the processing of the funds was decentralised and each Member State gained overall responsibility for implementing , monitoring and ensuring the efficiency of the structural interventions on its territory .
As for France , I wish to formally appeal to the prefects of the regions that are eligible for Objectives 1 and 2 to make every effort to mobilise and encourage those responsible for the projects and to give them all the necessary technical support to enable them to carry out the programmes more successfully .
Unfortunately , it is often difficult to involve businesses in Community programmes , since the management of the projects appears complicated and the procedures appear slow .
This is an aspect that the national authorities must focus on , without fail , in order to enhance the attraction of Structural Funds in the private sector .
Lastly , to conclude with a firm proposal , I think that one of the ways to simplify and lighten the administrative burden would , in fact , be to introduce a single regional development fund in 2007 .
Mr President , Commissioner , we are debating the own-initiative report on the management of regional policy and the Structural Funds presented by Mr Pohjamo , whom I would like to thank for his good work .
The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance has tabled five amendments because we want to highlight some of the aspects relating to the issue we are dealing with .
Firstly , while we agree that cooperation with other agents - other than State and regional governments , that is to say , with local communities , NGOs , private bodies , etc. is beneficial in terms of achieving the economic , social and territorial cohesion of the Union , we do not believe that that cooperation has been satisfactorily respected in all the Member States , but that it has been applied in an unequal fashion .
We therefore affectionately urge the Commission to try to ensure that socio-economic and environmental cooperation be applied equally in all regions receiving Community Funds and to ensure that the programming of projects is subject to consultation with the parliaments and governments of the constitutional regions which have legislative powers .
We also demand the creation of clear indicators intended to assess the application of this cooperation principle .
Furthermore , within the framework of the guidelines for the intermediate evaluation of September 2002 , we want the Commission to define indicators for the efficient allocation of the reserve which , as well as financial management , take account of other aspects of management , such as cooperation , additionality and the quality of expenditure .
At the same time , we ask that , in the event that unspent resources are reallocated , the appropriations which are not used be directed towards the least-favoured regions which are most active and innovative , as well as measures in favour of sustainable development .
Finally , in support of the rapporteur ' s idea - with regard to including the quality aspect in the annual monitoring of programmes subsidised by the Commission - we propose an assessment of their contribution to the implementation of the Union ' s strategies relating to sustainable development and employment .
We hope that our amendments will receive the majority support of Parliament , since they will serve to improve our Community economic and social objectives .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would firstly like to thank Mr Pohjamo for his excellent report , for the interest he always shows , as do the other members of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism and its new chairman , Mr Caveri , and as did the previous chairman , Mr Hatzidakis , for their collective efforts to make the management of regional policy and Structural Funds more straightforward and more efficient .




Ladies and gentlemen , I think it is very important for the Commission to receive both encouragement and constructive criticism .
I have been listening very closely and with great interest to each of the speakers and , if I may , I would like to write to some of you within the next few days in order to clarify a number of points .
Mr Pohjamo , the Commission supports your comments regarding the financial execution , particularly the very severe and very strict n + 2 rule that is to be applied , as well as your remarks on monitoring and control and also on the quality of the programmes and projects .
Like you , we have seen that there are some difficulties in the management of funds .
In the few minutes that I have , I would like to make three comments to clarify or explain the work of the European Commission .
My first comment concerns the new rules for the 2000-2006 period , which were laid down for a new working method and which also defined new responsibilities for those involved in the management of Structural Funds .
Each of the persons involved needed time to prepare and get up to speed .
In the case of our Directorate-General , these changes came about at the same time as the internal reorganisation of the whole institution .
I am not looking for excuses ; I simply want to give an explanation .
These new regulations were also drawn up from much stricter requirements regarding the quality of programmes .
I am thinking , for example , of the provisions governing the ex-ante appraisal .
In this area too , the various players needed time to understand and grasp these new requirements .
There are also areas where this change required a choice to be made between several objectives .
I shall give an example that you yourself , Mr Pohjamo , mentioned .
You quite rightly pointed out that the negotiations on the programme documents took an average of eight to twelve months to complete , instead of the five months scheduled by the legislator .
The truth , and I want to be honest about this , as I always am before this House , is that a five-month deadline to draft a document that is intended to cover a seven-year period was not realistic , when you understand the tough challenges involved and the amounts involved in the Structural Funds .
A choice had to be made between completing the job rapidly , sometimes even in a hurry , and quality .
The Commission , I must say , and I think that you will acknowledge this , decided to put the quality of the programme documents before all else .
Given the excessive number of months taken to complete the programming - and I repeat , Mr Pohjamo , that I took careful note of your comment , and I may come back to this point later when we discuss the report by Mr Musotto - I decided , in future , to propose that the Commission anticipate , as far as possible , the presentation of its proposals on the new regional policy , namely , the new agenda beginning in 2007 , so that we can begin programming and implementing projects at the very beginning of the agenda , rather than two years later , because I share your sentiment .

Second , within the limits of the room for manoeuvre that these texts allow , the Commission is already committed to responding to certain problems that you have raised , Mr Pohjamo .
I would firstly like to reiterate our desire to approach the management of Structural Funds in a transparent manner , and the communication that the Commission adopted on 5 July on the results of the programming of funds for Objective 1 between 2000-2006 is evidence of this .
The Commission has also recently simplified the procedures for handling programming complements , which was an area of criticism .
I heard many regional chairmen and ministers voice this criticism .
I also decided to set up , in order to study all the areas where we could simplify matters , a working group between my office and the Directorate-General on regional policy , so that we could make specific progress with simplification .
Remember that the commissioner speaking to you , ladies and gentlemen , is speaking to you using a wealth of experience and hindsight that I have gained , and cannot forget , from being chairman of a local authority in his own country .
Therefore , I understand very well this need to reduce bureaucracy and excessive complications .
The only boundary that I have , to tell the truth , and which I will not exceed , is that I must supply accounts , accurate accounts , sometimes very detailed accounts on several thousand euro , both to the budgetary control authority - in other words , the European Parliament - and to the Court of Auditors .
It is my personal responsibility , that of the Commission , to provide fair accounts when they are requested .

As regards the sensitive question of natural or ecological disasters , which you mentioned in your report , Mr Pohjamo , I wish to point out that changes can be made to the programmes , as we have done in the past , with the Italian , Portuguese and Greek programmes , for example , when there were earthquakes between 1997 and 1999 , or , more recently , in France , because of the hurricane .
That does not , of course , take into account the freedom that the national and regional authorities have within the programmes adopted by the Commission to finance projects that they believe to be most applicable and , if necessary , to re-deploy or re-programme appropriations .
My third comment is that I naturally want to reiterate that everyone , myself in particular , must comply with the regulations that the legislator wanted in order to supervise the management of the Structural Funds .
It is in the light of this reminder that I must examine certain proposals that you have put forward , Mr Pohjamo .
Therefore , your proposals on imposing penalties for infringing the additionality principle or for cutting short a programming period are to be taken into account in the current debate on the future of the cohesion policy .
I took note of these proposals and the comments for use in the debate and I will take them into account .
But beware of proposals that could involve modifying the legislative framework , or even amending the Treaty itself , such as the idea of creating a single regional development fund .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , whilst respecting the competences and the responsibilities of our respective institutions , I would like to reaffirm to you that the Commission is at your disposal and is willing to loyally fulfil its duty to keep Parliament informed .
It will do this by regularly reporting back on the use of the Structural Funds , including by objective , as I have started to do for Objective 1 and as I will do for Objective 2 ; by systematically informing the House of our work by means of reports , including reports which provide assessments , and by coming before the committees on a regular basis , such as the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , and the Committee on Budgetary Control .
In fact , I shall be doing this in a few days ' time .
I think that together this forms a solid basis for a genuinely transparent , sincere and ongoing dialogue between our institutions .

Lastly , I would like to confirm the links that I am establishing between the report by Mr Pohjamo and the next report , and that all these comments on improving the management of Structural Funds will be very useful to me , to us , in drawing up the Commission guidelines on the future regional policy .
I believe that better management of appropriations , provided in a timely fashion , for useful projects in each of our regions , that the proper use of Structural Funds during this period , will be evidence and an argument for pursuing , or even stepping up all our actions by revamping regional policy in the next agenda .
That is why , Mr Pohjamo , I would like to express my sincere thanks to you for the time that you have taken , for your initiative in drawing up this report on the current management of Structural Funds .
( Applause )
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Economic and social cohesion
The next item is the report ( A5-0007 / 2002 ) by Mr Musotto , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the second report from the Commission to the Council , the European Parliament , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions on economic and social cohesion ( COM ( 2001 ) 24 - C5-0527 / 2001 - 2001 / 2207 ( COS ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it must be pointed out that this report is being tabled before Parliament at a particularly important historical and political moment in European integration , namely just before the start of the Convention which is to lay the foundations of the new Europe , a Convention of which Commissioner Barnier is an important member .
We are therefore especially glad that he can be here today .
It must be said from the outset that cohesion policy is a major success story in terms of Community integration . Indeed , it is , has been in the past , and will continue to be , one of the cornerstones of that process .
Consistently with the Commission ' s second report , we have noted that between 1988 and 1998 per capita GDP in Objective 1 regions rose from 63 % to 70 % of the Community average - and this is a great success - moreover , the benefits of cohesion have not been limited to direct recipients of related funding but have also extended to countries which are net contributors in terms of exported goods and services .
Of course , the process has not yet reached its conclusion .
Much still remains to be done and there are difficulties to address and overcome , including , in particular , the scourge of unemployment , which , I am sad to say , is affecting many regions where the unemployment rate has not dropped at all .
We need infrastructural investments in order to eliminate the marginalisation caused by geographical location and the remoteness of the islands and the most outlying regions ; accessibility is a determining factor in terms of the competitiveness of an area and it needs to be improved , although without incurring excessive environmental costs .
In future , cohesion policy must be recast , first and foremost to cater for the changed circumstances which enlargement will bring for all of us , but it is also vital that the future regional policy should be based on the results of Commission documents , particularly the most recent document issued a few days ago , known as the periodic report .
I am afraid to say that the gap between rich and poor will grow as , after enlargement , one sixth of the Community population will have an income of barely 40 % of the Community average .
Preaccession instruments such as ISPA and the Sapard programme have been set up to assist the candidate countries , to enable them to prepare for the new situation of which they will have to become a part ; these have been essential tools for the transition from candidate countries to Member States .
However , we need to promote a genuine regional development policy . In this regard , I feel that the European spatial development perspective can serve as an important technical source of major integration and development .
There are two key objectives to pursue : solidarity towards the new Member States and avoiding penalising , indeed protecting , those currently benefiting from cohesion policies .
A major effort therefore needs to be made in terms of solidarity - especially political solidarity ensuring that all the peoples are involved and are provided with the requisite information - in economic and financial policy .
The ' statistical convergence ' must not be mistaken for ' real convergence ' by the current beneficiaries , who will certainly not automatically become richer simply as a result of the accession of poorer regions .
We need administrative methods which will improve efficiency ; we need to streamline , clarify and facilitate the demarcation between the role of the Commission and that of the regional and national levels ; it will be necessary to simplify procedures increasingly and we need greater subsidiarity and more decentralisation .
It will also be essential to rationalise the support instruments by reducing the number and size of funds and better coordinating Community policies and cohesion policies .
Regions which continue to lag behind in terms of development , measured in terms of unemployment and other criteria in addition to per capita income , must be maintained under Objective 1 .
Lastly - and this is a point of contention which prompted wide debate - the allocation of financial resources must be increased or , at least , revised and brought up to a sufficient level : the threshold of 0.45 % is an absolute minimum below which it is impossible to go .
We hope that Parliament and the Commission will both call for a increase in the budget dedicated to the future resources of cohesion policy .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs . ( DE ) Mr President , the Commission 's report and Mr Musotto 's are laudable , the one for its analytical description of the situation and the other for its supplementary proposals , although the observations of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs were taken into account only to a somewhat modest extent .
Further to them , though , I would like to elaborate , from my Committee 's point of view , another issue which has almost been pushed into obscurity .
Commissioner , we have learned essential lessons from the difficulties we have had in raising poorer regions or suffering former industrialised zones to the level within the European Union ; they should spur us on to improve things and should serve as a benchmark for the process of enlargement .
It is above all the poorer industrial zones in the future Member States whose need for massive restructuring measures causes me great concern .
I refer above all to coal and steel regions ; the steel industries in these countries are absolutely incapable of competing with our own , and the collieries are a potential problem .
I do not want to go at this juncture into what will happen if we are unable to give our new friends sufficient aid .
I will only observe that , as the ECSC 's expiry is imminent , we no longer have a suitable instrument in this field .
I reiterate that now because the ECSC continued to be of excellent service to us in recent years , no cofinancing is needed and the system of financing could in any case have been adapted .
We also have to make solidarity payments to the applicant countries .
I reiterate that now because the new States will not have adequate access to financing .
I have touched on this issue now because the Commission played a considerable part in changing this instrument without envisaging the difficulties in the process of enlargement or even giving them some thought .
Do something about this problem , Commissioner !
The problem is not a small one .
We do not have enough instruments suited to the processes of adaptation while enlargement is going on .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , when considering the report we are now discussing , on the future of cohesion after enlargement , the Committee on Women ' s Rights and Equal Opportunities unanimously approved the following fundamental principles :
firstly : cohesion policy , as defined in the Treaties , is a crucial pillar for the future of European integration and must not , therefore , be renationalised ;
secondly : the active promotion of a policy of equality between men and women is a prerequisite for achieving real economic and social cohesion ;
thirdly : the fact that disparities between the richest and poorest regions are predicted to double following the planned enlargement to a further ten countries and a significant fall in per capita income makes it crucial that the sum currently spent by the Union on cohesion polices is at least 0.45 % of GDP , and for the sake of coherence , this amount must be increased .
I should also like to draw your attention to the objective laid down at the Lisbon Summit of achieving , in the European Union , in 2010 , a 60 % rate of female employment , because this increase in women working is essential not only in order to increase the European GDP , but also to finance the future of social security and to bring about an increase in tax revenues .
I therefore ask the Commission to consider gender equality as an integral part of the Community polices that contribute to economic and social cohesion ; to include the aspect of gender and equal treatment between men and women in cohesion policies and assess , on the basis of precise indicators and quantified objectives , the contribution that economic and social cohesion makes to achieving the Community strategy for equal treatment and opportunities between men and women .
Mr President , I must congratulate Mr Ìusotto on his report , which is a job extremely well done .
We must look , first , at what conclusions we can draw on the basis of progress so far and , secondly , at the challenges facing us .
As regards what conclusions we can draw from the policies applied so far , what we can say is that we have clearly made progress , but that this progress has varied from one Member State to another .
In some Member States there have been very positive results and a great deal of progress , while in others such as my own , unfortunately , the results have not been as positive as they might have been .
This means that governments need to get the message , especially in the light of the new regulation now being applied , which is more decentralised than the previous regulation , and do what they can to bring about the results which other countries have achieved .
Secondly , the question of enlargement is now a factor , bringing with it even greater demands .
Because numerous poor countries are joining , this will , as we all know , artificially inflate the income of numerous regions in comparison with the Community average .
Because of the statistics , numerous regions will cease to be covered unless they take measures during a programming period .
Consequently , 0.45 % of the Community GDP earmarked for the Structural Funds must be the lower limit .
We cannot drop any lower and have reliable policies .
Many of my fellow Members disagree with this view and they do , of course , have every reason to put forward their arguments .
But what we have to ask ourselves , especially those of us who really believe in the European Union and its prospects , is just how much money we are spending from the Member States ' GDP in order to achieve the ambitious objectives set by the European Union .
Is it because we are spending so much money that we object every time the Community budget increases ?
At some point we must realise that ambitious objectives cannot be achieved without the necessary funding .
Mr President , I wish to start by thanking the rapporteur for the work he has done , which has enabled us to make out a good basis for the years to come .
I would also like - and I think this might be permitted me - to say a word in praise of our own group , whose discussions , which were highly intensive and also sometimes rigorously conducted , produced uniform outcomes , something I consider to be very important in this area .
I want to deal with those essentials that are of significance to us .
The first point I wish to make , Commissioner , is that we join with you in rejecting the renationalisation of regional policy .
That is for us of primary importance .
Efforts are being made in certain Member States to reclaim this policy for the national level .
We here are quite united in repudiating this .
Cohesion policy makes clear European solidarity , which we do not want to lose , but rather to emphasise in the future .
On this we , Parliament and Commission , stand shoulder to shoulder .
My second point is that we seek greater coherence - between regional policy on the one hand and , in particular , the common agricultural policy on the other .
We could perhaps engage in a dialogue , even with Commissioner Fischler , on how we might manage this , without which our goals for rural areas , and the agricultural policy 's goals for rural areas , will not always be found in the same direction , and this is something we must work on .
It is also beyond dispute that going below the 0.45 % level imperils the cohesion objectives , so we just have to become more efficient , as has also been made abundantly clear by Mr Pohjamo 's report , which we were discussing earlier .
Now to my final point . We need to achieve a balance between the candidate countries and the regions we have supported to date .
I think it is not at issue that we must make enormous efforts for the candidate countries , that there must also be a cohesion instrument to help them , and this was also mentioned in the interim report you presented last week .
We must also , though , give thought to the need to continue to bring the regions we used to support up to the EU average .
If we manage this balancing act , I believe we will gain Europe greater acceptance .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I wish , on behalf of my group , to congratulate Mr Musotto on his report , which calls attention to some pertinent matters .

The measures to achieve economic balance have been insufficient : they have been heading in the right direction , but they have been insufficient .
Regional and social differences in terms of prosperity have even increased in the present Member States .
In future we must pay attention to strengthening rural vitality and diversity in regions which are unfavourable in terms of geographical location and natural conditions .
Additional costs resulting from difficult conditions , for example in island regions and mountain areas , must be compensated for with combined efforts and precisely defined regional policy measures .
Furthermore , the sharp disparities in unemployment rates and structural problems must be taken seriously in planning regional structural policy .
The commitment of SMEs and skills and know-how to projects is an important priority .
Aid action under the Structural Funds must also be better coordinated with national employment targets .
GNP alone is inadequate as a criterion in determining eligible areas .
We have to equally consider permanent problems associated with climatic and geographical conditions .
For example , extremely sparsely populated areas , long journey times , and cold and hot climates mean additional costs , which will also be there after enlargement .
An effective cohesion policy requires that sufficient financing is safeguarded .
There are actually rather different views in my group regarding how that can be addressed .
Whatever the case , it is important to have improved coordination between the various forms of aid granted out of the funds available .
The enlargement of the Union requires a reinforced cohesion policy .
Enlargement must not go ahead at the expense of the worse-off regions , but through joint efforts .
It is important to ensure that all the Union ' s resources are spent effectively , and that includes the most remote regions .
We have to ensure together that the whole area of the Union is included in the single market and derives benefit from it .
For that reason , cooperation with the peripheral areas is more important than ever .
Mr President , my first point is that this is where one normally praises the rapporteur . I cannot , unfortunately , do that on this occasion , as the rapporteur did not succeed in developing a discussion in the committee that would lead to a common position by Parliament on the Commission 's proposals , nor , indeed , did he make the effort to do so .
I see this as a great pity , as a core report and a core position on the part of Parliament are just what is needed .
The Greens , by contrast , have a clear position .
They reject all attempts to protect vested rights and the exceptions to them .
Solidarity between regions must remain the supreme imperative , whilst there must not be such a thing as first and second-class Europe .
In consequence , the Structural Funds must primarily benefit the poorest regions , which just happen to be in the East .
That means that a phasing-out is at the same time an important instrument , and it also cushions the present regions in receipt of support .
Option 2 highlights the problems and offers a solution , and hence it is Option 2 that enjoys our full support .
At the same time though - and this is my next point - our group objects to the Commission 's tactic of involving the candidate countries in the management of the Structural Funds at too late a stage and then making a saving at the end of the day .
Last week ' s proposal strikes me as scandalous .
It economises on the cohesion policy rather than introducing it earlier , in the pre-accession process .
That is why we urge that a start be made now , with the candidate countries , on phasing-in , on setting up the payment agencies , on training in the management of Structural Funds , in order to make decentralised structural policy , rather than centralised project-based policy , the objective of the Structural Funds .
Future coalition policy must be characterised by sustainable development and participation by local actors , and we must make a start on this now .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , unlike Mrs Schroedter , I regard the final result of the Committee 's vote on Mr Musotto 's report as a success .
The report demonstrates , firstly , a balanced assessment of the disparities within the European Union , which continue to be marked , secondly , the challenge thrown down by enlargement , and thirdly , the need for improvements in the area of the EU 's structural and cohesion policies .
I would very much like to highlight four fundamental points .
The first is that there must be no renationalisation of Structural Fund policy .
I can save myself the effort of justifying this , as Mr Duin has already done that for me .
Secondly , a polycentric model of space would be a sensible approach to counteracting the disparity between the centre and the periphery .
Thirdly , there is a need for improved coordination among the Structural Funds as well as of structural policy with the other Community policy areas , especially the common agricultural policy and fiscal and economic policy .
Fourthly , consistent application of the bottom-up and partnership principles at every stage - planning , implementation , monitoring and evaluation would not only promote closeness to the citizens , but also the subsidiarity principle .
What is imperative , quite apart from the need to continue with aid for the underdeveloped regions of the present Member States , is that the soon-to-be Member States of the European Union must enjoy our full solidarity with them , which means the involvement of these countries , with equal rights , in EU structural policy , without allowing the present Member States to fall by the wayside .
Serious shortfalls in development make it , in my view , already perfectly clear that even 0.45 % of Europe 's GDP will not be sufficient to do this .
Provision of support and transnational cooperation in the border regions will be of great significance as enlargement takes its course .
Justice has not , in my judgement , been adequately done to this in the report .
The course for the Structural Funds , with their criteria and indicators for support , must be set in such a way that economic and social cohesion is also reflected in falling unemployment figures .
My own country , the Federal Republic of Germany , is setting a bad example in this respect , for unemployment in the ' Objective 1 ' regions is rising dramatically .
We have a rate of over 20 % , but this figure is , fortunately , not as high in the more developed regions .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Title XVII of the Treaty establishing the European Community , particularly Article 158 thereof , includes among the Union ' s political priorities the promotion of the Community ' s ' overall harmonious development ' , aiming at ' reducing disparities between the levels of development of the various regions and the backwardness of the least-favoured regions , including rural areas ' .
Personally , I feel that it is necessary to continue to pursue this objective with a coherent , continuing , sustainable policy .
The second report on EU cohesion presented by Commissioner Barnier depicts a situation which has improved but which has certainly not been resolved .
It is clear that the progress made has not been uniform and that severe regional disparities remain which - as rightly pointed out by the rapporteur - are increasing rather than diminishing .
With regard to the objectives , I fully support the position of my fellow member , Mr Musotto .
The criterion for deciding which regions are eligible for receiving aid lays down the threshold of 75 % of average Community per capita GDP .
My personal feeling is that , as of 2006 , it would certainly be more appropriate to use the unemployment rate as a measure , for the entry of poorer regions which are in greater need of aid will certainly not raise the level of the regions currently under Objective 1 .
Mr President , the forthcoming enlargement of the Union gives this debate on economic and social cohesion a special dynamic .
Indeed , it is evident that when the candidate countries join , the current system will prove to entail too heavy a financial burden .
This forces us to make choices .
The Commission has already indicated a few options , but we must give this matter some more thought .
We believe that , in some cases , a policy in support of economic and social cohesion that also supplements national policy is useful and desirable .
The Structural Funds have a special and relatively broad task in this respect .
The Cohesion Fund , on the other hand , pertains to one particular aspect of economic cohesion , namely participation in EMU .
In our view , this should also be at the heart of cohesion policy : helping Member States meet the convergence criteria , both before and after enlargement , without drawing a distinction between old and new . In that way , not too much will need changing .
The reports of the Commission have also proven that the current system works .
The Cohesion Fund is intended to provide economic stimuli on the basis of transparent , clearly defined criteria .
As far as we are concerned , this is how things will remain , because otherwise we run the risk of losing our way in a structure of soft criteria , and the European and Monetary Union cannot survive on soft criteria .
That is why I have tabled a number of amendments to which an honest but plain approach is central .
I hope that fellow MEPs will give this matter serious thought .
Mr President , the Committee on Industry considers this report to be quite positive . It feels that the indicators in euros paint a more reliable picture than the current measurement and eligibility criteria and also considers that the unemployment indicators are important because in some regions , only 44 % of people of working age are in employment , although disparities in production are also significant .
The Committee on Industry also takes the view that the concentration of the Union ' s economy in a triangle which is twice or four times as productive as the outlying regions is one of the problems accentuating these disparities and making it difficult to correct them , and is of the opinion that future programming must make a qualitative assessment of the various indicators .
With regard to enlargement , we must allow greater flexibility in the way funds are used , in line with the specific characteristics of each State .
The Committee on Industry supports an increase in the Union ' s financial effort for cohesion policy , specifically by making competition tougher and by adjusting the budgets of Community policies . It takes the view that any policy that is given greater financial resources than cohesion policy could neutralise it and that the most developed countries grant production aid that almost equals the Community budget .
The lack of tough competition favours neither cohesion nor integration and is one reason for ongoing criticism within the WTO .
The Committee on Industry urges the Commission to guarantee the creation of a European energy and communications market that respects universal service , prioritises energy efficiency and research , energy saving and the use of renewable energies .
The Committee considers it essential to complete infrastructures in the fields of accessibility and transport in order to reduce the effects on the competitiveness of the current outlying regions , without which the efforts for cohesion that we have already made will suffer .
The Committee wishes to draw attention to the effects on the price and the taxation of energy in the outermost and overseas regions . It recommends that endogenous energies should be developed as well as clean and safe technologies for the use of coal , nuclear energy and hydrocarbons .

Mr President , Commissioner , congratulations first to Mr Musotto on a fine report , and I say this against the backdrop of the harsh criticism by the Greens , whose attitude I do not share .
I would like , in my contribution to this discussion , to focus on the future of regional policy .
Reference has already been made several times this evening to the reconciliation of two fundamental needs with each other , which must be possible , with a high degree of solidarity towards the new Member States on the one hand , but also , on the other , solidarity with those regions that are at present lagging behind or undergoing economic transition .
To put it another way , even if it is generally acknowledged that the regions in all the applicant countries must be supported as a matter of priority , the ' Objective 1 ' regions of the present fifteen Member States , which will , in the course of enlargement , lose their eligibility for support only because of their relatively high standard of living in an enlarged EU , that is , only by dint of the cosmetic use of statistics , should not overnight be excluded from any opportunity to be supported .
Commissioner , it will be necessary over the coming months to discuss how to guarantee equal treatment of these regions , which have yet to complete the process of economic convergence , with the areas being embraced by enlargement .
Political and economic considerations mean that future cohesion policy must not concentrate exclusively on regions whose development is lagging furthest behind , but it must also take into account the advantages and disadvantages in urban areas , in areas undergoing socio-economic change , in regions with permanent natural disadvantages and also the cross-border dimension .
The financial means this policy needs must of course be made available .
The present threshold of 0.45 % of Community GDP must therefore not fall any lower - that too was mentioned several times this evening - in order that cohesion policy may not be jeopardised .
At the present time , we have in any case not yet exhausted the possibilities open to us .
Everything else must be tested by reference to the new financial framework and in the light of the results of enlargement .
I therefore think it inappropriate to be already , as a precaution , articulating demands for the replenishment of funds .
Ladies and gentlemen , in discussing Mr Musotto 's report , we obviously want to express our concerns about the future of political cohesion in the Union , given that , if the gap between the rich and the poor is to narrow and they are to feel that they belong to the same European body , they need to converge economically and socially .
Of course , our starting point is fundamentally contradictory .
We want much greater enlargement , but without providing the corresponding funds and we invent lower and lower cohesion targets along the lines of " if the mountain won 't come to Mohammed , then let ' s take Mohammed to the mountain " .
Be that as it may , we face a very tricky problem and we are required to resolve it in less than optimum circumstances , while keeping up the fight to improve those circumstances .
Obviously , we do not want a twin-track Europe , as previous speakers have stressed , but we want a multi-track Europe even less .
So our objective must be to help the new regions where they need help , but without abandoning the old regions which also need help , when they need help .
So I think we need to state that 0.45 % is inadequate and that the Cohesion Fund and other Community initiatives need to keep functioning as they have done so far , given that they have proven to be extremely efficient .
And of course we must take a very careful look at the future of political cohesion , in conjunction with the policy of sustainable development and agricultural policy . It is our duty here to avoid stop-gap , hasty solutions which might prove to be the undoing of our farmers , whom we need for the countryside , for the environment , for our very existence .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , European regional policy includes a differential element , which is dictated by geography and which defines the outermost regions .
They are distant , isolated , fragmented and are highly dependent on the outside , and they have been experiencing inconsistent development since the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam , which allowed the application of specific measures to correct their backwardness .
Over recent days , the authorities of these regions have been meeting in the Canary Islands to analyse , together with the representatives of the European Commission and the three States involved , the situation of these special regions in relation to social and economic cohesion .
I am sure that , as well as asking for special treatment , they will have requested some of the measures which Mr Musotto is asking for today in his report - and I congratulate him also - in which he stresses the need to differentiate between statistical convergence and real convergence , as well as the suitability of using alternative indicators to per capita income , such as unemployment , the lack of infrastructures , the lack of transport and energy , double insularity , the training of human resources and the levels of ozone in the outermost regions .
In this way , I am sure that their economic and social development will not be restricted and Europe will have clearly demonstrated its solidarity with its people .
Mr President , the Musotto report is a good report .
The overall thrust is quite correct .
The purpose of Cohesion Funds is to counteract the natural centrifugal forces of a large single economic and monetary unit , which is what the European Union and the euro zone are , by helping the less advantaged regions come up to the level of the more prosperous ones .
This is the point : if the less advantaged remain less advantaged , the Cohesion Funds will have failed in their purpose .
But that is why , contrary to what Mr Mussotto and the Committee on Regional Policy demand , we should stick to the 75 % of average Community GNP as a graduation point .
Having reached that level the pump will have been adequately primed and the graduating region , with a suitable transitional process , should be well able to continue up the escalator to 100 % and higher .
Surely it is only reasonable that at that point these Cohesion Fund resources should be reallocated to those regions which lie further behind .
That is why I will vote against recitals O and R of Mr Musotto 's report .
There must also be financial discipline .
An open-ended honey pot is not conducive to encouraging self-help and self-reliance .
This is why I cannot countenance leaving open-ended the possibility of an even higher percentage of European Union GDP being committed to cohesion policies .
0.45 % should be quite adequate and will make us hone our priorities and procedures , even in the context of enlargement .
So the second half of paragraph 57 , or any compromise of similar effect which leaves the amount be made available open-ended , is not acceptable .
Given these small but significant changes I will be very pleased to support Mr Musotto 's report as an important contribution to the future well-being of all parts of our European Union .
Mr President , I would like to thank the many Members who have helped to enhance this resolution with over 50 amendments .
I would also like to make three brief suggestions to the Commission , for - like many other Members - I am convinced that cohesion is not a financial obligation but , first and foremost , a resource , and that if we do not have a Europe of equal opportunities we will never have Europe .
That said , I will turn to the first two suggestions , which , moreover , have already been put forward this evening .
I feel that it would be appropriate to reflect on the parameters , for the gross domestic product may well be in danger of becoming inadequate as an indicator of the real state of well-being or distress of our countries .
We therefore need to assess other factors as well such as the rate of unemployment , the quality of infrastructure and the cost of labour .
My second suggestion is this : since I feel that politics should always prevail over arithmetic , I would call upon Parliament and the Commission not to concentrate on the effects of enlargement as portrayed by statistics , although I do believe deeply in enlargement .
Indeed , we will strive to ensure that no government can see it as a handicap , for it will certainly be a great political asset for Europe .
That said , we would like to avoid certain regions unexpectedly finding themselves in a state of wealth for purely statistical reasons .
Politics must continue to take precedence over arithmetic in this sense .
Here is my third suggestion : we should reinvigorate the strategic profile of our cohesion policy , learning to invest in non-material resources such as training , knowledge and information .
We feel that this is the road to take if integration is to have any practical meaning .
Mr President , last week this debate was dominated by some unfortunate news for cohesion .
In committee we saw the discharge of the 2000 budget , with an execution of 56 % of objective 1 , 4.5 % of objective 2 and 0 % of Community initiatives .
We are not talking about the cohesion funds .
The Commissioner , as he told us , wrote a letter to the Presidents of the various countries , reminding them of the ' n + 2 ' rule , that is , that funds may disappear after two years of not being executed .
That is by way of a precaution , amongst other things , and I think it is correct .
The Commission proposed 0.14 % of the budget to solve the problems of enlargement .
In any event , I am very pleased with the report by Mr Musotto , in which he makes an enormously positive assessment of regional policy and cohesion policy .
It is a successful policy which is going to ensure that soon there will be almost no Objective 1 regions amongst the Europe of the 15 .
The messages of Mr Musotto ' s project are clear : procedures must be taken seriously .
I am pleased that the Commissioner has maintained what Parliament proposed : that the programming period be brought forward two years to the next financial perspectives .
He also sends a message relating to the quality of investments and participation , and the implementation of the partnership , which has not yet happened .
But the star has been enlargement : enlargement itself , the effect of enlargement on the other regions that currently receive aid and the absence of a reply to the four questions , Commissioner .
An apparent absence of a reply , since you can give us a satisfactory reply through good work , which is easy if done with common sense and if we believe in cohesion .
Mr President , I will end by saying to the Commissioner that Parliament trusts that the Commission will obtain that response which we all need .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by congratulating Mr Musotto on his excellent work .
It is difficult to not repeat points which have already been made by other speakers at this stage in the debate .
I will be brief .
One : cohesion policy has proved to be a policy that works , and the report confirms this .
It may not work as well as we would expect or like it to , but it is a policy that yields results .
What is more , in many regions , for many of our fellow citizens , it is sometimes the only practical , positive , friendly aspect of the European Union that they see .
This is an asset which increases the spirit of European citizenship and overall cohesion .
My second point is a fact : we can try to postpone it , ignore it or put off dealing with the issue , but it is still a fact .
In practical terms , enlargement will upset the balance and distort the statistics on which we have built this cohesion policy , for we have based it on what is certainly a statistic , the number of inhabitants and the average income disparity which will be created .
I feel rather hesitant about advancing proposals on this issue , Commissioner , but I would invite the Commission to be less reticent .
Starting to think about the way cohesion policy will have to change in the face of enlargement does not mean placing a question mark over the entire policy of enlargement .
My suggestion is that this debate could , perhaps , focus on three factors : resources , as has been said , for it is unthinkable that resources should remain at their current level ; the tools , for I feel , for example , that , while the Structural Funds are a tool which is suitable for a cohesion policy which differs greatly from region to region , it may be that the Cohesion Fund , which is less selective , should be rethought , at least in terms of the way its funds are allocated ; coordination of the policies .
In many cases , where there are no additional resources , coordinated policies could be of benefit such as , for example , tax discounts , which it is still not possible to apply to some regions because of a rigid Commission policy on State aid .
Mr President , I also want to address a rigid Commission policy .
As a result of a recent competition policy decision , over EUR 1 billion of much-needed UK regional regeneration investment in poor urban areas and derelict sites has been cut by 75 % .
Following the conclusions of the Belgian informal meeting in October , the Commission must now undertake a review of the operation of state aids and regional regeneration policy .
Can the Commissioner please state what follow-up action has been taken ?
Can it also reassure us that competition policy will not continue to undermine the legitimate efforts of regional and cohesion policies ?
Secondly , unlike my Conservative colleague , Mr Purvis , I do not believe that we should take a rigid view of the reform of funding post-2006 at this stage .
Poorer regions such as Merseyside in my region , and in the rest of the EU 15 , may continue to need Objective 1 funding , but more importantly than that , today a delegation of trade unionists from Manchester came to Strasbourg to fight to save 650 jobs threatened due to industrial restructuring .
Last year 9 500 jobs were lost in the manufacturing sector in the region alone .
Can the Commissioner therefore tonight give his support for the continuation of a strong role for European assistance post-2006 for our urban and industrial restructuring regions as well as our poorest regions ?
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , since it is impossible , in two minutes , to discuss the countless issues concerning cohesion , which have , furthermore , been dealt with very thoroughly in the report we are now considering by Mr Musotto , whom I should like to congratulate on the excellent work he has undertaken , I should just like to express a few ideas on the implications of enlargement for the European Union ' s economic and social cohesion policy .
The first idea is that if we want to have a viable European Union which has good prospects for the future , we will inevitably have to improve economic and social cohesion policy .
Eastern Europe must feel the same level of European solidarity experienced by countries such as Portugal , Spain , Greece and Ireland following their accession to the European Union .
Improving cohesion policy is necessary , however , not only to counter the huge regional imbalances that will result from the entry of scores of least-favoured regions in the current candidate countries , but also to continue to deal with the backwardness that still exists in the current Europe of fifteen countries , particularly in the outermost regions .
This is all the more important because eastwards enlargement will probably accentuate the lack of economic and social cohesion in the current Europe of Fifteen , in other words , regional asymmetries could increase within the current European Union as a result of the dynamics created by the enlargement process , particularly in the relationship between the outermost regions and the centre of Europe . In other words , countries such as Portugal could become further consigned to the edges of Europe and the current centre and could become even stronger because it will then be the centre of a Europe which is economically integrated from its western almost to its eastern borders .
By this I wish to state that following 2006 , we will need a cohesion policy which does not only look eastwards , but which also considers the still existing cohesion deficit in the current Europe of Fifteen and the new problems it will face as a result of enlargement .
The reading of the second cohesion report demonstrates that the Commission is aware of this problem . We feel sure that the third report will provide appropriate and fair solutions .
Mr President , Commissioner , with its membership increasing from 15 to 25 countries , Europe is at a turning point and must face up to the challenge of its size .
History commands us and we have commitments to do this .
The fact remains , nonetheless , that there will be numerous question marks , when we realise that a Europe with 25 Member States will have 30 % more inhabitants , 30 % more territory , but only 10 % more wealth .
Along with enlargement , Europe is therefore in need of greater solidarity .
But how are we going to manage to show more solidarity with the same amount of money ?
It is impossible .
There is no use in continuing to bury our heads in the sand .
Europe must decide to provide the necessary resources for the radical transformation that will bring about enlargement and must reformulate the criteria for granting structural aid so that the poorest populations are not adversely affected .
We must therefore pay particular attention to the outermost regions , which are amongst the ten poorest regions of today ' s Union .
In this respect , I welcome the recent proposal by the Spanish Presidency to set up a permanent forum specifically for these regions .
Ladies and gentlemen , Europe has chosen cohesion , and therefore solidarity , the price of which is the coherence of our common project .
Mr President , Commissioner , one of the recitals of this report states that extremely large regional differences constitute both a political and economic threat to the EU .
That is quite correct .
We must hold an enlarged Europe together .
I want very briefly to emphasise a number of points .
Enlargement is very important for the whole of Europe , and it is not the poorest regions which should pay for enlargement .
There must therefore be sufficient budget resources for the whole of this process .
At the same time , we must use the money in the most effective way , which is why the EU ' s agricultural policy should be reformed and coordinated with regional policy so that it promotes rural development , that is to say promotes differentiated economic life in agricultural areas too .
Each Member State must also have its own policy of solidarity and cohesion , and all growth policies must effectively favour justice for the regions .
That applies especially in the fields of education , research , employment and transport .
Finally , I wish to say that future cohesion policy must pay attention to regions with pronounced , permanent geographical disadvantages , for example long distances and a sparse population .
The whole of the EU has an interest in its being possible to be resident , and earn one ' s living , throughout the EU .
As the last speaker I have two points to make and one question for the Commissioner this evening .
The first point is about making sure that the poorest regions of Europe do not pay the price of enlargement .
I disagree with what Mr Purvis said .
Areas such as South Yorkshire and Merseyside in the United Kingdom must continue to benefit if they need it , and if they are shown to need it .
The second point is to retain some kind of aid for areas undergoing industrial restructuring .
My question is about competition policy as well , and about coherence between competition policy and cohesion policy .
I am getting a lot of complaints about the way competition policy is being applied , particularly , recently , about voluntary and community sectoral organisations being treated in the same way as private sector organisations and being told that for projects they cannot receive more than 50 % in total in public sector intervention .
I want to know whether it is Commission policy to treat the voluntary and community sector the same as the private sector .
Does that apply to other public sector organisations ?
It is an extremely important point because if this is the Commission policy , a number of projects which are going ahead in some our most deprived regions will simply cease to go ahead .
It is not what the Commission worked for many years .
Regional policy pushed to put these projects in the hands of the voluntary sector and now they seem to be disadvantaged .
I would like to know what the Commissioner 's position is .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as you can imagine , I am deeply committed to the regional and cohesion policy , not only because I have the honour of directing this policy on behalf of the Commission and in conjunction with my colleagues , Franz Fischler and Anna Diamantopoulou , but also for another , more political reason , which is that I believe , as several of you have said , that the cohesion policy , which has grown in importance over a 15-year period , symbolises a certain concept of the European Union .
It is the proof that the European Union is not merely a supermarket where we quite simply rely on the laws of supply and demand and on fiscal transfers in order to ensure solidarity or to avoid a two , three or four-speed development .
It is the proof that we have agreed that we should share our financial resources and redistribute them in a regulated manner , and also to work with greater coherence .
This policy is the proof that the European Union is not merely a supermarket ; that it will , one day , I hope , be a political power and that it must remain a community that stands together .
This is the profession of faith that I wanted to give to you at the beginning of my answer .
In this spirit , I feel that Mr Musotto ' s report is an extremely worthwhile and useful contribution , as you have all said , to the debate on the future of the cohesion policy that I unveiled to you in January 2001 .
And since I am speaking about a concept of Europe , I want to tell you , ladies and gentlemen , that the debate on cohesion , which I launched a year ago and which I will be seeing through to completion , in a genuine and decentralised manner , with the Member States - you can count on me to do this - the debate will be part of the other wide-ranging debate on the future of Europe .
Depending on how the Heads of State and Government respond to the question of cohesion , depending on whether we maintain , or even extend , the cohesion policy , whether we scale it down or take it apart , we will somehow answer this broad question - one of the subjects to be tackled by the Convention , which we will also be attending - on the future of Europe .
What do we want to do together ?
I think that this contribution , Mr Musotto , is also important because it brings together the points of view of five parliamentary committees after an in-depth discussion has been held .
And then , finally , you will adopt this report in a few days and only after the Commission has published the first interim report on cohesion , which I released last week .
I will also be coming to present this interim report to the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on 20 February , as I pledged to do .
For all these reasons , I am pleased - in spite of the criticisms or questions , which I feel are constructive - to note in your report , Mr Musotto , a genuine convergence between Parliament and the Commission , on four essential points at least .
First of all , in the future , the main priority of the cohesion policy must be aid to regions that are lagging behind in their development , in other words , the poorest regions .
On this point , there is agreement , including amongst the Ministers that I met in Namur during the Belgian Presidency , and you confirm this agreement , that the poor regions , which are lagging behind in their development , are located in the future Member States ( and they make up almost all of the regions of the future Member States ) or in the Member States of today ' s Union .
Therefore , our priority and focus is on the regions that are genuinely lagging behind in their development .
The second point of convergence is that cohesion , as many of you pointed out , is not an aspect of one single policy , but of all Community policies , which must , as stipulated in the Treaty , contribute to the cohesion between European countries and regions .
This applies to the CAP , which has not been effective , to transport - Mrs de Palacio is here and she could explain this better than myself - to energy , competition , research , employment and many other policies .
Each of these policies , even more than before , must contribute to increasing economic and social cohesion , if only because of the question marks that enlargement will raise , which , as we note in our second interim report , will increase gaps and inequality .
The third point is that we must strive to have more than a minimalist cohesion policy and reinvent a policy which applies to all the territories of the Union that are experiencing difficulties .
In other words , I note our consensus on the idea that the future regional policy will , after 2006 , take into account all European regions , to varying degrees , of course , depending on whether the region is lagging behind in its development or is in a more prosperous region .
This policy should contribute to the integration of all regions in the Community and promote territorial cohesion .
To do this , it must be more simple , more decentralised and , at the same time , more specific ( this is one of the questions that I raised in the cohesion report ) , specific , for example , on the urban question - half of European citizens will live , already live , in towns ; specific on the regions that are undergoing industrial restructuring that you mentioned ; specific on the regions that have lasting or definitive natural handicaps , mountainous regions or islands ; or even specific on thematic objectives , such as the information society .
On this issue too , I await your ideas , but I have explained my outlook .
The fourth point of convergence is that we need resources in order to meet all these challenges and , for the next cohesion policy , resources which meet the needs of a larger Europe .
The current threshold of 0.45 % of GDP , which I myself quoted last year in reference , is the absolute credible minimum below which , I feel , it is impossible to go without jeopardising the very essence of the cohesion policy .
In my view , the fact that Parliament and the Commission are tonight giving a joint response to these four points is an important and worthwhile political element in the debate on the future of the cohesion policy . Not everyone , as yet , shares this ambitious vision .
This applies to certain Member States , where some political leaders - whom I respect and to whom I listen - are talking of the deterioration of politics and one is talking of renationalisation .
We therefore have to show , time and again - and I am thinking of Mr Izquierdo Collado ' s earlier comments - the merits of the cohesion policy , we must aim to convince and to show that this policy has been worthwhile , that it has helped to bring about greater coherence , but that we still need more .
I cannot prove this single-handedly .
You can count on me to do this at Commission level , with the help of all my colleagues , but I will not be able to do this if the regions , the Member States and Members of Parliament do not contribute to this task .
It is also natural for us , at this stage , not to have total agreement on all the subjects raised in Mr Musotto ' s report .
There are points that we must debate or discuss , such as the instruments of the future cohesion policy , the place occupied by Community initiatives , that of the Cohesion Fund or a possible single regional development Fund .
All this will , of course , depend on the level of our ambition towards this policy .
Another point of discussion is the choice of eligibility criteria .
The Commission chose , and made this choice a long time ago , the criterion of GDP per capita and per region for determining which regions are lagging behind in their development .
I think that this is a reliable , straightforward and transparent indicator that all the Member States accept , and it is so that we can maintain an objective approach and a certain impartiality that we are not , at this stage , proposing to add other criteria to the criterion of per capita GDP .
Ladies and gentlemen , this does not mean , however , that the Commission will not listen to appeals by the regions which may be affected , either by enlargement or by the so-called ' statistical effect ' that several of you have mentioned , by a mathematical decrease in the Community average of per capita GDP or the drop , also mathematical , of the eligibility threshold , which means that some regions that are still having serious problems ( not only those in southern Europe , but also in East Germany , in England and elsewhere ) are mechanically and artificially situated below this threshold , although they are still experiencing real difficulties .
I will say once again that I am committed to proposing , at the appropriate time , a fair , Community-wide solution so that we can continue to assist the regions which are situated just below the new eligibility threshold .
Furthermore , if we maintain a genuine cohesion policy , which does not only cover regions that are lagging behind in their development , we should be able to take into account other criteria and move , as some of you have pointed out , towards making greater qualitative investment in people , in training men and women and in the information society .
I also note that , in the current programmes , - those that I approved and which have got off the ground - there are more programmes based directly on quality , rather than quantity , than in the previous period .
Lastly , I am not forgetting and will not forget the particular attention that must be given ( not only in accordance with Article 299 of the Treaty , but also because the real problems they face , and their unbearable levels of unemployment ) to the seven outermost regions of the European Union .
Ladies and gentlemen , I hope that these brief clarifications may help to increase even further the degree of consensus between Parliament and the Commission , so that together we can preserve and promote the model of European society , the core of which is cohesion .
One MEP touched upon the subject - and this will be my final point - of the appropriations that you were proposing to grant to the countries which will join the Union , most likely in 2004 .
I do not share the very harsh judgment that Mrs Schroeder expressed earlier and I do not think that it is fair .
We proposed a phasing-in process .
These countries already benefit from the Cohesion Fund , and they are experiencing ( I regret that Mrs Schroeder is no longer in the Chamber to hear my response ) great difficulty in using up the appropriations .
And this is why I suggested , along with my colleagues , for this genuine reason , that we adopt a progressive approach to the cohesion policy .
I am not trying to trick anyone or create an effect .
I do not want to see money that has been earmarked by Europe for the candidate countries , which will join the EU in 2004 , to stay in Brussels or be returned to Brussels .
That is why we are being quite ambitious and going further than the proposals set out in the Berlin Agenda for the first year of membership and why we are proposing more money . But we want to avoid a situation where this money cannot be used by the countries that do not yet have the necessary administrative structures in place to manage these appropriations .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I shall end here .
Lastly , I confirm that the Commission is due to adopt the third cohesion report in December 2003 and that the report should set out the Commission guidelines for the next agenda .
This should , therefore , be done earlier than usual , so that we can , as I said before , begin to turn the new programming period into a reality on the ground , as soon as the new Agenda begins in 2007 , rather than two years after that .
We still have a few months to stimulate and make a success of the political debate on cohesion policy . If we succeed in stimulating this debate ( and I need you to help me to do this ) , a decision will be taken , at the appropriate time , by the Heads of State and Government , which will not only maintain cohesion as the heart of a specific model of European society , but will enable the Heads of State to commit , on a budgetary and financial level , to fulfilling the political and strategic choice that they made when they decided to undertake reunification of the European continent , through extensive enlargement that will take place very soon .
We shall support the new Member States and I hope , personally speaking , that the Agenda , in 2007 , will enable them to benefit , like all the other Member States , from every aspect of the cohesion policy .
Speed limitation devices
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0012 / 2002 ) by Mr Hatzidakis , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Council Directive 92 / 6 / EEC on the installation and use of speed limitation devices for certain categories of motor vehicles in the Community ( COM ( 2001 ) 318 - C5-0267 / 2001 - 2001 / 0135 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , this proposal for a directive seeks to extend speed restrictions , which already apply to some commercial vehicles , to other categories of passenger and goods vehicles , i.e. to lighter commercial vehicles than those to which the restrictions already apply .
In other words , to category Ì2 and Ì3 passenger vehicles and category Í2 goods vehicles .
The European Commission 's proposal makes provision for speed limitation devices to restrict passenger vehicles to 100 kph and goods vehicles to 90 kph .
And basically , I agree with the European Commission 's proposal .
A study carried out in Holland and brought to our attention by the European Commission demonstrates that it stands to reap profits in the order of EUR 40 million a year and benefits to society in the order of EUR 89 million a year from the transport sector alone .
If we extrapolate these figures , we stand to gain something in the order of EUR 3 billion .
But I do not want to dwell on this study because others may dispute it .
I should like to dwell for a moment on common sense .
And common sense tells us that , if we restrict speeds , we stand to gain , first from road safety , because there will be fewer accidents ; secondly , we stand to gain in the environmental protection sector and , thirdly , we shall ensure there is fair competition between companies because we shall have the same limit everywhere , throughout Europe ; at the same time , companies will not be able to force their drivers to drive very fast , putting human lives at risk for the sake of their profit margins .
That is why the amendments which I have proposed do not differ in any great respect from the text of the European Commission 's proposal .
I should like to comment on two amendments accepted in committee .
The first concerns the exemption , which we propose should be 5 years from when the directive enters into force for category Ì2 and Í2 vehicles weighing between 3.5 and 7.5 tonnes .
What we are proposing here is that the directive should apply five years after it enters into force and , secondly , that the European Commission should submit a study eighteen months after the directive enters into force on so-called intelligent speed adaptation systems so that we can see if we can use these systems to differentiate speeds depending on the circumstances and , of course , if we can have even lower speeds in urban areas .
The European People 's Party has tabled an amendment for category Í2 , which includes vans , calling for the speed limit to be raised from 90 to 110 kph , because they are a different type of vehicle ; they are lighter vehicles and I think that we can be more flexible here .
Some fellow members voted against this and explained their reasons .
They have ideological , political reasons and they do not think that the European Commission , or rather the European Union , should intervene here .
I should like to thank them , I understand their reasons and , even though I disagree with them , I respect their position .
But I should like to ask them , given that there are some amendments which make the European Commission 's proposal more flexible and bring it closer to their own position , to examine these amendments constructively and , if they can , to vote for them , because it is my prediction that , their position notwithstanding , this directive will , at some point , become European law .
Mr President , Madam Vice-President , ladies and gentlemen - at least those of you who are still here - the PPE-DE group supports the entire content of Mr Hatzidakis ' report .
We take the view that we may well support the Commission 's proposal in principle , but that we do want to bring about some changes on a few points .
The traffic safety issue is , of course , decisive , and we need this regulation because traffic safety is not bound by national borders and heavy goods vehicles do , indeed , cross them .
In principle , we also need speed limitation devices for smaller vehicles , as we have had good experience of speed limitation devices in heavy lorries .
It is because these HGVs travel across borders everywhere that we need European regulations .
However , Madam Vice-President , we have to introduce the regulations in a slightly refined form and with longer time limits , for we are dealing here with major economic burdens laid on small and medium-sized enterprises .
We should therefore be more generous in the transitional provisions , in order that the burden on the economy may not be allowed to be too great .
Let me conclude by appealing to the Social Democrats and Mrs Hedkvist Petersen , who is herself a great expert on traffic safety .
As our Amendment No 12 demands , Mrs Hedkvist Petersen , we need different speeds for small and large lorries .
So we are again asking you to support our Amendment No 12 , so that we can permit a speed of 110 kph for smaller commercial vehicles .
If we impose the same speed limit on all HGVs , we are pre-programming traffic jams into the motorway system .
If we are to ensure traffic flow , we must make it possible for smaller vehicles to overtake .
With that in mind , Mrs Hedkvist Petersen , I ask you to support our amendment .
We will then have a great piece of legislation !
Mr President , Commissioner , I wish to begin by thanking the rapporteur , Mr Hatzidakis , for the considerable openness and readiness to compromise that have characterised his work on this report .
The transport of both goods and people on the roads is ever increasing .
Movement on the roads is international and cross-border , and so too , therefore , must be the rules we lay down .
A shining example is the legislation on speed limitation devices .
When it came into force in 1994 , it had met a certain amount of resistance both from the industry and from the drivers themselves , but this evaporated when the advantages became apparent .
In a Europe in which more than 40 000 people lose their lives in road accidents , all kinds of methods must be tried in order to make the roads safer .
Once speed limitation devices had been introduced , it was no longer possible to build speeding into systems under which the heaviest vehicles operated .
This new proposal will lead to speed limitation devices also being used in lighter commercial vehicles and buses , and this will have further positive repercussions .
Recently , there has been a marked increase in the frequency of accidents involving lighter commercial vehicles .
Those of us in the Group of the Party of European Socialists support the amendments in favour of a longer transition period .
One issue which , however , recurred in the debate on this directive , and which Mr Jarzembowski addressed , is that of whether there should be different speeds for different categories of vehicle .
It was argued that identical speeds create congestion and bottlenecks on the roads .
I do not believe that is the case .
The fewer speed differences there are , the smoother the traffic flows , in actual fact .
There are mathematical calculations to show this . It is enough to imagine a road on which vehicles are maintaining the same speed .
In that case , the traffic flows more smoothly .
That is why I demand that Amendment No 12 be rejected .
Mr President , I am quite sure that we all accept the premise that an inappropriate speed by any vehicle can cause accidents .
But more often than not accidents are attibutable to the manner in which the vehicle is being driven , or the carelessness of drivers failing to be vigilant , especially in bad weather for example .
Accidents are also caused by drivers crawling along at a snail 's pace on motorways and in some cases they could be avoided by having a minimum as well as a maximum speed limit .
There has to be recognition that there is a world of difference between motorway and urban driving .
Whilst clearly agreeing with the Commission and my colleagues , including Mr Hatzidakis , that we must do all we can to improve road safety across the European Union , I cannot agree that the way forward would be the introduction of this directive , which advocated a one-speed-fits-all approach .
It is recognised that the United Kingdom has the best safety record in the EU .
It is equally true to say that it was one of the first countries to fit speed limiters on coaches , for obvious reasons .
In addition , this directive is also meant to improve the environment and congestion and again I would refute that claim .
To extend this directive to those categories of vehicles included in the proposal , and to impose the upper speed limits as outlined , would be a mistake .
It is bad enough struggling along motorways when two heavy goods lorries are running parallel because one decides to overtake on a hill and clearly cannot accelerate .
If this directive comes into play I believe that congestion and environmental pollution will increase .
Finally , the right way forward would be to seriously consider advances in technology , for example the proposed voluntary agreement on pedestrian protection .
In addition , there is also the possibility of ISA and I would support a study by the Commission along those lines .
Nevertheless , ultimately , it should be left to the discretion of the Member State to decide what would or would not be appropriate .
With the exception of a couple of amendments , my delegation will be unable to support this report .
Mr President , I should first of all like to thank Mr Hatzidakis for his sound preparation of this report .
Traffic safety is rightly one of the core themes of the White Paper .
The number of people who are killed each year in the European Union is still far too high .
These fatal accidents are often caused by speeding .
With a view to reducing the road accident toll , speed limitation devices for lorries are an effective instrument for improving road safety .
Indeed , lower speeds lead to fewer road accidents and fewer victims .
Furthermore , benefits can be expected in the fields of maintenance and of a cleaner environment .
In order to ensure that speed limitation devices cannot be interfered with and in order to guarantee that they are maintained in proper working order , reliable inspection is needed .
Annual compulsory inspection seems best suited for this purpose , in my opinion . But in that case , an adjustment to the European General Periodical Car Inspection Directive is necessary in order to bring about a level playing field .
I should like to draw your attention to the issue of intelligent speed adapters , a very important point in my view .
I would therefore like to ask the Commission , at the earliest possibility , to conduct a study into the possibilities which this system could offer .
It could contribute to greater safety on the roads , less irritation and a greater sense of security on the part of drivers .
In general , I should like to ask the Commission to give an extra boost to technology which should make intelligent road and traffic control systems possible .
This is with a view to the expected growth in demand for transport , as a result of which the benefits of this directive in terms of road safety will be lost .
The level of safety will go down once again , the build-up on roads will increase again and the beneficial impact which we are pursuing by means of this directive will be cancelled out .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would firstly like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Hatzidakis , for his fantastic work on this directive , a report which fully supports the Commission ' s proposal and which incorporates numerous amendments which improve the text of the proposal without changing its objective .
The purpose of the proposal is to extend the scope of the obligatory installation and use of speed limiters to vehicles in lighter categories than those currently affected by these limitations .
This measure represents the realisation of the priorities formulated in March 2000 , within the framework of the Commission communication on road safety , which also received the explicit support of this Parliament .
The proposal will contribute to an increase in road safety , the protection of the environment and the maintenance of conditions of equal and fair competition between all operators within the European Union .
I would like to make some comments on the report we are dealing with here .
There are several amendments which we can support : Amendments Nos 4 , 6 and 7 can be accepted in their entirety ; Nos 5 and 10 are acceptable in principle , although the dates need to be altered , and the same is the case with Amendment No 6 , which I referred to previously .
The Commission would prefer the following timetable : two years for new vehicles , three years for international transport and four for national transport .
I believe that this answers some of Mr Jarzembowski ' s questions on the effects on small and medium-sized businesses , which are the most frequent users of this type of vehicle .
There is an adaptation period and , if we bear in mind the rotation of this type of vehicle , the time of the entry into force of the directive , etc . , we see that it is not so out of place .
With regard to Amendment No 9 , the Commission could accept a study in the context of road safety towards 2010 , as long as it does not involve a separate report .
In any event , the time limit of 18 months is excessively short to carry out such a study . We need two years as a minimum .
In this regard , I would like to stress the great importance the Commission attaches to intelligent speed restriction systems and great attention will be paid to the study of this issue .
The concepts behind Amendments Nos 8 and 11 are unacceptable to the Commission .
The acceptance of greater maximum speeds for a limited period of time not only raises technical problems for which there is no solution , at least at the moment , but would also hinder the implementation of the measure .
The Commission believes that , for the moment , there is no advantage in applying this directive to M1 and N1 vehicles .
Furthermore , the Commission cannot accept Amendment No 12 , which Mr Jarzembowski advocated , amongst others , because the triple objective of the directive - road safety , environmental protection and competition under equal conditions - cannot be achieved unless all vehicles are bound by the same speed limit .
Finally , we will carefully study Amendments Nos 1 , 2 and 3 , which refer to the textual differences between linguistic versions , in relation to the definition of vehicles .
I would once again like to congratulate the rapporteur and all the Members who have spoken in this debate .
I hope that , through the application of this directive , road safety will improve , which is the intention , since the figure of 42 000 deaths per year is completely unacceptable to all of us .
The debate on this report is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon .
Excise duty on rum , liqueurs and eaux-de-vie
The next item is the report ( A5-0001 / 2002 ) by Mr Marques , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the proposals for Council decisions :
1. authorising France to extend the application of a reduced rate of excise duty on ' traditional ' rum produced in its overseas departments ( COM ( 2001 ) 347 - C5-0401 / 2001 - 2001 / 0142 ( CNS ) )
2 . 2. authorising Portugal to apply a reduced rate of excise duty in the autonomous region of Madeira on locally produced and consumed rum and liqueurs and in the autonomous region of the Azores on locally produced and consumed liqueurs and eaux-de-vie ( COM ( 2001 ) 442 - C5-0422 / 2001 - 2001 / 0169 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , Madam Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , as a Member for one of the outermost regions , I welcomed the opportunity to draw up the report we are now discussing .
I am pleased because the Commission ' s proposals to reduce the special rate of excise duty on the consumption of certain alcoholic drinks produced in Madeira , the Azores and the French overseas departments are yet another measure giving form and substance to the principle of remoteness , enshrined in Article 299 ( 2 ) of the Treaties .
We should bear in mind that this legal basis , endorsed by the Treaty of Amsterdam , provides for the adoption of specific measures in various fields , especially that of tax legislation , in accordance with the very particular geographical , social , economic and cultural situations of these European regions .
In short , the European Union can give these territories special treatment in line with their very specific situations , and the only limit on this special treatment should be the integrity and coherence of the Community legal system , including the internal market and common policies .
Only by providing this specific treatment will we ensure that these regions can become involved in the dynamism unleashed by the internal market , by Economic and Monetary Union , by the forthcoming enlargement of the European Union , and even by the phenomenon of globalisation .
Only by providing this special treatment will we ensure that these regions can offer genuine equal opportunities for our citizens living in the outermost regions .
The measures to reduce the special rate of excise duty on rum and liqueurs produced and consumed in Madeira , on eaux-de-vie produced and consumed in the Azores and on rum produced in the French overseas departments are crucial to offsetting production costs and thereby guaranteeing the survival of traditional activities of considerable economic , social , historic and cultural importance for these regions .
One hundred and forty jobs are at stake in Madeira and the Azores and 40 000 in the French Overseas Departments .
At stake are also elements related to the specific identity itself of these regions , particularly in the French Overseas Departments , where activities linked to the planting of sugar cane and to the production of sugar and rum are an important part of the economic and social history of these territories .
All of these activities are , therefore , linked to the sugar cane , sugar and rum industries , which depend on this tax measure , in a context marked by the revision of the COM in sugar and by the dismantling of customs barriers for exports to the Community market of spirits from third countries .
Indeed , without the tax measure now being proposed , how will rum production in the OD be able to remain viable , when production costs for rum are considerably higher there than in neighbouring Caribbean countries , when rum from the Caribbean is able to enter the Community market without duties in 2003 ?
We should bear in mind that Community rum producers pay between four and six times more for sugar cane and three times more for their work force .
Here , costs arising from adapting rum production units to environmental standards , in order to comply with Community regulations , are increasing .
I shall close by emphasising that , despite the permanent nature of the specific characteristics that justify the special treatment granted to the outermost regions by Article 299 ( 2 ) , these tax measures are not only limited in terms of time - they are valid for seven years - but are also limited in quantitative terms .
They are , furthermore , subject to periodic evaluation , in order to assess whether the reasons which justify the granting of the tax derogation still exist .
Before us , therefore , lies a well-drafted and balanced proposal by the Commission , to which we should all give our support .
It responds , on the one hand , to the need for special treatment for the outermost regions and , on the other , safeguards the integrity of the Community ' s internal market .
This is also the type of measure that creates and promotes European citizenship in territories far from the centre of Europe such as the outermost regions .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the cane-sugar rum sector provides almost 40 000 jobs in three of the four French overseas departments .
By allowing producers in these departments to supply only the French market with a limited quantity of ' traditional ' rum for a seven-year period , we are giving these businesses the means to fight against stiff competition from some third countries and , in doing so , we are protecting the future of thousands of jobs .
However , I personally deplore the fact that , despite the request made by France , the Commission has not stated that it is in favour of a longer derogation period , which would have been a more appropriate way to reflect the economic logic of this matter as well as the letter and the spirit of the notorious Article 299 ( 2 ) of the Treaty .
Despite the fact that some progress has been made , the implementation of this article for now only partially meets the expectations that it raised .
We must , however , take ambitious measures and do so quickly .
The people are asking us to do this , and it is our political responsibility to respond .
Mr President , Commissioner , rapporteur , ladies and gentlemen , this debate concerns a specific issue , which is of limited reach and importance in the Azores , not wishing to make any comparison with the situation in the overseas territories or even in the autonomous region of Madeira , just two days after the Las Palmas summit of the Presidents of the Outermost Regions , which was attended by representatives of the Member States and the Commission .
I should , therefore , like to welcome the conclusions of that summit and call on the Council and the Commission to take them into consideration .
This year is of particular importance to the Azores where fisheries are concerned , since important initiatives such as the revision of the common fisheries policy , the revision of Poseima-Fisheries and the quotas policy for groundfish are to be approved .
These are areas in which it is crucial to fully understand the realities of the Azores and to take account of their specific situation .
The Commission proposals on quotas for fishing groundfish cause us the greatest concern from this point of view .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , firstly I am pleased to note that Mr Marques ' s report fully supports the Commission ' s proposals .
According to these reports and the Commission ' s proposals , these measures are essential in order to maintain the local production of rum , which is traditional in French overseas departments , and of rum , liqueurs and eaux-de-vie , which are traditional in Madeira and the Azores .
These traditional activities are very important for the economy of these regions and it is essential to maintain them in order to ensure an economic , social and territorial balance for these regions of the European Union .
I would like to say something relating to the legal basis of the proposals , since there has been controversy about it , which the rapporteur , Mr Marques , has mentioned .
Both are based on the application of the second paragraph of Article 299 of the EC Treaty , which is precisely the one relating to the outermost regions .
This provision allows the Council to adopt specific measures , which may repeal other fundamental provisions of the Treaty , laying down the conditions for its application in regions which - we must state this very clearly - have very different specific characteristics owing precisely to their condition as outermost regions .
I would like to point out , ladies and gentlemen , that this provision was included in the Treaty of Amsterdam with the purpose of creating a common legal basis for actions in favour of these regions .
These actions must allow for the complete integration of these regions into the Union , while recognising their own characteristics , such as their great distance from the continent , the dependence of their economy on a small number of products , many of them relating to traditional and small-scale activities .
Therefore , the Commission considers that this second paragraph of Article 299 of the Treaty is the appropriate legal basis for these proposals and any others which may arise in the future .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon .
Galileo Joint Undertaking
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0005 / 2002 ) by Mr Glante , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the Proposal for a Council regulation on the establishment of the Galileo Joint Undertaking ( COM ( 2001 ) 336 - C5-0329 / 2001 - 2001 / 0136 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies , gentlemen , and above all , you interpreters who are assembled here in such numbers for so few of us Members , it is always a pleasure to be able to discuss such an interesting and exciting topic at such a late hour .
I hope that the lateness of the hour will not downgrade the project .
I refer to the Galileo satellite navigation system , the first great project to be shaped jointly by the European institutions and the ESA .
In technical , economic and political terms , it is eminently comparable with such projects as the Airbus and the GSM mobile telecommunications standard .
This system will to some degree be in technological competition with the existing American GPS system , which is a good thing for European technology , but it will also be compatible with GPS - at least I hope it will , and that is something by which we set store - and be able to supplement it .
I have been told that the United States is seriously concerned about developments in Europe .
That cannot be a bad thing , and can mean only that we are on the right road and that we will make technological progress in Europe by the use of this system .
It is certainly in competition , in technological terms , with the existing GPS , but there is also the possibility of their interacting .
We are working towards the system being able to use the same receivers for GPS and Galileo signals .
That will increase the utility of both systems .
I would also like , at this point , to refer to the coordination between GPS , Galileo and EGNOS .
Most discussions fail to do justice to this point , but I think it too is important .
After 11 September and during the Afghanistan conflict , the United States had apprehensions about the security aspects of what is a civilian project , but these will be safeguarded .
Both the civilian character and the public control of the Galileo project make disruption , interference and misuse impossible .
A certain levy on receivers will mean that broad use will be free of charge .
Broad use of GPS is free of charge , and so will Galileo be .
More exact services of a higher order will have to be paid for in order to guarantee the refinancing of the running and development costs .
The service will , however , be permanently available .
This afternoon I had the pleasure of a conversation with the US Government 's representative in Brussels , who again expressed his concern about the project 's development .
I was able to reassure him , but not in the sense that we would unreservedly submit ourselves to the GPS system .
I made it clear to him that we are building our own system , that we are working towards cooperation , but that we will carry on with development and not let ourselves be led into some kind of technological dependency .
I think that these informally expressed wishes and these remarks show that we are still on the right road .
The Member States have delayed taking a decision for a long time , and I hope that they will enthusiastically endorse this project in March , despite certain problems that they have with the Price Waterhouse study - indeed , I get indications from various Member State governments that they will .
I hope that we will get to that , and believe that it is high time we did .
We are already a couple of months behind , but will be able to make up for them .
I would like to again express my gratitude to the Commissioner for the conversation we had and also for providing these documents , which again explain what Galileo is about and can allay any suspicions or misgivings .
Let us turn now to the report itself and to the proposal , which is not uncontroversial .
I think there is , as there was in the past , overwhelming agreement that we want this project and that we want it to be a civilian one .
As a result , though , of events last year and in recent months , we are also agreed that it needs to be available to some degree to our troops who are sent out to maintain the peace .
That will be feasible , technically feasible , but it will also be politically desired and feasible .
It is , though , to remain a civilian system , as it was before .
There were great problems in discussions about how private enterprise was to be involved in this undertaking .
The Commission proposal works on the assumption that private firms will be involved , including financially .
Financial participation is - shall we say - a symbolic act .
It would be enough to finance the development stage by means of public funds alone , but industry is to be involved .
That is what I want too , but I have had no clear indication from industry that they are becoming amicably disposed towards the Commission proposal and getting on board the Joint Undertaking .
My proposal that the development company should be established , coming into being in parallel with the Joint Undertaking but dovetailing closely with it , offers a compromise , a way out of the dilemma .
Indications from the business world are variable - some are rejecting this proposal , while others have a very open mind about it .
I have endeavoured simply to use this proposal to reduce to some extent the inhibitions that businesses have , and I hope that they will participate in the development company .
In so far , I hope for broad support tomorrow .
Unfortunately , I cannot support the European People 's Party 's proposals , which date back to the Commission proposal and thus , in my opinion , give industry another argument against joining in .
, draftsperson of the opinion of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , thank you also , Mr Glante , for your efforts at producing this report in this form , and thank you for what you have said .
Mr Radwan , in his capacity as your shadow rapporteur , will further enlarge on the PPE proposal that you feel unable to support .
Having its own satellite navigation system has been one of Europe 's concerns for many years now , but it exists only as an aspiration .
No decision on it has as yet been reached .
It is in connection with Galileo , of all things , that everything is weighed in the balance a thousand times over , every euro is examined closely , whereas in other areas the European purse-strings are much looser .
What I reproach the Member States for is the way they delay and defer , hang back and hesitate , and that is what could stick in the minds of Europe 's citizens .
That is also what Europe 's image threatens to become if we are not careful .
I , however , want Europe to be modern , technologically on the ball , quite literally the worldwide Number One .
This is where Europe can play its trump cards - economic strength , a talent for innovation , technological capacity and vision .
I do not want to make apocalyptic predictions , but I am convinced that , without Galileo , Europe could completely lose its position in an important sector and will fall back so far that it will , at the end of the day , be quite impossible for it to catch up .
If we do not manage to get Galileo started and at last open the doors to new technologies , if we do not manage to make the necessary funds available , then we will become a laughing-stock across the world , and in outer space as well .
Why am I telling you this ?
We need now , at last , a resounding ' yes ' to Galileo and a competitive alternative to GPS !
The Council wanted industry involved in Galileo as early as possible .
The Commission submitted a proposal which Parliament put to the acid test , and which received - and still receives - severe criticism from different sides , and I do think there were omissions on the Commission 's side as well .
Our Committees have identified a number of problem areas .
Industry involvement in the Joint Undertaking - whether direct or via the development company - must not , though , be made so hard to reach that Galileo 's failure becomes a possible result .
Europe needs Galileo , or , as the Commission puts it in its information note , Galileo is indispensable to Europe .
That is why I hope Parliament will speak with a clear voice and that there will be a large majority tomorrow .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as draftsman of an opinion on the Galileo proposal , I would like to focus essentially on two financial aspects of the Commission ' s proposal , leaving the rapporteur and the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism the task of discussing its merits .
The Commission has presented a proposal for the setting-up of a Joint Undertaking to complete the development phase of Galileo ; this would provide a single management structure with legal personality which would be flexible and capable of concluding the necessary contracts .
The founding members would be the Commission and the European Space Agency , which would contribute a maximum of EUR 520 million and EUR 550 million respectively .
The European Investment Bank and any private company providing a minimum sum of EUR 20 million could be further members .
The cost of this phase is estimated at EUR 1.1 billion , to be split equally between the European Community and the European Space Agency , with an extra EUR 200 million coming from the private sector , pledged through the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding in March 2001 by representatives of the main industries concerned .
The Community ' s financial contribution will come from two budget lines : from B5-700 - Trans-European Networks - and from a token entry under the B6 Research chapter pending a final decision on the 6th Framework Programme .
Out of the amount financed by the European Space Agency , EUR 50 million would be paid in cash and EUR 500 million in kind , as stated in the European Space Agency ' s Statutes .
I have tabled two amendments in my opinion : the first concerns the possible future participation of the candidate countries in the development phase of Galileo , as called for by Parliament in its resolution of 3 October 2001 .
I have called for instruments to be identified in the budget which will allow them to participate , not least in order to avoid further widening the existing gap .
The second amendment concerns the role to be conferred on the Budgetary Authority ; I therefore call upon the Commission to inform it on a regular basis on the implementation of the development phase of Galileo , and for the annual report on the activities of the Joint Undertaking to be sent to Parliament and the Council and not only to the Court of Auditors as proposed by the Commission .
Mr President , Commissioner , I too would like to thank the rapporteur at the outset for his close cooperation .
All of one mind , we are on track to make Galileo a reality .
I would also like to start by thanking the Commissioner , who repeatedly and doggedly pleads , and indeed fights , for Galileo at Council level .
Economically , technologically and politically , Galileo is a strategic project for the future .
That has already been said several times .
Here in Europe , we should remember how it was explained to us decades ago that we did not need the Airbus , we did not need a missile industry .
They would do all that for us , and it would be for the best .
Where would we be today if , for example , we had not developed the Airbus ourselves ?
Now , though , I have two practical observations on Mr Glante 's report .
I consider it essential that industry should today already be actively involved in Galileo .
There is no use in describing Galileo 's importance in fine words ; we need industry to make a clear commitment to Galileo .
We must make a start right now on developing services to get products onto the markets of the future , products which would enable Galileo to be self-financing , which is what both sides of this House want : hence we need absolutely clear support for the Commission proposal to this end .
We should , though , perhaps give thought to some reduction in the ' front-loading ' .
I see Galileo 's political dimension as a second important point .
We want Europe to have a common foreign and security policy .
We have the Rapid Reaction Force , and we want , in the future , to send our soldiers to troublespots .
Here , too , we need to assume responsibility for our soldiers , which means that we have information systems of our own and are no longer dependent on third countries .
What this means is that Galileo is , to some extent , necessary if we are to grow up in the way we approach external policy .
Tomorrow should , therefore , see Parliament send a clear demand , for the sake of Europe 's future , that the Council should decide in favour of Galileo !
Apart from that , we propose , as an alternative , that , if the Council proves to be Galileo 's undoing , we might well have to have thoughts about the defence budgets , and I am very definitely of the opinion that it is our primary duty to ensure that Galileo remains a civilian product .
Mr President , Commissioner , first of all , I would like to express my regret that we have engaged in a battle over amendments after the enormous success of Mrs Langenhagen ' s report .
I think that divisive forces have also been at work in the European Parliament , but I am convinced , from what I have heard , that they will not succeed .
I hope that , however we vote on the amendments , tomorrow ' s vote will be an overall majority in favour of the Galileo report .
The most important thing is that Parliament does not become divided , and that it continues to show its support for Mrs de Palacio and the Commission on this extremely important project .
We cannot merely focus on accounting and notarial-oriented matters when discussing a subject of this importance , when the Americans are pouring millions of dollars into their aerospace and space industry .
We are today facing the acid test .
Either the European Union is capable of launching a space programme as modest as Galileo , forty years after the daring innovations of Airbus and Ariane , or - as some Members who are sitting on other benches have said - we show that we are incapable of doing this .

If we have to show that we are incapable of this , I do not want Parliament to take any responsibility for this and I hope that the Commission and Parliament will , in future , display a united front when showing the Council what its responsibilities are .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance takes a positive overall view of the report by Mr Glante .
It is not a question of deciding whether or not to approve the Galileo project .
This has already been decided in the report by Mrs Langenhagen , as she herself has just pointed out , and I myself gave a favourable opinion on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy .
Our objective is now to decide how to manage the project ' s development phase .
We agree with the rapporteur ' s proposal to create a Joint Undertaking whose shareholders would be the European Union and the ESA , an undertaking which would be dissolved once the development phase is completed .
We also agree with his proposal to create , alongside that , a development company in which the private sector will participate .
It will enable conflicts of interest to be avoided whilst drafting the specification and the tendering procedure during the deployment phase .
The Undertaking will not therefore be judge and judged .
We do not believe that the proposed monitoring committee will serve a useful purpose , since the Member States are already represented in the Joint Undertaking .
However , we are in favour of setting up a committee with an ethical purpose , whose opinions will be consulted and which will ensure that Galileo is used properly and in accordance with the principles laid down by Parliament .
Lastly , we do not agree with the amendments tabled by Mr Radwan , which reintroduce the concept of Galileo being used for military applications , even occasionally , on the pretext that this could be done for humanitarian ends .
If this amendment received a favourable vote , we could not vote for the report thus amended .

To sum up , if the use of Galileo for military applications is not reintroduced by any means whatsoever , we will vote in favour of the report by Mr Glante , in its current form , unless the monitoring committee concerned , which we recommended setting up in the first report , does not have an ethical purpose .

Madam Commissioner : the PPE-DE broadly supports the Galileo project in principle .
We recognise the case for a complementary and alternative satellite radio navigation system .
We recognise the importance of maintaining European technological capability for space activity .
We welcome the emphasis on a civil project intended ultimately to be commercially viable in a number of fields such as communications and Earth observation , as well as position - finding .
The difficulty lies in determining how to fund a venture until it becomes self-financing , particularly in view of the large sums of upfront investments required .
We want to see industry fully involved in the planning , specifications and preparatory stages to ensure a better chance of technical success .
That is why we have reintroduced amendments to lower the entrance fee for business to be part of the Joint Undertaking .
We see no particular merit in the proposal for a development company at this stage which duplicates the Joint Undertaking structures .
We are mindful of the difficulties of funding such a large-value infrastructures project solely from the private sector , which is why we have put forward the amendment enabling some funding to come from defence budgets provided it is used only for peacekeeping purposes .
This merely supports the comments made in Annex 1 of the Commission 's own information note concerning strategic considerations .
In closing I would say that it is a great pleasure to be here as the other half of " les deux gilles ciel et espace " club , with my colleague , Mr Savary .
Mr President , I would firstly like to thank Mr Glante for the report he has presented .

I would also like to thank Mr Savary and Mr Chichester , the whole of the Sky and Space team and all the MEPs who backed a document supporting the Galileo programme with a view to the European Council at Laeken .
Unfortunately , we were not able to achieve it on that particular occasion , but we hope to do so next time .
We must not be discouraged and we still have time , although not much , to try finally to move ahead with a project which seems to me absolutely crucial to Europe and which furthermore is going to be a measure of Europe ' s real will to have a presence on the international stage .
I will just focus on three aspects which have been referred to here in relation to the report .
We all feel that the participation of the private sector is crucial .
Our differences lie in how and from when , if I have understood correctly .
I wish to say in this respect - as Mr Savary and Mrs Langenhagen have said - that , regardless of the result of the amendments relating to Mr Glante ' s report , I hope that the report , in the form it takes after the amendments or without them , has the greatest possible support , regardless of my preferences for one formula or another .
We believe that the private sector should be incorporated from the outset , not only because of the limited funds which it is going to provide during the development phase of 2002 to 2005 , but because in the medium term it falls to that sector to contribute substantially during the following phase , not only in the implementation phase , but also in the operative phase .
The substantial increase in the financial participation of the private sector is an essential condition if we are to achieve , within the framework of the future financial perspectives , the necessary public funding in the latter phases .
The participation of the private sector should not be improvised , but rather it should be prepared from now , and that was expressed in the resolution of the Council of Ministers in April of last year .
The Commission ' s proposal , which is being presented today , simply puts this principle into practice .
It is true that there is a suggestion , raised by Mr Glante , which replaces that direct participation with the creation of a Joint Undertaking , with the creation of a promotion company in parallel with the Joint Undertaking , which does not seem sufficient to us , as I have pointed out .
We believe that participation must take place within the undertaking and furthermore that there is a clear will , not only in the space sector , but also in the applications sector , to go ahead with this phase , with this public or private participation .
I would also like to say that , by participating in the capital of the Joint Undertaking , industry is now beginning to accept a minimal risk , and I think that is appropriate , because it must also participate in the final definitions of the architecture of the whole system .
Some in the Council and in Parliament fear that conflicts of interest may arise .
In my opinion , these days , national legislations provide formulae which prevent this type of conflict of interests .
As I have said on previous occasions , we are giving aid and funding programmes , while there is a bank acting as financial adviser on the aid , while , linked to that bank , there is a non-governmental organisation , which carries out the programme and while , also related to that bank , there is a study group which is assessing the reality of the programme .
And we say that all of that is correct and that there are sufficient barriers to guarantee that a conflict of interests is not possible .
I believe that , in this case , there are even more concrete and clear ways , the famous Great wall of China , which would allow us to prevent this type of problem .
Article 9 of the Statutes says that , in the proposal we are making , in the field of contracting , the executive committee must act totally independently from the management board in which the companies participating in the Joint Undertaking would be represented , that is to say that the executive committee acts independently of the companies which may participate in tenders .
To prevent concerns , there are formulae which may offer greater guarantees .
With regard to the role of the States of the Union , we fully agree with the approach taken in the report by Mr Glante , that is , the creation of a monitoring committee made up of representatives of the Member States , so that those States may closely and continuously monitor the activities of the Joint Undertaking .
We have therefore proposed to the Council , and they have approved it , that in the Regulation , not in the statutes of the Joint Undertaking , but in the Regulation , a monitoring council should be established made up of representatives of the States .
This council should meet before each meeting of the management board of the Joint Undertaking to offer its opinion on the positions the Commission intends to advocate in relation to the different points on the agenda .
These operating rules seem to us to be the most appropriate for achieving our objective , since they maintain the operating autonomy of the undertaking while allowing the States to control the activities of the Commission , which represents the European Community on the management board of the Joint Undertaking .
With regard to the military dimension , ladies and gentlemen , I will say that Galileo is a system designed for civil purposes , which will have to be managed by civilians and that , furthermore , that is one of its essential differences when compared to the GPS .
Having said that , it is true that there is a service reserved for public administrations , which is intended for applications such as fire services and security , which at certain times can be used for other purposes , but at the moment the open GPS is being used for certain applications and for certain military uses .
It is inevitable that they will carry equipment which is synchronised with Galileo .
By this , ladies and gentlemen , I mean firstly that this type of system always has a double use .
Secondly , as you know , there is a free access signal , which is totally free of charge , and another access signal , pre-paid , with services , codified , but which is also free .
And a third signal is reserved for the public sector , but - I insist - is intended not for military uses but for civilian uses such as those I have indicated .
Ladies and gentlemen , in relation to Galileo , all the elements for taking a decision are on the table in the Council of Ministers , and the funding for the whole of the development phase , without any State of the Union having to give a single euro more in order to implement the project .
We must make it clear that the current financial perspectives cover the whole of the development phase of Galileo .
No State should have to put in another additional euro .
Galileo is essential to European industry , to technological capacity , to European space technology , but also for a series of other factors , such as autonomy , sovereignty and the capacity to offer an alternative service to GPS , which would strengthen the latter , since , as we have often said , Galileo will be and should always be , compatible with the GPS , both should be mutually strengthened , and , in the event of the failure of either of them , the other should serve as an alternative for all users .
It only remains for us to see whether or not there is political will and I believe that this is one of those occasions which will demonstrate whether or not there is political will to move towards a Europe which counts in the world .
The ball is in the Ministers ' court and we hope that they decide that there is that will .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 11.35 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting
The Minutes of yesterday ' s sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , with regard to yesterday ' s vote on the Olsson report , Paragraph 1 , second part , states that I abstained from the vote .
I actually voted against . I would appreciate it if this were corrected .
We take note of how you voted , which will be corrected .
Due to an error , the proposals of the Conference of Presidents on the appointment of Members of Parliament to bureaux of delegations to joint parliamentary committees do not appear in yesterday ' s Minutes and they will , therefore , be included in today ' s .
( The Minutes were approved )
Mr President , I wish , on the record , to thank France and Belgium for the guard on the buildings having now been markedly stepped up .
Thank you , Mr Rübig .
We take note of your observation .
Mr President , at the last sitting , we were all horrified at the possibility that Safiya Husseini might be executed in Nigeria .
I was going to ask for the floor , but Mr Corrie asked for it and I felt that he was representing me when he asked the President to intervene .
There is currently a mobilisation in my country , because it appears that the execution has been brought forward to this Saturday .
This horrifies us even more , because the case of this woman , like that of many others , is a display of savagery .
It is horrendous that a woman is going to be executed for having had a daughter , which is her fifth child , whatever the circumstances of the child ' s birth .
We should make a final effort to prevent this execution which the authorities have brought forward to this Saturday in an attempt to avoid the international pressure on them not to carry out what I consider to be a murder .
Mr President , I would ask you to make the appropriate representations .
Mrs González , the whole House shares your feelings and , as far as our institution is able , we will take all possible measures to ensure that such an atrocity cannot be carried out .
Mr President , I should like to make a comment on today ' s agenda .
It strikes me that today ' s debates will finish around 5.30 p.m. , while the votes will not start until 6.30 p.m.
We have had this situation for a long time now .
It means that for many of the Members , it is just too late to return home at the end of the debate , and they therefore have to stay on until tomorrow , or return home sooner .
In my view , it is an excellent thing that we are here , even if we have to burn the midnight oil as far as I am concerned , if we have something to discuss .
If that is not the case , then we should not be required to sit here drinking coffee for an hour .
I would therefore ask you if you could perhaps put it to the President to see whether this problem can be solved in such a manner that Members need not at any rate stay on any longer than is necessary .
Yes , Mr Maaten , but we have an agenda established .
Within the bounds of this agenda , we will try to take your concerns into account as far as possible .
Women 's rights and equal opportunities in Mediterranean countries
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0022 / 2002 ) by Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou , on behalf of the Committee on Women ' s Rights and Equal Opportunities , on EU policy towards Mediterranean countries in relation to the promotion of women 's rights and equal opportunities in these countries ( 2001 / 2129 ( INI ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Euro-Mediterranean cooperation is a political vision and a vital project for the EU .
But it is not just a sound method of promoting its economic interests ; the main objective is to create an area of peace , security , stability and prosperity .
The history of European unification teaches us that , unless there is prosperity for all , men and women alike , there can be no zone of peace and stability .
At present , the role of women in this process of cooperation is marginal or focused on the economic sector , with negligible results as regards improving their standard of living , whereas our committee believes that such a political vision should consider women to be instrumental in promoting cohesion , peace and sustainable development .
The aim of this own initiative report is to assess policy to date , to urge the European Union to implement all the necessary policies to promote the social , political and economic rights of women in the Mediterranean and to urge the partner countries to assume their responsibilities and rise to the challenges inherent in this objective by all possible means .
Assessing the situation is no easy task , because there are considerable variations from one country to another .
There is a lack of statistical data broken down by gender , an absence of studies by the European Commission and the national governments effectively evaluating the impact of Euro-Mediterranean cooperation on the promotion of women ' s rights and a special regional Mediterranean programme has yet to be applied .
Generally speaking , unemployment also affects women with a university education and illiteracy is on the increase .
Early marriage and other entrenched customs mean that girls often drop out of school .
There is evidence of entrepreneurship in the Maghreb , but the lack of financing and credit facilities tends to block women 's initiatives .
Violence , poverty and poor health among women are also commonplace , as is their absence from or under-representation in decision-making posts and , hence , their absence when Euro-Mediterranean cooperation is being negotiated and planned .
Tradition and religious stereotypes affect legislation , the ratification of international agreements and the application of such agreements .
Our committee calls for the effective implementation of what has already been laid down in the Barcelona Declaration regarding progress towards democracy and respect for human rights and for the gender dimension to be incorporated in the three pillars of the Euro-Mediterranean partnership .
It also calls for association agreements to incorporate an explicit provision on protection forwomen 's ' rights and also to provide for a policyfor monitoring suchprotection .
We are delighted that the study and the first regional Mediterranean programme for women have already been decided and we call on the Commission to take a global political approach , rather than confining the programme to vocational training , and to provide all the tools needed so that the issue of sexual equality can be dealt with in the broadest possible context , as it is in the countries of the European Union which apply this principle .
The European Commission and the Commissioner , who is present here , are experienced in drawing up and applying this sort of programme in the Member States and candidate countries and we believe that this experience will stand them in good stead when it comes to drawing up the regional Mediterranean programme .
Similarly , our committee is in favour of supporting women 's organisations in the partner countries and of networking them with women 's organisations in the Member States of the European Union .
We predict even greater potential for cooperation with women 's organisations and social agencies in the candidate countries and the Balkans because the entire region is responding to the challenge of stability and peace by mobilising civic society .
In addition , having noted that the European Investment Bank has no budget for financing and supporting women 's activities , we are in favour of a study into the possibility of creating a Euro-Mediterranean Development Bank for the Euro-Mediterranean zone because we feel that this will give women and women 's organisations a chance to develop and obtain facilities and credit .
We are also in favour of setting up a database and observatory to monitor this progress and the compilation of data used to assess and plan future policy .
We also paid close attention to the problems of women immigrants from these countries in the European Union and we call for the red tape and other obstacles to legal immigration into the Member States of the European Union to be lifted , because we believe that they result in poverty , marginalisation and the exploitation of human and , more specifically , women 's lives .
These phenomena have been denounced repeatedly , both by our committee and by the European Parliament as a whole .
This report is the result of excellent collaboration with the other political groups and I should like to thank my fellow Members for their amendments and for working with us and to ask you to endorse the report in its entirety .
Mr President , Commissioner , as members of this Parliament ' s Committee on Women ' s Rights and Equal Opportunities , we are extremely concerned about the situation of women in the Mediterranean countries , which was so well described by Mrs Kratsa in her report .
Widespread illiteracy - especially in certain countries , as the percentages she presents indicate - early school leaving , without achieving a level of study which prepares them for later life , and a lack of participation in the labour market - especially amongst young women - are factors which , together with poverty and marginalisation , above all affect women in the majority of cases .
This is the case despite the cooperation agreements , which contain many clauses , but never make it very clear that the situation of women should be taken into account amongst the objectives , and that the promotion of women and their access to better levels of personal well-being and to the labour market must also be amongst those objectives , so that they can pursue their own professions .
In these areas , health problems are one of the most serious situations they face , not only through a lack of healthcare , but also because of a lack of prevention .
These problems affect the whole population in general , but particularly women .
This is particularly surprising , given that we know the MEDA programme has had problems in this House , because not even half of what was intended has been implemented .
The MEDA programme , which is aimed at cooperation programmes in the Mediterranean areas , in particular the Southern Mediterranean , would be a wonderful instrument for creating specific programmes for women , aimed at promoting the role of women and increasing the living standards of women , which would be an advantage to the whole population , since we all know how important women are in the least-developed societies and , in particular , in traditional societies , where women bear the greatest responsibility for the family which , furthermore , usually includes a large number of children .
By means of the Euro-Mediterranean Forum of Women Members of Parliament we are well aware of the situation of these women , and we know what they expect from Parliament and the European Union .
We therefore have the obligation to draw attention to these facts so that their needs may be met .
Mr President , this is unfortunately the story of a so far unfulfilled commitment , which I will comment on later .
I would firstly like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Kratsa , for being so willing to incorporate all of those amendments and issues which we in the Socialist Group have wanted to raise in order to supplement this excellent report .
In reality , the work in committee has been a complete collaboration between all the groups , and I hope that the House will reflect this in its vote this morning .
We have managed to achieve compromises on almost all aspects of a problem which has become very serious , because it affects the great majority of women in the associated countries of the Mediterranean .
It is true that there are slight differences between the various countries , but , in general , the situation of women in these countries is of great concern : illiteracy , early school leaving , unemployment , violence against women and health problems , originating from their reproductive health and the lack of adequate services for women .
The report exhaustively describes all these situations .
The European Union and the Member States must renew their commitment to the women of the Mediterranean countries .
In very many cases , cooperation agreements do not fulfil the commitment to deal with the special situation suffered by these women .
It is what we call " the transverse introduction of the gender perspective " , because the situation suffered by women is not the same as the situation of men and therefore it is necessary to analyse what this situation is from the outset , in order to provide the tools necessary to resolve it .
Unfortunately , the regional programme within the framework of the MEDAs has once again been delayed and therefore this report is going to see the light of day long before this regional programme is implemented .
I hope that by then we can take up the fundamental ideas contained in this report .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we cannot continue to lament the situation suffered by women in many countries of the world , especially in this region which is so close to us , without taking action .
It is an urgent issue and we must promote the necessary mechanisms in order to ensure that the lives of women in these countries really becomes better and easier .
We must restate this commitment because there is no more time and we have to act .
Mr President , there is of course a tendency for its only to be women who take part in the debate whenever we have issues concerning women on the agenda .
I should therefore like to begin by saying that there are in fact two men from my group who have submitted to Parliament an appeal for equality that will also be forwarded to the President .
This appeal , entitled ' Enough is enough ' , calls upon all the groups to consider what real progress they have made with equality and actively to take initiatives to improve the situation .
Next , I should like to thank the rapporteur for her brilliant report , which deals very well with an area in which some time needs to be devoted to the position of women , and I would pick up on a couple of individual points which I should like to emphasise .
First of all , I think it is incredibly important that we should acquire statistics , and I would urge the Commission to look at how we can improve the statistical base , for any discussion about women , men and inequality is a non-starter if we do not have the necessary statistics .
Whether there is to be a supervisory body or data bank , or whatever , is less important .
What is crucial is that we obtain statistics .
The second thing is that , in my view , it is entirely right - and this is also related specifically to this appeal - that the Commissioner should ensure that women participate when the association agreements are negotiated .
We are well aware that we very often only have men around the negotiating table .
When that is the case , women have already been reduced in status , and their position does not become a topic of central concern .
The third thing I should like to highlight is the issue of programmes .
It is crucially important to investigate what practical programmes we can offer to secure better education for women so that they themselves will also be in a position to do more to promote equality .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Group of the Greens and European Free Alliance congratulates Mrs Kratsa on her excellent report .
I should also like to emphasise that we were pleased with the constructive manner , namely by cooperation between the groups , in which this report came about .
We concur with the rapporteur ' s view that Euro-Mediterranean cooperation is , politically speaking , of crucial importance for Europe .
Not only is this cooperation a safe way of promoting Europe ' s economic interests ; its key objective is to establish an area of peace , security , stability and welfare .
In order to accelerate this cooperation , a better understanding between the European peoples and the peoples of the partner countries is necessary , as well as an active mainstream society which is capable of taking part in this process .
In all of this , women occupy a key position .
They must be encouraged to acquire their own political identity and for this purpose , they must be given the opportunity , via education and awareness-raising , of making up for an unfair disadvantage that has built up over the centuries .
Women must no longer solely be regarded as mothers , no matter how important their role in bringing up children may be .
They must also be seen - provided they gain access to education - as fully-fledged partners in the labour market and in politics .
With a view to enlargement , women from the South must conclude a solidarity pact with women of the North , and they need to support each other in their justified demands .
In this respect , Europe should function as a driving force .
Our Committee on Women ' s Rights and Equal Opportunities , headed by an inspiring chairperson , Mrs Karamanou , has an important role to play in this .
Mr President , I feel that this whole report - for which I thank Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou - lacks something , that there is a taboo throughout , that there is a word it avoids mentioning .
I understand the sensitivity of the subject but , if we do not mention this word , we will not be able to address the root of the problem or cooperate with groups of women who are fighting in these countries for their freedom .
The missing word is ' religion ' , in other words Islam and the political abuse of Islam by the ruling power .
The key obstacle to the emancipation or liberation of the women in these countries - as was the case for a long time in our own countries - is the equivalence of religion and politics , an equivalence which makes the provisions of the Sharia the sole legal basis for laws on the situation of women in those countries , and this is becoming increasingly the case .
None of this is mentioned in the report , and I understand the difficulty , but I also fear that our reticence will not help the groups of women in those countries who , unaided , are courageously starting to raise the issue of separating religious and political authority .
The most important laws on women are those making up what is known as civil law .
Well then , all those laws which codify - and I repeat - codify discrimination against women are , albeit in different forms - directly applying the interpretation of the Koran .
There are women there fighting for the separation of powers , there are women fighting for the Koran to be brought up to date .
None of this features at all in the report , where the effects are listed but the cause is not addressed .
I regret this , for I feel that we are lagging behind them .
I would like to add my voice to those of my fellow Members in congratulating Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou on her report .
Certainly , listening to Mrs Bonino , we cannot deny the truth of what she has said .
The two minutes ' speaking time restriction undoubtedly prevented her from going into more detail . This is an important issue which must certainly be dealt with using a different approach from the one adopted in the recent report , which focused on ' women and fundamentalism ' .
If we take that approach , we will not be enabling either the women or ourselves to make any useful contribution to the growth - the cultural as well as economic growth - of these countries , and we will not be enabling these peoples as a whole to escape from a cultural and religious situation in which the human and civil rights of people in general and women in particular are being trampled underfoot .
I therefore feel that the issue must be addressed from the perspective outlined by Mrs Bonino , for the matter has hitherto been little debated in Parliament .
However , with regard to this report , as it stands , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur and make two recommendations to the Commission and the Council .
They are contained in the text before us but I would just like to emphasise them .
The first is that the presence of women at all levels of social , economic , financial and political life in conditions of equality , not least as regards decision-making , is a prerequisite for democracy and therefore for peace and well-being .
In everything the Union does to pursue these objectives , it must ensure that the programmes we have already implemented or are currently implementing are totally inflexible in terms of respect for the protection of rights , and that none of the work carried out by the Council towards partnerships and cooperation ever fails to take into consideration the need for these rights to be respected .
Mr President , Commissioner , I too would like to thank Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou for her sound analysis and for her excellent collaboration in the drafting of this report .
I think we can refer back to the Beijing World Conference of Women , where , too , steps were taken towards women 's empowerment and capacity building , and the MEDA programme actually provided us with the right instruments .
I must say , though , that we lack the statistical data to carry out a more exact and more precise analysis .
For example , the data is not in the report on the programme , and no yardstick has as yet been laid down against which progress can be measured .
Why was it that MEDA I and II included not even one regional programme exclusively devoted to women ?
Why is the democratic clause not applied with greater thoroughness where there is flagrant violation of women 's rights , as with genital mutilation , for example ?
The Valenciano Martínez-Orozco Report gives important pointers to that .
Why is fundamentalism not addressed in greater detail ?
I ask the women from the other groups , though , to pluck up the courage to introduce these issues into the Plenary rather than having their treatment obstructed in the Bureau .
I ask myself why women are barred from education in many countries .
It is a destructive tendency .
Particularly in rural areas , up to 60 % of women are excluded from education , even from being taught about reproductive health .
Why , for example , do our Member States , when dealing with immigration and asylum , not show a very emphatic red card to the illegal trade in human beings ?
In the Member State from which I come , for example , the recognition of gender-specific persecution or any persecution that is not carried out by the State as grounds for asylum is currently being made into an electoral issue , and the good starts we have made in our immigration law therefore end up being put out of the reach of women in the Mediterranean .
I think this is an area where women like us need to work together even more . With this report , we are setting a good example .
Not only do we need more women performing social functions here , we also need them in our partner countries , and I emphasise again that the European Union must focus its instruments of cooperation even more intensely on women , so that it is to the advantage of us all that we , with the help of the democracy programme , empower women and open up dialogue .
First of all , I would like to thank Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou for her excellent work .
This report reminds us how important it is for the European Union to promote the role of women in economic and social life , both by means of Community policies and in the context of cooperation with third countries and the Mediterranean countries .
I would simply like to add a few words on the current situation , which is impeccably described in this report .
Although circumstances have improved for women in some Mediterranean countries , there is still a long way to go , in particular as regards access to education , vocational training and the labour market , but also in social matters , with regard to single and divorced women , single mothers and women in rural areas .
The European Union should draw attention to any progress that is made and lend its support should the opportunity arise .
The European Union must also ensure that the good intentions stated during discussions on partnership or association agreements are in fact followed by practical measures , with a view to increasing social cohesion .
However , there is still much progress to be made .
The promotion of gender equality in the Mediterranean countries is hindered by a number of obstacles such as the influence of cultural and religious traditions and the lack of social and legal structures .
At a time when some of these countries are undergoing significant economic expansion , the integration of gender equality into all policies and , in particular , policies concerning access to training and the labour market , must be promoted , as women can only have access to positions of political , economic or social responsibility if specific measures are implemented with regard to training , backed up by appropriate social measures such as , for example , the establishment of childcare structures .
The Spanish Presidency has reiterated its strong interest in developing programmes such as MEDA and in partnerships between these countries and the European Union .
This is an ideal opportunity to encourage our current and future partners to promote women ' s economic , social and civil rights in order to create an active society involving both men and women , which , I hope , will enable an area of peace , security and prosperity to be created in the medium term .
Mr President , I wish to offer Mrs Kratsa my warmest congratulations , both on her initiative in drafting this report and on the report itself and the clear policy proposals contained in it .
This report will be a huge help to the women of the Mediterranean who , despite some improvement in their situation over recent years , still suffer sexual discrimination and inequality .
Illiteracy , poverty , domestic violence , inadequate medical care and little involvement in professional and political life are the main aspects of life for women on the southern shores of the Mediterranean basin .
However , what is worse , and here I agree completely with Mrs Bonino , is that women are the main victims of religious and political fundamentalism , of ultra-conservatism and of autocratic regimes who hang on to their power by controlling the sexual conduct of women , their way of life , their reproductive functions and even their mode of dress .
Without doubt , irrationalism and fanaticism are the main obstacles both to the emancipation of women and to social and economic progress in general in these countries .
Obviously , the best defence against the powers of irrationalism and fanaticism is to strengthen the worldly aspects of the state and legal democratic order .
We must send out a clear message .
No political system , religious movement , tradition or custom can take precedence over respect for the fundamental freedoms of women , human rights and the Rule of Law .
As long as these basic aspects of a democratic state are lacking in numerous countries around the Mediterranean , there will only ever be a faint glimmer of hope of any improvement in the position of women and the resolutions passed and conferences held within the context of the Barcelona process will be meaningless .
That is why we are calling on the European Commission to use every means at its disposal , especially when negotiating association agreements , to include clear-cut clauses and commitments protecting women 's rights and the principles of the Rule of Law and recognising them as the sine qua non to social development in the countries of the Mediterranean and the promotion of the Mediterranean basin as an area of peace and cooperation .
Mr President , I wish to make four points in connection with this report .
Firstly , I feel that the fact that this report has been produced is a very positive thing .
I also thank the rapporteur for her efforts .
Secondly , I take the view that Mrs Bonino 's reflections are something we should all share .
What is lacking in the report is precisely the principal cause underlying the facts of this situation , which was analysed in the report , in part unsparingly ; the cause of it , though , is not there .
Thirdly , it appears to me that we are , from the point of view of consistency , far too amicable , far too calm , far too balanced .
Appeals are made , recommendations are made , requests are made , things are emphasised , but , in my view , far too little is demanded .
I believe we must in future exert much more pressure on this issue .
We must exert massive pressure on these countries and the societies in them , even with the suggestion of sanctions - and I do know that the word is not quite the right one .
That means that we must convince them and give them to understand , that the failure to positively influence the placing of women on an equal footing in these countries will have consequences .
Fourthly - and here I pick up on one of the Liberal Mrs Dybkjær 's ideas - this is very much an issue for men too .
I am a bit of a black swan here today , but I hope that those men who are not here today will , when the vote is taken , do the right thing and advance the policy of this report a few steps further - and I hope that they will also do so in future .
Mr President , I too should like to congratulate Mrs Kratsa and the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities because not only is this a report of substance , it also puts the question of women 's rights straight back on the Euro-Mediterranean agenda .
The Barcelona process is basically a means for dialogue between the Community and the countries of the Mediterranean .
Needless to say , this dialogue cannot simply be based either on the principles of the European Union or on the principles underpinning the regimes in these countries .
It has to be based on international law , human rights conventions , the Beijing declaration , which these countries have signed - all the international texts and conventions which place women 's rights at the heart of human rights , bringing us back to the question of the gender dimension of foreign policy .
Because the Barcelona process is one of the ways used to develop the European Union 's foreign policy .
I should like to inform the House that the Commission has already taken an initiative to adopt a text of recommendations and principles in the hope that it will be accepted by the foreign ministers and will govern every contract and agreement between the European Union and third countries as regards women 's rights and the gender dimension of foreign policy .
The Commissioner responsible for foreign policy issues and I have already held initial talks .
The first conference of international experts on the matter has been organised and will be held some time in April .
Our aim is to have an established programme of recommendations and agreements in principle at political level by 2003 .
Of course , we shall be holding separate discussions on this with the Committee on Women 's Rights , I imagine very soon , once we have the full programme and timetable , so that we can discuss a specific text with the parliamentary committee .
The financial tools for the Barcelona process are ÌEDA I and ÌÅDA II .
But , as you rightly said , we have no reason to be especially proud of the results of ÌEDA I as far as the social sector and women 's issues and rights are concerned .
The difficulties are caused , in large part , by our inability to close the gap between administrative systems and , in even larger part , by differences in principle .
The objective of the ÌEDA IÉ programme is to create a free trade zone between Europe and the Mediterranean countries in the long term , by 2010 and , within it , to implement programmes which will help these countries develop economically , along with social and economic measures to support this economic development .
And , at the heart of these measures , there must be measures for women and for involving women in education , the job market and social and economic life .
It is the Commission 's job , following the forum held during the Belgian presidency , to prepare a specific regional programme during 2002 containing measures on the job market , women 's networks and easier access for women to financing by developing initiatives which also relate to training .
This report will provide a great deal of input into the final programme which the Commission presents but , in closing , I must stress that I believe that any regional programme , irrespective of how much funding it has , if it is not applied within the framework of international agreements - I repeat this because the approach on the European side is often considered paternalistic - so I repeat that this programme will only succeed and bring in the results we all hope for if it is applied within the framework of international agreements , the Beijing declaration on respect for human rights and respect for women 's rights .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
Illiteracy and social exclusion
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0009 / 2002 ) by Mrs Hermange , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on illiteracy and social exclusion ( 2001 / 2340 ( INI ) ) .
Mr President , almost two years ago , we adopted the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
The right to knowledge and , consequently , the right to know how to read , write and count are part of this Charter .
Consequently , the opportunity to learn how to read and write should be available to all as a fundamental right , and parents , teachers and politicians should recognise their obligation to ensure that this opportunity is grasped by all , in particular because , when people cannot express themselves with words , they often do so with their fists , as they feel excluded from school , business or even their own family .
This right to knowledge is not currently realised , however , as 10 to 20 % of the population of the European Union , or as many as 30 % if we count the candidate countries , are considered to be illiterate : 45 % in Portugal , 35 % in Italy , 22 % in Ireland and Great Britain , 15 % in Germany and France and , to add the candidate countries : 42 % in Slovenia and Poland , 33 % in Hungary , 29 % in Bulgaria and 20 % in Lithuania .
Illiteracy increases the divide between privileged members of society who are in a situation of relative security and those who are disadvantaged and marginalised , who do not have access to the labour market and consequently suffer financial insecurity , psychological isolation and social exclusion .
From an economic perspective , we all know that illiteracy also affects our businesses and their modernisation : it leads to increases in costs relating to the accident rate , employers ' contributions and time taken to complete work because of the need for additional supervision .
However , although the European Commission and our institutions have produced a number of documents , there are still a number of obstacles : gaps due to a lack of reliable data , the lack of clarity of certain programmes proposed and policies which are still insufficiently integrated .
This matter , which I consider to be serious , Commissioner , should also be addressed through integrated policies associating social , and cultural and educational objectives , and should be discussed at policy level to increase awareness of this phenomenon .
It is with this in mind that I call on the Commission to submit to Parliament and the Council a Green Paper on Illiteracy , together with a timetable for achieving tangible objectives along the lines of the social agenda , precisely defining the measures to be taken at European level .
In the same vein , I call on the Commission , in connection with the employment guidelines , to propose specific indicators and benchmarks relating to illiteracy , in close cooperation with the social players .
I also ask the Commission to submit to Parliament , each year , a written report , incorporating statistical data , on progress towards the objectives of combating illiteracy and social exclusion .
We should all be aware that this matter is a key issue for development and for harmony in our societies .
We are not always aware of this , which is why I would also like us to be able to set up , not another observatory but , within the European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training , based at Thessaloniki , a sort of European illiteracy monitoring centre , as suggested by my group , specifically by submitting Amendment No 5 .
Lastly , I would like to say , with regard to the amendments tabled recently , in particular by the Group of the Greens , that I am in favour of Amendment No 4 and that I would have been in favour of Amendment No 2 had it been considered as an additional item .
As for Amendment No 3 , even though I am not against it in principle - the amendment requesting a Green Paper on illiteracy and mathematical illiteracy - I call for a vote against it because I think that , in the wording " Green Paper on Illiteracy " , the problem of mathematical illiteracy is obviously included .
Lastly , I cannot accept Amendment No 1 .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , those were the points I wanted to mention .
Mr President , my compliments , in particular , to Mrs Hermange for her initiative in taking up one of the elements of the new strategy on combating social exclusion and poverty such as illiteracy , which I feel is a genuine barrier to the exercising of fundamental human rights , the rights of all citizens .
The idea that functional illiteracy affects over 10 % of the European Union ' s population is horrifying , to say the least , in a developed society in which Europe is pursuing ambitious goals such as those set by the Lisbon Council : firstly , the need for every citizen to have the necessary skills to be able to live and work in the new information society ; and secondly , to make Europe the most competitive , dynamic economy in the world .
I feel that we must approach the debate on illiteracy , or rather the problem itself , with great vigour , taking this approach and with these goals before us .



The resolution focuses on certain points which I would like to mention briefly : firstly , knowing how to read and write is a fundamental right which must be guaranteed to all people ; secondly , combating illiteracy is essential because it secures and strengthens the freedom of the individual ; thirdly , the task of combating this disturbing situation must be undertaken by society as a whole and by public authorities and administrations in particular ; fourthly , ' returning ' illiteracy , which particularly affects elderly people , especially those in danger of social exclusion - who , as they lose their self-sufficiency , are obliged to live in sheltered accommodation , leaving their family and socio-cultural environment behind them for good - is a scourge which must be combated .
Therefore , governments should promote an incisive initiative through Community programmes , while it is up to you , Commissioner - and , as we know , you are very aware of the problem - to honour the undertaking to address this issue .
Mr President , I would like to begin with a phrase from the rapporteur ' s explanatory statement in which she clearly states that extreme poverty and social exclusion must be considered to be a violation of human rights and illiteracy an intolerable violation of those same rights .
Furthermore , we must remember that , as she herself has said , between 10 and 20 % of the European population is functionally illiterate .
The situation of these people severely restricts their ability to find decent work and to integrate themselves into the society in which they live .
They also have difficulties in reading some of the official documents which we regularly present .
This situation really contributes to the fact that , in a prosperous continent such as Europe , between 18 and 20 % of people live in poverty , if we consider that they are below 60 % of the average in their country of origin .
This is an intolerable situation .
The rapporteur proposes a series of objectives which we agree with and which must be taken into account in future decisions .
Firstly , a definition of the different forms of illiteracy - which we still do not have - with common criteria and mechanisms .
Secondly , common action against the situation of functional illiteracy , with an open method of cooperation between the various countries .
This fight against illiteracy must be incorporated into other Union policies and must be taken into account whenever we talk about education and training .
There must be a timetable for specific achievements , and Parliament must take account of the progress made , as the rapporteur has said .
The matter must be integrated into equal opportunities policy .
We have just discussed another report which speaks about this and we are perfectly aware that illiteracy figures in all countries are always higher amongst women .
And finally , there must be participation by social agents and the sectors involved .
This participation is crucial .
In previous programmes to combat poverty , as you will recall , there were concrete projects which spoke of the crucial importance of participation by all the sectors involved .
Mr President , Commissioner , I must congratulate Mrs Hermange on her initiative on this report on illiteracy , since it is a problem which we do not normally pay much attention to , because we think we have achieved total literacy , since the majority of Member States of the European Union have made enormous efforts over recent years to achieve this objective and we thought we had done so .
However , there are increasingly pockets of marginalisation in the cities , there is an immigrant population establishing itself in our cities and that means that the problem of illiteracy , and particularly functional illiteracy , is a really serious problem today , because it is always linked to poverty , to marginalisation and to social exclusion .
As defenders of human rights - and this is one of the most fundamental rights , as has been pointed out here - we have an obligation to draw attention to this matter so that programmes are set up to resolve the problem .
The worst affected are the young people who come from these sections of the population , who do not have employment opportunities , or in some cases find insecure jobs , without any opportunity to improve their working conditions .
Since the Lisbon Summit , becoming the most competitive information society in the world has been one of our objectives .
If the information society is fundamental to work in the future , these young people who can hardly find work under normal conditions , will not have any opportunity unless we integrate them into this information and knowledge society .
It is therefore urgent to carry out programmes and actions by means of the Green Paper which the rapporteur is requesting , so that these sections of the population , which are increasing with the immigration of recent years , are offered a solution to this fundamental problem , so that they can access other systems of personal welfare .
We always focus on health , housing and employment , but this is a fundamental problem and resolving it should be a priority .
I once again congratulate the rapporteur on this wonderful initiative , which draws attention to a problem that is still facing us .
Mr President , I too would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Hermange , on her presentation of this report to the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs and on her extremely detailed work .
We know that Europe is one of the most prosperous continents in the world but , despite that , a substantial number of our citizens live in conditions of extreme poverty and social marginalisation .
One of the parameters for measuring these conditions , in addition to income , is , without a doubt , illiteracy , for illiteracy is a cause of exclusion and prevents access to human rights , as the rapporteur rightly said in her report .
Illiteracy , understood to mean either a lack of basic education or ' returning ' illiteracy , is causing an increasing divide between those who are privileged and enjoy relative security and those who are disadvantaged and marginalised , who do not have access to work , who are in danger of isolation and do not participate in social life .
Illiteracy also represents an expense , a cost both for businesses and in social terms , as well as a cause of exclusion .
It is an ongoing problem in Europe , although it is not thought of as a cost , but there are no reliable data available for analysis .
Combating illiteracy and social marginalisation is now essentially the responsibility of the Member States , but at the Lisbon Summit - as has already been said - the Heads of State and Government set themselves the goal of making Europe the most competitive knowledge-based economy in the world , etc , etc .
Moreover , the European Social Agenda was adopted at Nice .
Therefore , combating illiteracy and marginalisation must become one of the priorities of the Union and the Member States , with all the relevant policies applied in the context of a global , integrated strategy .
We therefore firmly support the rapporteur ' s calls for a Green Paper and an Action Plan . I will not go into their contents because they are already outlined in the report .
However , we do call strongly upon the Commission to promote these texts : Parliament will support them and stand shoulder to shoulder with the Commission to ensure the Council endorses them .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , it is scarcely credible that between 10 % and 20 % of people in the European Union are unable to understand printed matter and documents and make use of them .
Even I will readily concede that I am not in a position to fill in my German tax return forms without expert help , let alone actually fill in an application form for a project promoted by Europe .
It is , though , surely not this sort of documents to which this report refers .
People who have difficulty with reading and writing are restricted in their ability to participate in the life of society , and , when it comes to earning a living , are relegated to work for which minimal qualifications are required and which is therefore badly paid .
On economic , but above all on ethical and moral grounds , it is our duty to preserve people from this fate in this century of the information society and of lifelong learning .
Parliament is therefore doing the right thing with this report by describing a problem which is often shamefacedly hushed up , and offering solutions to it .
That has been done in this report as thoroughly as necessary and as briefly as possible , by the rapporteur , Mrs Hermange .
European legislation , though , is limited in this task to measures of development and support , as general and vocational education falls within the remit of the Member States , and that is where it should stay .
The Member States ' sole duty is to make real the right to education which is now also enshrined in Article 14 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
The work of the monitoring centre which the report calls for should be carried on in the already-existing Centre for the Development of Vocational Training ( Cedefop ) in Thessaloniki , using the resources available there .
That makes sense in view of the costs involved and of the relevance to the functions Cedefop performs in any case , and so I ask you to support our Amendment No 5 .
I would also subscribe to and support a European Year devoted to books and to reading , in view of our young people 's widespread mania for television .
Mr President , Commissioner , this own-initiative report , which we should welcome , concerning the specific subject of illiteracy sheds light on two particular approaches recently implemented by the European Union in adopting the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights on the one hand and the action programme combating social exclusion on the other .
As Marie-Thérèse Hermange , our rapporteur , reminded us , the right of each individual to know how to read , write and count is the practical basis that enables these individuals to exercise their rights as citizens .
This right must be guaranteed by practical measures wherever the scourge of illiteracy is present ; it is therefore enlightening to be reminded of the figures .
In practical terms , I believe it must be possible to develop these actions in two directions .
We need to make the connection between illiteracy and unemployment , on the one hand - for example there are the proposed actions targeting illiteracy in the workplace - in order to ensure the coherent implementation of the decisions made in Lisbon , and between illiteracy and social inclusion on the other .
We should devise actions for social inclusion that are independent of the professional situation of the people concerned , and I am thinking of women in particular .
I believe the case of migrant women must be considered in this respect .
The report also calls for the creation of a monitoring centre , and I think it is realistic to plan this within an existing tool , Cedefop , since compatible indicators and benchmarks between Member States are the basis of any coherent Community policy .
In conclusion , I believe that this report must be seen as a tool to facilitate the drawing-up of a measure involving local , national and Community levels , each with their own specific responsibilities .
Today , the handling of these issues requires Community initiatives and the impetus to encourage the Member States to make decisions that are essential for their people .
I would like to start by congratulating Mrs Hermange on this important document , which I support , and to wish Commissioner Diamantopoulou every success in her work .
This is the first time I have had the pleasure of seeing her this year and I am sure she will be just as successful in her work in the second part of the legislature as she was during the first two and a half years .
I feel that this document is extremely important , and it is crucial that Mrs Hermange has stressed that illiteracy does not just mean not knowing how to read and write , but not understanding discussions and being unable to move about in modern society , where it is not enough to know how to read and write but where a certain culture and savoir-faire are necessary for a person to have any status .
In some States of the European Union , this form of illiteracy is as high as 30 to 35 % .
I would therefore stress the importance of resolving this issue .
There is another Commission document on the issue , which has been referred to the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport - on that famous subject ' lifelong learning ' - but this is a question of learning not the languages of other States but our own .
Well then , I am concerned by what happens as a result of this kind of illiteracy during elections .
Voters who are illiterate in this way do not know what or whom they are voting for when they go to the ballots and they do not understand the programmes .
This means that democracy is diminished .
Pensioners , I must say , know exactly which way to vote when they go to the ballots , but we must be sure that everyone understands why and for whom they are voting .
Mr President , as others have also said , this is an incredibly important report .
The nightmare scenario for the future is that society will be divided into two groups : the initiated , who know everything and are plugged into the knowledge society , and those who have been left behind and will therefore be marginalised in society .
Nor is there any doubt that this is a European issue , which is why I also sincerely support what the rapporteur has said about open coordination being the best method of achieving progress in this area .
The only way is to make it genuinely very embarrassing for the Member States if they do not do something in this area , and for the status of their efforts to be made as public as possible .
We must proceed with the proposal on lifelong learning as quickly as possible , and I naturally hope that the Commission will include the views adopted by Parliament today in the proposal on lifelong learning , for that is where they in fact belong . I also think that we must endeavour to get some new thinking into this area .
We must bear in mind that , if adults are to learn about a subject , going back to school is not an option .
Instead , they have to learn in some other way . They have to learn in the context of the labour market ; they have to have time off work to be able to go to classes ; and they have to learn through the process of schools and teaching coming out to the workplace .
I believe it is very important to establish the connection between work and learning so that we can continue with lifelong learning .
The last thing I want to say concerns an idea for the Commissioner that could perhaps be taken further and might also put pressure on the Member States to demonstrate that they are doing something in this area . It is the possibility of introducing ' knowledge accounts ' for the individual Member States through which the latter would simply report each year on how much they had done in the area of lifelong learning to combat illiteracy and promote knowledge and education in general .
' Knowledge accounts ' are a good idea , Commissioner , which I hope you will consider .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I wholeheartedly concur with the Lisbon objectives .
I consider it a thoroughly positive thing that we live in a performance-oriented society , one which wants to become the most competitive , the most dynamic and also the most reliant on knowledge .
That being so , it is of course quite deplorable that we see society actually disintegrating and that we have in our society a new grouping which is weak in social and educational terms .
In view of this , I support the report and am of the opinion that there is a need to address these documents that have been mentioned several times today in the context of the Green Paper and that the amendment on the monitoring centre tabled by Mr Pronk and Mrs Stauner should be adopted .

I wish to address a second aspect of this topic , the issue of to what extent it is possible to compensate for differences between the various Member States in education , training , schooling , and the current state of knowledge .
The idea of States retaining their own competences in this area is , after all , pretty obsolete .
This is where we should be reorienting ourselves and also accepting a degree of harmonisation , even if that were to lead to substantial restructuring in certain countries .
It is not fair to tell the citizens of this EU of ours that there is freedom of movement and of establishment when differing school systems and recognition of training standards mean that there are significant differences , and therefore discrimination , when it comes to actually putting it into practice .
We should , for this reason , be taking this report as an opportunity to take steps towards harmonisation in the cultural sphere .
Mr President , today 's report on illiteracy is a very important contribution to the wider issue at European level , i.e. our review of the basic skills of literacy and a working knowledge of arithmetic as prerequisites to social integration , as prerequisites to the European Union 's achieving the Lisbon objective of a knowledge-based economy .
We have , without doubt , entered a new stage , in which basic skills do not stop at reading and writing and now include IT skills , high-tech skills , entrepreneurship , foreign languages , interpersonal communication skills and social skills .
All this can be summed up nowadays in four simple words : the need to learn .
The Commission 's policy in this sector will be expressed in a series of initiatives and programmes which are currently in the pipeline as a result of cooperation between the Council , Parliament and the Commission .
My first point is that the Lisbon Council in 2000 called for the Commission to draft a report on the specific future objectives of education and training systems .
This report was presented in Stockholm and we are currently preparing a programme of work on the subject of the universal acquisition of basic skills , which will be presented in Barcelona . The acquisition of basic skills is one of the 13 basic objectives for the education and training systems of the European Union .
This objective includes defining indicators to measure over a ten-year period the extent to which Member States ensure that all their citizens acquire a working knowledge of reading , writing and arithmetic .
This is the first specific indicator which will reflect developments in this sector over a ten-year period .
Secondly , I should like to remind the House of the communication which the Commission published in November 2001 on creating a European area of lifelong learning , which stresses that lifelong learning depends on acquiring basic skills .

Thirdly , I should like to mention the forthcoming action plan on skills and mobility in the European Union which the Commission , by which I mean President Prodi and I , are due to announce next week , the aim of which is to achieve a real European job market based on mobility and a minimum level of common skills at European level .
My fourth point concerns the Community strategy on combating social exclusion .
As you know , the bottom line in the national actions plans of most countries is that there is a direct link between social exclusion and the acquisition of basic skills .
And both the Equal programme and the Social Fund make provision for funding for individual programmes relating to access to basic skills , especially by groups subject to discrimination .
And we must not forget that certain groups , such as people with disabilities and immigrants , must overcome even greater problems in order to acquire basic skills .
My fifth point concerns cooperation at international level , in other words , our international strategy .
The European Commission is working with the OECD , ÁSÅÌ and G8 to support direct action to get basic skills put on the corresponding agendas .
Which brings me to the report and , more specifically , to the application of the open method of coordination . As I mentioned in relation to the strategy on exclusion , we can take it as given that the Council of education ministers will approve the open method of coordination on common objectives for education and training systems next week .
As far as the Green Paper is concerned , I must express a certain reticence , mainly because numerous new policy initiatives have been started , important matters are in the pipeline in various Councils and we are now in a position to take action on illiteracy ; it would perhaps mean additional delays if we were to proceed with the Green Paper , given that we now have most of the information we need from work carried out in previous years .
Which brings me to the recommendation to Member States on reading and writing lessons and access to basic skills .
I must stress here that we need to respect the principle of subsidiarity and take particular care in our approach to education , which is a strictly national matter .
The open method of cooperation is an excellent tool , giving the Member States added value in the form of indicators and exchanges of best practices .
On the question of a European illiteracy monitoring centre , I have taken note of the proposal by the Members of Parliament on the need to use existing institutions , such as Cedefop , and I would remind the House that there are already a number of programmes , such as the OECD Pisa programme , which provide some initial answers .
Before creating new tools , we need to be sure that we are making efficient use of tools which already exist .
Finally , as far as the proposal for an annual report on illiteracy to Parliament is concerned , we want to look at the most efficient way of informing Parliament and what use Parliament can make of reports on national action plans on social integration and reports via the open method of coordination , i.e. how existing means , reports which are drafted every year anyway , how this dimension can be used so that the information provided is exponential and more efficient .
Thank you , Commissioner Diamantopoulou .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon today .
Social policy agenda
The next item is the report ( A5-0004 / 2002 ) by Mrs Hermange on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs on the Commission communication to the Council , the European Parliament , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions on the scoreboard on implementing the social policy agenda ( COM ( 2001 ) 104 - C5-0536 / 2001 - 2001 / 2215 ( COS ) ) .
Mr President , it is unusual to speak twice in a row in the same day .
I would like to thank you , Commissioner , for your comments and suggestions , which we will have to discuss .
Commissioner , we have greatly criticised the Nice Summit , yet it has provided you with a valuable instrument : the Social Agenda , which was drawn up with the objective of making the European Union the world ' s most competitive economy , as decided at the Lisbon Summit .
As we all know that there is no openness between European , national and local partners , this agenda raises the issue of responsibility and attribution of powers of all those playing a part in its implementation .
It is in its dual role of ensuring openness and acting as a social instrument that the Social Agenda is a key component of economic and social modernisation , as its implementation will , in the long term , be decisive for achieving the strategic objectives laid down by the Lisbon European Council .
We are sure of this , even if it is not currently given much consideration .
That , Commissioner , is why Parliament and its Committee on Employment and Social Affairs deeply regretted not having been able to consider the Social Agenda prior to the Stockholm European Council .
We therefore ask that Parliament be involved in the implementation of the adjustment of the Social Agenda , as well as all the social partners , and we insist that , from now on , the scoreboard make clearer the various responsibilities of the parties involved .
We also call on the Commission to supply information on how it proposes to act on a number of requests we have made : to define an appropriate legal basis for the development of civil dialogue ; to provide a tax and legislative framework for the development of the social economy ; to integrate the social dimension into competition policy ; to submit a directive on social security cover for new forms of employment ; to reinforce the action programme and instruments against poverty and social exclusion and submit a proposal to amend Directive 92 / 85 / EC on introducing measures to help improve the health and safety of female workers ; and to launch an initiative aimed at better guaranteeing the social quality of work .
You will also understand , Commissioner , that we are calling on you to speed up a number of operations : in particular to submit a proposal for a review of the enterprise committee directive as soon as possible so that the legislative procedure can be concluded as intended , to submit to Parliament a memorandum on policy in the area of health and safety at work that could serve as a consultation document , to conduct in-depth examination and assessment of the impact of the Luxembourg process , and , lastly , to propose activities to mark the European year of the disabled .
Commissioner , we are convinced that this scoreboard should not be confined to setting out actions implemented by the Commission but should eventually become a strategic instrument by means of which the agenda ' s implementation can be supervised , and where need be adjusted .
We are also convinced that partnerships should be strengthened in all the actions taken in this area .
Commissioner , Nice has provided you with a valuable tool .
You therefore have a valuable role to play in making social policy more transparent .
Take this opportunity to transform this Europe of commodities into a people ' s Europe , in the knowledge that Parliament will be right behind you .
Mr President , I too should like to congratulate Mrs Hermange on the extreme care and sensitivity with which she has drafted this report on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs . I agree with her that the table of results of the Social Agenda should include all planned activities and the division of responsibilities and should be submitted to the European Parliament within a reasonable period of time so that Parliament can study and give an opinion on it .
The European Parliament has supported the Commission proposal on a cohesive policy framework for social development right from the start , although it did point out that the updated European standard which was the whole purpose of the Social Agenda should serve the values of solidarity and justice underlying the European structure better and more efficiently , given that these values are currently under attack .
In order to promote these values , the European Parliament stresses in its resolution that we also need to promote the full participation of women in economic and social life .
The European Parliament also stresses in its resolution that the gender dimension needs to be included in all sectors covered by the Social Agenda and monitored in regular reports .
We need a proposal to amend the directive on the safety and health of pregnant and breastfeeding workers , i.e. directive 92 / 85 .
We need to highlight the fact that the social partners have a responsibility to put the principles of equal pay and equal opportunities into practice .
We need to take an initiative to improve working hours and strike a better balance between work and home , we need a more substantial take on sexual equality in all pre-accession negotiations and we need to promote dialogue with women 's organisations in candidate countries .
As rapporteur for the Committee on Women 's Rights for the Social Agenda , I should like to ask the Commission to tell the European Parliament how it intends to follow up these issues and if it intends to present a proposal for a directive on equal treatment in sectors other than the employment sector .
Finally , the European Parliament has highlighted the need to make it easier for social agencies to take part and I should like to ask what initiatives you intend to take to increase the participation of women 's organisations .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should obviously , first and foremost , like to congratulate Mrs Hermange and thank her for her excellent cooperation .
The result is there for everyone to see .
This report is based on a very broad consensus , for not one single amendment has been tabled .
However , I should also like to say that , with this report , the European Parliament actually falls between two stools .
On the one hand , it is a fact that the scoreboard which we are discussing has actually been outdated for a long time .
On the other hand , the new scoreboard has not yet been finally rubberstamped by the European Commission , despite the fact that , in Stockholm , we were assured that this scoreboard , together with the summary report for Barcelona , would be before us by no later than January .
I should , at any rate , like to thank the Commissioner for the opportunity we have had , together with the coordinators , of obtaining current information about the Commission ' s intentions , and of making our concerns known regarding the state of implementation of the Social Agenda .
Commissioner , in my view , we should make this sound initiative an integral part of the procedure in order to guarantee Parliament ' s involvement during the implementation of the Social Agenda .
I should therefore like to afford this debate a little more topical value by seizing the opportunity urgently to call upon you , Commissioner , but especially - and I am stressing this - the entire board of Commissioners , to implement the ambitions of the Social Agenda and the pledges made during the Swedish and Belgian Presidencies down to the last detail and according to the time schedule .
After all , Commissioner , there are quite a few reasons why we are concerned .
It is , of course , the case that 2001 has produced some welcome results , but it is vital to keep this momentum going and , for this , we need a new and better scoreboard , which clearly indicates the responsibilities with the attendant expiry dates .
I will give you a few reasons why we are concerned .
First of all , the role of the social partners in relation to labour organisation and lifelong learning is crucial if the Social Agenda is to be implemented , and I hope that their contribution to Barcelona will be considerable .
But where consultation fails , the legislator needs to step in , and this is currently the case with temporary agency work , in connection with which we have long been waiting impatiently for a Commission proposal .
Secondly , following the successful completion of the directive on worker participation in the framework of the European Company and the directive on the information and consultation of workers , nothing now stands in the way of a review of the enterprise committee directive .
This also applies to the action plan to improve health and safety which Mrs Hermange introduced a moment ago .
According to the Social Agenda , the initiatives should have been before us at the end of 2001 / beginning of 2002 , but , Commissioner , there is no trace of these in the operational programme of the Commission . I am also picking up signals that there is quite a bit of resistance in the Commission .
I should therefore like to say one thing in conclusion , Mr President .
I should like you , Commissioner , to pass on these words to the College of Commissioners : pacta sunt servanda [ Treaties should be respected ] .
This Parliament will never accept the Social Agenda being shelved , and I hope that you will be able to use the support of this Parliament in the College of Commissioners .
Mr President , the ELDR Group would like most sincerely to congratulate Mrs Hermange on her report and on the unanimity that it achieved in committee .
That said , it is only fair to give notice to the House that we may find ourselves less able to form part of a consensus when the Commission brings forward some of the proposals referred to in paragraph 14 .
In some cases it will depend on the form of the proposals , given our commitment to subsidiarity ; in others , it will depend on their exact content .
I would , for example , express my own concerns in both respects over the second indent of the paragraph and any proposals for providing a tax and legislative framework for the development of the social economy , the third sector .
Many voluntary organisations have already expressed their worries to me that such a measure , unless we get it exactly right , could well prove more of a hindrance than a help to their activities .
This is just one of the reasons why I would like to give wholehearted support to the first indent of paragraph 14 .
Knowing how much volunteers contribute to our well-being , I sometimes wonder just how much of a society we would have without their efforts .
We urgently need a proper legal base for the civil dialogue .
Without one , we will find it much more difficult to do what the President of Parliament urged us to do yesterday : involve EU citizens in the creation of a Europe fit for its future .
Mr President , I would also like to congratulate the rapporteur on her work .
We are looking for a greater role as a parliament in ensuring that we can conclude agreements with regard to social inclusion , so as to best respond to the needs and demands of those people we represent .
Parliament 's role must be a constructive one .
However , I have some concerns regarding the amount of legislation sought by this report and the move towards creating more bureaucracy and red tape , which could work to the detriment of the ideals underlying the social policy agenda .
We must favour creating a proper business environment where employment can be created , and where proper and real jobs can be maintained within the European Union .
Nowadays when we look around the world we can see how it is more common and easier for industry and business to relocate outside areas with high social costs and high taxation .
We must work towards a more progressive system in which workers are entitled to keep as much of their earned income as possible and there is better provision of services in the social sphere in areas such as housing , health and education through the national exchequer .
We may not achieve those with the proposals contained in this report . I am in favour of the report , but I have specific concerns .
We must also look at the whole legislative process implied by what is being called for in this report .
Although Parliament is seeking a greater role , more involvement in coordination and quicker action , with hindsight it is also looking for more legislation to be put in place .
Legislative instruments are called for when negotiations are not concluded in relation to training , lifelong learning , organisation of work , adjustments , new forms of work , guidelines for negotiations by social partners and supplementary sickness insurance .
However , the Commission has proposed something different .
The Commission is taking a far more proactive and forward-looking approach in its proposals .
We must support the call for research , which unfortunately was not highlighted within the committee report .
There has to be a radical increase in employment participation .
An emphasis must be put on better jobs .
More must be done towards building a European labour market with more mobility included within it .
Finally , we must play a greater and clearer role as regards the place within society of those with disabilities .
These people represent 10 % of the population , yet they are excluded from so many walks of life .
We have not yet achieved as much as we should have done for those people .
Mr President , congratulations to Mrs Hermange on her report , and also to the Commission on its communication .
It is a new instrument that is being developed .
It is the first time that it is on the table , so it goes without saying that it will require fine-tuning in future .
All criticism should therefore be seen in this light , and criticism is obviously always relative .
I welcome this instrument , and would want to make two comments in this respect .
First of all , we have developed a great deal of European legislation .
One of the aspects to which the annex to the communication refers is the need for codification .
This is absolutely vital , in my view , for the complexity of European legislation and the large quantity of European legislation are starting to play tricks on us .
Needless to say , we can insist on more European legislation , and more European legislation is probably required in the social field .
However , there should also come a time where we can catch our breaths and take stock , certainly in the light of enlargement .
After all , all these new laws will also need to be transposed in the candidate countries .
If I consider the social situation in the candidate countries , then this is certainly not straightforward .
They are very poorly developed in the social field , and if we pass new laws , these will also apply to them .
I therefore call for occasional reviews to be drawn up of the situation as it stands .
Would it not be useful to consider the results of all the existing laws ?
How do they operate in practice ?
Also , should the results in practice not be included in the scoreboard so that we at any rate have an overview , not only of our wishes for improvement , but also of the reality in the field ?
I call for including this too in the scoreboard .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I wish first to congratulate Mrs Hermange and thank her for this fine report , which is every bit as good as its predecessor .
We share her analysis and also the criticisms she has raised in the report .
I wish also to thank you , Commissioner , for your ideas on the Barcelona Summit .
Only this morning , I was telling a party of visitors from Bad Hersfeld how much commitment you demonstrate .
Your agenda has enjoyed very strong support from Parliament , and especially from the group to which I belong , but we now expect definite proposals and initiatives , action plans and also - Mrs Smet - directives .
This will not work in the complete absence of directives .
Of course , we should make more use than hitherto of the new method of coordination , especially in discussions with the candidate countries .
I see that as an excellent instrument for getting these countries involved right now and also giving them the opportunity to set out to us their current concerns and needs , and what they have achieved .
Here too , I do not share Mrs Smet 's opinion that these candidate countries lag behind on all these points .
I think we urgently need a reform of the European Works Councils directive .
If you have problems at the Commission , Commissioner Diamantopoulou , then just take the excellent report that Parliament produced last autumn .
We must also shape social policy along precautionary lines , and not always leave it until , so to speak , the child has fallen down the well .
The scandal surrounding lorry drivers in Luxembourg is only the tip of the iceberg .
The head of Luxembourg 's government has said that there is an urgent need for action on the part of the European Union , and perhaps we should take him at his word .
The Spanish presidency is , unfortunately , rather hesitant , but , Commissioner , Parliament supports you with all the commitment it can muster .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the degree to which the European Union complies with the Social Policy Agenda is a major indication of its interest in resolving the countless social problems that still exist .
We are still seeing not only major delays in this policy ' s implementation , however , but also that concerns with social policies are not being reflected in other policies and in the Community budget and we are even seeing a reduction in funds in the fields of employment and social affairs , which is unacceptable .
Even in the field of social inclusion , and despite the miles of paper that have already been used up on the subject and despite national inclusion plans and countless declarations of intent , there are still serious problems which could grow worse as a result of the slowdown in economic activity and the insistence on privatisations in fundamental sectors and in public services that are essential to a genuine policy of social inclusion , in addition to the fact that financial resources are still very thin on the ground .
If the European Union ' s leaders persist in this approach , there is a danger , as the report states , that the commitments given in the Agenda will not be fully met by 2005 .
This is why it is so important for the Commission to speed up its work and , above all , to change its policies , giving the utmost priority to the social aspect in areas such as quality employment with rights , the fight against poverty and social exclusion , the guarantee of access to fundamental rights , specifically for the more vulnerable social groups such as children , the elderly , immigrants and the disabled and the establishment of equal opportunities for men and women in all areas .
Lastly , I wish to thank the rapporteur , Marie-Therèse Hermange and her colleagues in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs for including in the report proposals that I tabled , specifically on asking the Commission to adopt initiatives and to present an action plan for the effective prevention of musculoskeletal injuries at work , to take initiatives to provide appropriate safeguards for workers ' rights , and notably employment , in the event of the restructuring or relocation of undertakings and to take initiatives , and notably adopt an action plan , to put into practice equality of payment for men and women .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to congratulate Mrs Hermange on her excellent work but also express some dissatisfaction at the Commission ' s communication .
We do not , of course , want to ignore the various initiatives planned by the Commission regarding employment and certain social issues , nor do we want to disregard the negotiation initiatives undertaken by the social partners .
The fact is that , although the agenda has a programme structure , endorsed since Nice by the Lisbon conclusions , in particular - and which , moreover I clearly support - this initial assessment of its implementation would seem somewhat inconclusive , removed from the original plan and goals set .
Indeed , I wonder whether , in the meantime , a predefined model and predefined frameworks exist , within which the responsibilities laid down by the agenda for the many parties involved can be exercised ; whether there is evidence of even embryonic good quality work and what its particular characteristics are ; whether the job placement systems and systems providing information on opportunities are successfully fulfilling their role and whether school and training courses are starting to be rationalised .
Moreover , it should be ascertained , at both Community and national level , whether industrial relations are moving steadily towards general development in terms of flexibility and security and whether local bodies and social forces are starting to cooperate responsibly in respect of national action plans and whether these plans are starting to be fully consistent with Union guidelines .
It would also be appropriate to ascertain , in order to get an overall picture , whether the States have at least initiated an internal debate on their social rules , on cohesion within their national territories and on the integration of groups which are relatively or extremely marginalised because of age , disability , sex or profession .
One last point concerns enlargement , on which the agenda focuses greatly , unlike this initial assessment , which merely refers to NGOs ' activities , although that is not to say they are not important .
To sum up , the point we are trying to make is that , although much of the issue is left to the principle of subsidiarity and the active responsibility of a number of parties to manage , the social protocol , although behind schedule , is an integral part of the Treaties , and social policy at last goes hand in hand with economic policy in the open method of coordination .
It is , therefore , vital that the Commission take a more incisive , specific role , which must be shared by the European Parliament in a more substantial , ongoing fashion .
Mr President , I have very great respect for the ambitious work which the rapporteur , Mrs Hermange , has put into the report on the scoreboard for implementation of the social policy agenda .
However , I am at the same time concerned that the work has led to the request for a long list of legislative initiatives on the part of the Commission , relating for example to lifelong learning , organisation of work , the need to reconcile work and private life , working environment policy , supplementary sickness insurance and the hiring-out of staff .
There are two main reasons why I believe that demands for legislative initiatives within these areas are the wrong road to go down .
First of all , we Swedish Conservatives believe that these issues should not be dealt with at Community level .
They are best dealt with at national level and , best of all of course , through negotiations at national level .
Secondly , I believe that adding more and more pages of legislation to the thousands upon thousands of pages that the candidate countries are now already required to accept and incorporate into their own legislation would make it considerably more difficult to implement any enlargement of the EU .
I therefore agree with what my colleague , Mrs Smet , said about its being important to pause and reflect and to review the legislation that already exists .
We are not being given the opportunity to vote against individual points in the report .
We Swedish Conservatives will not be able to support the report as a whole in the final vote , in spite of the fact that there is actually a lot in the report that we think is positive .
Unfortunately , the initiatives are , as I said just now , to be taken at the wrong level .
They should be taken at national level .
Mr President , I should like to start by saying that this report will help enormously in improving how we use an important tool .
As Mrs Smet said , it is vital that we understand that this is the first social policy tool we have had at European level , a tool achieved with a great deal of hard work and sensitive negotiation .
The report and the amendments tabled by the honourable Members touch on three issues : content , time and procedure .
As far as the content is concerned , I would remind the House that the Commission highlighted the need for a binding Social Agenda in the spring of 2000 and spent 6 months making important policy preparations in close collaboration with the French presidency and Parliament , in the person of Mrs Van Lancker , resulting in Nice in agreement between the leading countries , for the first time ever , on a long-term , five-year Social Agenda .
The Commission was specifically instructed to implement this Social Agenda and it announces a programme every year so that the commitments made will be fulfilled by 2005 .
I should like to remind the House that I presented the results of the first year 's implementation of the Agenda to the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs in October 2000 .
It was 100 % efficient ; there was a 100 % correlation between commitments and implementation .
In October 2001 , I again presented a table of actions in 2001 to the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , and again there was a 100 % correlation between commitments and results .
The question is , does the Agenda remain constant or does it absorb new factors over the course of time ?
The Commission is basically - or rather absolutely - committed to the Social Agenda as adopted in Nice on the basis of the Agenda agreed in 2000 .
In the meantime , we have promised to review it in 2003 and , of course , I agree with the report that Parliament will need to play an important part if we are to have the facility to adjust it .
My second comment concerns time .
First , the report on the Agenda and the Commission 's summary report to the spring Council need to be submitted at the same time .
This always creates problems , which we are trying to resolve .
Secondly , our criticism is based on the results of the first year of the Agenda , as Mrs Hermange says in her report , so we must bear in mind that the report in question had to be submitted two months after the decision taken in Nice .
This brings me to the procedure .
I agree with the report on three points : first , that the Social Agenda and the table of results cannot simply be a statement of past action and should make a careful examination of broader achievements and look to the future .
Secondly , it must refer back to the wider review of the factors involved and look forward to future expectations , these factors being , of course , the social partners , together with women 's organisations and civic society organisations , as described by the honourable Members .
The third point is that the stability and cohesiveness of the Agenda are not written in stone , i.e. we must intervene wherever there is an emergency or new elements create problems at social level with social repercussions .
As was the case recently with the initiative on restructuring , to which the Member in question has already referred , where we had 350,000 redundancies in a year due to corporate restructuring in the European Union .
We had no choice but to intervene , even though there was no commitment in the Agenda .
Ladies and Gentlemen , I am positive that this report and the close collaboration with the committee in question will help to improve consistently the performance of the Social Agenda which , I would again remind the House , is a completely new tool and which close cooperation will help to make even better .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
Welcome
Ladies and gentlemen , it is an honour and a pleasure to welcome to Parliament the President of the Republic of Bulgaria , Mr Georgi Parvanov , who has taken his seat in the official gallery .
His delegation includes prominent members of the Bulgarian government , including the Minister for Foreign Affairs , Mr Passy , and the Minister for Defence , Mr Svinarov , as well as members of the Bureau of the EU-Bulgaria Joint Parliamentary Committee .

Mr Parvanov took office less than three weeks ago , and we are delighted that one of his first actions should be to visit the European Parliament .
We are aware of the endeavours made by Mr Parvanov and the Bulgarian government to overcome the country ' s present social and economic difficulties and to prepare it for accession to the European Union .
We support its desire to be part of the European family and we would stress that the European Parliament is rooting for Bulgaria and its citizens .
Thank you , Mr President , for your visit .
( Applause )
Vote
I wish to table an oral amendment to Amendments Nos 10 and 16 , which are identical .
This is to do with the original text 's stipulation that the Joint Undertaking 's registered office should be located somewhere where it would be exempted from taxation .
For reasons of competitiveness , and other comparable reasons , this is of course not feasible .
In consultation with the groups , the text should be replaced by :
... " subject to the existing tax regimes and negotiations with the potential country of location " .
( Parliament gave its assent to the tabling of the oral amendment ) ( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Mr President , there is an omission in item 9 of the joint resolution .
In the discussions between the various groups , the European Commission was given the task of reforming the CEMT permit system , but this role has been omitted from the text of the resolution .
I therefore suggest tabling an oral amendment and adding the following words , which we agreed .
The text would then be worded as follows : " Calls on the Member States , in close collaboration with the Commission services , to initiate a qualitative and quantitative revision " .
( The House gave its assent to the tabling of the oral amendment )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Joint motion for a resolution on the situation in the Middle East
Regarding Amendment No 2
Mr President , I request that the first clause - " calls on Israel to comply with " - be replaced with the clause " calls on the two sides to comply with international conventions " , and that , after the words " arrested and imprisoned " , the words " by Israel " be inserted .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Motion for a resolution ( B5-0100 / 2002 ) on measures to combat terrorism
Regarding Amendment No 8
I wanted to table an oral amendment both on behalf of my own Group of the Greens and European Free Alliance and on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists .
The intention is to add a few words which will then make it clear that the definition of terrorism , in the form that we adopted yesterday , will also apply to these measures .
In other words , the amendment will not affect the entry into force but the interpretation of the definition of terrorism .
The text reads : " would like the implementation of these four measures and especially the common position on specific measures to combat terrorism to be subject to the interpretation of the definition , as laid down in the framework decision concerning the definition of terrorism that was laid down by the Council on 6 December 2001 , particularly with regard to the guarantees described in the recitals and the relevant statements made by the Council " .
I hope that this is acceptable to everyone .
( The House gave its assent to the tabling of the oral amendment ) ( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Joint motion for a resolution on the financing of development aid
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Joint motion for a resolution on the UNCHR in Geneva
Regarding paragraph 5
Mr President , paragraph 5 , where it says " to sign and ratify " should read " to ratify or accede to the Rome Statue " because at this stage it is no longer possible to sign the Statute .
So paragraph five should read as follows : " Calls on the Member States to appeal to all UN members to ratify or accede to the Rome Statute setting up the International Criminal Court " .
( The House gave its assent to the tabling of the oral amendment )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0023 / 2002 ) by Mr Napolitano , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on relations between the European Parliament and the national parliaments in European integration [ 2001 / 2023 ( INI ) ]
Before the vote

Mr President , I would like to inform the House that at the end of the debate yesterday afternoon , Mr Napolitano , in response to statements made during the debate by myself and others , made the following offer : he suggested that we ought to withdraw Amendments Nos 18 and 12 in order that he might , through the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , propose the bringing forward of a specific report on the issue of constitutional regions in the architecture of Europe .
Many of us believe that is a very important question .
Those who think it is important are divided at the moment between those who would wish to include it in this report and those who would wish to deal with it in another context .
The best course - and my group agrees with this as I believe the Liberals do as well - will be for us to accept Mr Napolitano 's generous proposition that this should be raised as a separate topic in its own right through the Constitutional Affairs Committee and that we should withdraw these amendments .
I therefore propose that be done .
Mr President , I would like to table a compromise oral amendment absorbing Amendments Nos 7 , 8 and 9 tabled by Mr Belder .
My amendment replaces citations 2 , 4 and 6 of the report with the following : ' Having regard to the recent statements by a number of Heads of State or Government on Europe ' s future , ' .
Mr President , Mr MacCormick has now withdrawn Amendments Nos 18 and 12 , but Amendment No 10 deals with the same subject .
Will the latter be withdrawn accordingly , or will it be kept ?
First of all , I would like to know whether the House agrees to the oral amendment tabled by Mr Napolitano as rapporteur , to replace the three citations with the clause he has just read .
Are there any objections ?
Good .
The amendment is adopted .
Mr MacCormick has proposed to withdraw Amendments Nos 12 and 18 .
Mrs Van Lancker says that Amendment No 10 can also be withdrawn as it deals with the same point .
I have also been informed that Amendment No 17 is on the same subject .
On the basis of what I have been told , I therefore conclude that Amendments Nos 10 , 12 , 17 and 18 are to be withdrawn .
Could you confirm that , Mr MacCormick ?
Mr President , I am content with that , but they are on different points .
The other two amendments make this observation : there are exactly 15 Member States in the Union at the moment and that is not disputed .
Whether there are more nations is a different question .
However , in a spirit of goodwill I withdraw these amendments as well .
Mr President , on a point of order , at yesterday 's vote on the Watson report on the European Arrest Warrant , there was confusion on the numbering of amendments .
You will see from today 's report that what was Amendment No 3 has been penned over as 4 .
Even in the Official Report it is not quite clear on some of the pages .
Amendment No 3 , which dealt with the legal concept of habeas corpus , had been circulated to us in the Irish delegation of the PPE-DE Group .
We knew that the amendment would be defeated but nonetheless I and a number of my colleagues decided to vote for it because of our firm belief in the principle of habeas corpus and that it is a good one .
We wish to indicate our vote that this legal remedy should have a place in European law .
Looking at the record of yesterday 's proceedings , Amendment No 3 , which we received yesterday morning , became Amendment No 4 at the vote .
Our decision to vote for the principle of habeas corpus was negated by this change in the numbering of the amendment .
I wish it to be recorded here that our vote was intended to support the principle of habeas corpus .
Of course , Mrs Doyle . Your statement will be included in the Minutes so that it is clear what you intended .
EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE
Resolution on the area of freedom , security and justice ( B5-0099 / 2002 )
Mr President , I offer this explanation of vote on behalf of the PPE-DE Group .
The concern of the PPE-DE Group was that , as a result of the ambiguity of its wording , Amendment No 8 to the resolution on the European judicial area could be wrongly interpreted .
This wording - particularly in certain language versions - could be interpreted as meaning that the entry into force of the four measures was being replaced by that of the framework decision on terrorism .
Following Mrs Buitenweg ' s clarification , we have voted in favour , because it is logical that the framework decision on terrorism should serve as an interpretative criterion for these four decisions .
Hatzidakis report ( A5-0012 / 2002 )
. ( NL ) For a long time , we used to aspire to ever faster road vehicles for the transport of both freight and passengers .
Speed restriction was seen as a temporary and unwanted hitch in technology waiting to be perfected .
Each deliberate attempt to return to any form of speed restriction was considered an infringement of the driver ' s individual freedom or a barrier to favourable profit margins for hauliers .
The rising death toll on the roads is forcing us to have second thoughts .
Despite this , the prescribing of devices for an ever larger proportion of road transport is only part of the solution .
If appliances are made compulsory but if the legal speed limit is not sufficiently restricted , then this looks more like a disguised form of subsidy for companies that can tap into a new market in this way .
This is comparable to the covenant with the car industry , which produces headlights that are activated automatically when the car is switched on , whereupon the driver needs to switch them off again in order to meet national statutory provisions or safety requirements .
Unfortunately , the rapporteur confines the proposal to company cars , extends transitional periods and , in part , increases the maximum speed of category N2 motorised vehicles to 110 km .
Speed limitation devices only make sense if they are designed to make compliance with such a serious statutory speed restriction enforceable , and this is , sadly , still not the case .
Marques report ( A5-0001 / 2002 )
Mr President , firstly , in my capacity as a member of the EU-Bulgaria joint interparliamentary delegation , I too would like to welcome the Bulgarian Prime Minister , Mr Georgi Parvanov , to the European Parliament .
As regards the Marques report on rum in the French overseas territories and the Azores , how could I vote against the motion ?
Last night , I dreamed I saw the pirate , Captain Morgan , who said to me : ' I have been appointed by the trade union of pirates to advise you to vote for this document , for otherwise we pirates will not be able to sing our usual refrain ' - which I will read , not sing here - ' 15 men on a dead man ' s chest and a bottle of rum ' .
The bottle of rum is essential , and so I voted for the motion .
.
( FR ) Article 299 ( 2 ) of the Treaty provides for the possibility of introducing special measures in order to ensure the survival of activities in the outermost regions where a climate of legal certainty is greatly needed if economic operators are to maintain their position and to grow .
The production of rum has a major impact on the economy of the French overseas departments as 40 000 jobs are involved .
The Council Decision of 1995 , which is due to expire at the end of this year , authorises France to impose a reduced rate of excise duty within French metropolitan territory for " traditional " rum produced in the French overseas departments .
The current review of the COM in the sugar sector and the dismantling of customs barriers in 2003 have led France to propose that these tax arrangements be maintained beyond 2002 on the grounds that the measures adopted at national and Community level would not in themselves be enough to allow FOD products to compete with products from other regions .
In order to preserve this traditional agricultural activity , which generates jobs at every stage of cane-sugar-rum production , the current system sets a minimum level for imports from the FOD into France which is strictly limited and supervised in order to compete with the ever-increasing sales of rum from third countries , which are not subject to the same production specifications .
In order to ensure the survival of the sector , rum producers in the FOD are obliged to use local raw materials , which guarantees quality , but which , for example , prevents Guadelupian rum from being produced using cane from Martinique as well as from third countries .
Rum from the overseas departments is therefore obliged to participate in the FOD rural development policy , which increases restrictions and production costs and places it in a disadvantageous position on the market in relation to products from third countries .
The dispensational tax system therefore merely aims to compensate for the obligation incumbent on FOD producers to participate in the survival of the cane-sugar-rum sector .
( Intervention cut short pursuant to Rule 137 of the Rules of Procedure )
Glante report ( A5-0005 / 2002 )
Let us talk about the Galileo project , Mr President .
As you know better than me , Galileo Galilei , the great Italian scientist , used to study the sky with his telescope from the earth .
Here , the opposite is happening : Galileo will study the earth from the heights of the satellites , which is where he will be sent into orbit .
This coincidence is curious but it does not alter the fact that the Galileo project is very important , and so I voted for the motion .
. ( EL ) The purpose of the GALILEO programme is to design and build a satellite navigation system which allows users to determine their position on earth extremely accurately .
Apart from the fact that it is much more accurate than the American Global Positioning System ( GPS ) , which has been up and running for several years now , the main point about GALILEO is that , unlike the GPS , it is to come under political , rather than military control .
It is also the first European space project and , if it can be successfully installed and commissioned , apart from helping to improve navigation , it will give a tremendous boost to space science and technology .
The European Commission communication under examination does not relate to the GALILEO system per se but to the creation of a joint public / private undertaking to finance its development .
Mr Glante 's report proposes several important improvements to the Commission proposal .
However , the European Parliament approved two amendments by a large majority , led mainly by the European People 's Party , with the backing of the Party of European Socialists , which seek to militarise the system by making express reference to military use of the system for so-called " peacekeeping operations " .
If the Council and the Commission follow this line of thinking , it will completely negate the non-military purpose of the system and will , of course , be an addition to the European Union 's arsenal in its interventions against the people .
It is worth noting that the European Parliament approved a similar amendment in my report on the European Union 's space policy on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy at the last part-session .
This is no random coincidence ; as we pointed out on that previous occasion , it demonstrates a clear intention to use space for military purposes .
These developments prove that the global grass-roots movement needs to step up its fight against imperialist aggression and the militarisation of space .
It is for these reasons that the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece voted against the report .
The MPF delegation firmly supports the Galileo project for the implementation of a European satellite radionavigation programme , a system that will work parallel to yet independently of the American GPS system whilst maintaining ' interoperability ' , in other words , it will not work against this system and will permit the possibility for the two systems to work together .
The Galileo project seems exemplary for three reasons .
From a technical point of view , it will have numerous positive effects for all economic activities and will increase Europe ' s general productivity at a time when this is very much needed .
From an institutional point of view , it is clear that a project on which there is Europe-wide cooperation would be justified with regard to subsidiarity , and that the European Space Agency ( ESA ) could provide the appropriate instrument for this .
Finally , from a political and strategic point of view , the Galileo project will grant Europe independence from the United States while the acceptance of the GPS monopoly , on the other hand , would imply a tangible dependence that would increase over time .
In spite of these arguments , the final decision on the development of the Galileo project has been deferred from Council to Council , and the latest , held at Laeken , was no exception .
It is already almost too late for a useful decision to be made .
Apart from the technical discussions on the precise procedures for the involvement of private partners , the true reason for the delay lies in the United States ' hesitation , which has influenced certain European countries .
This brings us to the main issue : do Community procedures not slow the whole process down because they are too rigid and the partners are not all in agreement ?
These structures are acting like a brake now on the project ' s launch and they will act like a brake tomorrow and at each stage of development , especially if we want to add military or ' peacekeeping ' operations .
On this point , the European Parliament is frankly making a mistake in demanding an ever greater communitisation of the project , for example in estimating , in its resolution of 17 January , that " The ESA with its basis of intergovernmental cooperation should in the longer term be brought within the EU " .
In truth , the opposite is the case : we need to apply the principle of variable geometry to Galileo , as for Airbus and Ariane , and create a structure that groups together only those States that are truly involved in the project .
This would be the best way to pull this project out of the rut it is currently stuck in and make real progress .
. ( FR ) I would like to start by congratulating my colleague , Norbert Glante , on his research and negotiations on this matter of great strategic importance .
I would now like to draw your attention to the Galileo system .
We often hear mention of this project without really being aware of its future applications .
Galileo is a satellite radionavigation system that allows the user of a receiver to capture the signals transmitted by a number of satellites in order to determine its position in time and in space .
At the moment , there are two systems of this type : the American GPS system and the Russian GLONASS system .
These two systems have been developed on a military basis , which is not the case with Galileo .
On a practical level , we will be able to use this system in areas as varied as transport , fisheries , agriculture , telecommunications , oil exploration , defence and civil protection activities .
To give you an example , in the field of inland transportation , it will allow planning and better management of transport times , the automatic control of vehicles , a reduction in traffic jams and the number of road accidents and so on and so forth .
Of course , we are not at this stage yet .
The implementation of Galileo should take place in four phases .
We have completed the definition phase .
We now have to launch the development phase for 2002-2005 .
During this period , we will have to establish the technical and financial conditions necessary for the rapid deployment of infrastructure in 2006-2007 in order to be able to exploit this system commercially in 2008 .
The European Commission has made us proposals with regard to this second phase of Galileo .
Our Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy was of the opinion that the proposals made with regard to structures were not appropriate .
Thus , according to the model envisaged by the European Commission , private companies would be able to participate fully in the establishment of the Joint Undertaking .
Following the example of the rapporteur , I believe that there would be a conflict of interests if these companies were directly involved in the joint undertaking , since they would then have to respond to invitations to tender issued by this same company .
It therefore seems desirable that only the founding members , the European Communities and the European Space Agency , should be members of this Joint Undertaking .
The EIB may also become a member of the Joint Undertaking in the future .
( Intervention cut short pursuant to Article 137 of the Rules of Procedure )
. ( DE ) I consider the establishment of a European satellite navigation programme to be generally sensible and deserving of support .
I have , despite this , voted against the Glante report today , as I am unable to follow the rapporteur down the road he is taking .
In no way is there any certainty that Galileo will succeed in economic terms as a competitor to GPS , which has until now enjoyed a monopoly of the market .
I therefore take the view that the financial risk should be borne equally by the public sector and private enterprise .
The rapporteur wants to facilitate industry 's involvement in financing Galileo by means of a development company instead of giving it a share in the Joint Undertaking , as the Commission had planned .
One objective in this is to allay the Member States ' misgivings on the security policy front , and the other is to avoid the private businesses which constitute part of the Joint Undertaking enjoying competitive advantages when tenders are invited to set Galileo up and operate it .
I take the view , however , that the end result of this purely optional solution to financial participation will be that the investments Galileo will need will be raised by the public sector alone .
Industry will get on board only when Galileo has demonstrated its earning potential and is set to make profits .
This would boil down to funds raised by taxation being invested as venture capital and to substantial shares in the profits then being handed over to private enterprise .
That is not how I envisage taxpayers ' money being handled .
Nor am I convinced by the argument of possible conflicts of interest in tendering procedures .
It is , for example , the usual practice in municipalities for enterprises owned by the local authority to tender jointly with private firms when contracts are put out , without this resulting in unequal treatment .
As regards the argument of security policy , I have misgivings of a quite different kind .
Both the Commission and the Council leave no room for doubt that they regard Galileo as a central component of the independence of European defence policy .
Parliament has not been able to make up its mind to decisively reject the use of Galileo for military purposes .
I , though , reject all use of satellite navigation systems for military purposes .
- ( NL ) The rapporteur is right to refer private companies to a separate development company .
However , I do not back this proposal , for GALILEO is 15 years overdue .
The benefits which a navigation system supported by satellites could have for the government , industry and individual users have long since been stolen from under our noses by the American competition .
Only if we intend to close off the European market for American goods and services is it useful to develop a system with Community funding that , within a liberalised global market , is doomed to lose the competitive battle to the American GPS system .
This intention does not exist , and it even looks like we are painstakingly trying to avoid trade wars with the US over the import of dangerous goods and pollution by noisy aircraft .
European companies are , of course , free to try , off their own bats , to compete with the American product with something that is of superior quality .
In doing so , they may be able temporarily to gain a tiny foothold in the market and subsequently do profitable business with the Americans , which will enable them to incorporate European inventions into improvements to the existing system .
This does not apply to a large-scale project that has partly been funded with tax money and that can only win or lose .
Such a waste of Community funding only serves the interests of industry and the military machine .
The members of the MPF delegation to the European Parliament have supported Mr Glante ' s report in order to give their backing to the implementation of the Galileo programme , but they are anxious to show their disagreement with the mixed Community and intergovernmental approach , which has been retained .
This project is a perfect illustration of one of the domains in which European cooperation is vital .
The common interest is obvious and clearly defined .
The Galileo system is crucial if we are to ensure the independence of the Member States of the European Union in the strategic domain of satellite position-finding , since it will mean that they no longer have to depend on the GPS , that the United States controls in a discretionary fashion .
On the other hand , in attempting to manage the project with a ' Joint Undertaking ' , where the Commission , together with the ESA , would make up one of the two pillars , we would be running the risk of paralysing its implementation , causing disagreements , bureaucracy and delays and making it impossible to call upon competences outside the Union and so on .
The only effective solution would appear to be a specific ESA programme , for ESA mechanisms have proved their flexibility and efficiency .
Only a voluntary intergovernmental framework will permit the satisfactory resolution of the essential issue of the use of the system by the military .
. I wholeheartedly support this report by my Socialist colleague which will endow Europe with an independent technology which can be widely used for several practical purposes , including transport and telecommunications .
It is increasingly vital that the EU should develop an independent technology from the only two which exist in Russia and the United States .
Presently , we have a precarious situation whereby the EU is reliant on these two countries ' systems which could potentially be called into use for military purposes at any point .
Financing for this project has always been a contentious issue : its financial underpinning must inevitably come from the private sector , but the ensuing relationship between the Joint Undertaking and the private sector must be carefully defined .
This will preclude any conflict of interests or awkward ambiguity between the partners of this project .
In light of this , it is a sound proposal to establish a development company which would effectively act as an arbiter between the partners of this project .
Lastly , a monitoring committee which would observe the project throughout its creation will ensure that the project is as transparent and accountable as is necessary .
Joint motion for a resolution on the Middle East ( B5-0101 / 2002 )
Mr President , I am delivering this explanation of vote on my own behalf .
I voted for Amendment No 1 on the Israeli reservists refusing to serve in the occupied territories , against the instruction of the Group of the Party of European Socialists .
This instruction was given purely for tactical reasons , because if this amendment had been adopted , the Group of the Europe People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats would not have voted for the resolution .
I feel , however , that if there are men and women in Israel and the Palestinian territories who have the courage to say no to war , there is a glimmer of hope , and this is a wonderful example of courage to which we must cannot , under any circumstances , fail to respond .
In any case , I feel - and I want to believe - that history will prove these reservists right .
.
( EL ) The European Parliament resolution on the Middle East may ascribe some responsibility to the Israeli government , but it remains faithful to the general policy of sitting squarely on the fence , which is why the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece abstained from the vote .
The Communist Party of Greece condemns the blatant violation of international conventions , international law and bilateral agreements by the Israeli government and , more importantly , the aggressive , barbaric tactics of the Israeli forces occupying the West Bank and Gaza .
The barbaric move in cutting off President Arafat 's headquarters - and hence , to all intents and purposes , the Palestinian Authority - in Ramallah is intolerable and we call for an immediate end to it .
We also condemn the increased and indiscriminate use of violence by the Israeli forces against the Palestinian people , as a result of which the Palestinians have suffered hundreds of deaths and thousands of casualties among the civilian population and constant bombardment of their infrastructure , including their homes and fields .
We welcome the fight by the Palestinian people for a fair and peaceful solution in accordance with UN resolutions and we stand by them in their struggle to found their own independent state around the capital of East Jerusalem .
We also welcome all the Israeli democrats who oppose their government 's barbaric policy , who are fighting for a fair and viable solution and who often risk their life by refusing to be party to their government 's illegal and inhumane action .
More importantly , we stand by the Israeli soldiers who refuse to murder civilians .
We consider that the ÅU 's stand to date , despite its pronouncements to the contrary , has not helped to resolve the Palestinian question .
On the contrary , by promoting the new order together with the USA and keeping to its tactic of sitting firmly on the fence between the murderers and the victims it is perpetuating the problem so that it can turn it to its advantage in accordance with its imperialist interests in the region and beyond .
We call on the governments of the Member States , especially of the countries represented at the UN Security Council , and the ÅU to raise the issue of increased tension in the Middle East , the failure to apply the UN resolutions already passed and their violation by Israel at the UN and to call on Israel to help find a fair and viable solution to the problem and recognise the right of the Palestinian people to an independent state , which will make a decisive contribution towards stability and security in the region .
. ( PT ) The situation in the Middle East is so serious that it requires urgent measures and greater solidarity in demanding an end to the continual illegal incursion by the Israeli army into territories under the control of the Palestinian National Authority , to the virtual house-arrest of President Arafat , to the extrajudicial execution of Palestinian representatives , to the violation of the most basic human rights , including the torture and killing of children , and to the destruction of Palestinian infrastructures and other installations funded by the European Union and by other donors .
The international community must , as a matter of urgency , adopt new initiatives that lead to an end to the violence , to re-establishing trust and to reopening negotiations between the two sides , in accordance with international law and with the relevant United Nations resolutions .
Hence my support for the Joint Resolution which , although watered down , could express the European Parliament ' s concern at this situation , repudiate the statements and actions of Ariel Sharon , and reaffirm that the solution to the problem , including the safety of Israel and peace itself , requires the State of Palestine to be recognised in conditions that are viable .
I regret the fact , however , that the majority of those on the right has refused to show solidarity with the Israeli army reservists who refuse to serve in the occupied territories , and whom history will show to be completely right , although I welcome the decision to send a very high level parliamentary delegation to the region to meet the Israeli and Palestinian authorities and to convey a message of peace to both communities , together with the European Parliament ' s insistence on the need to urgently send international observers to the region .
I hope that , this watered-down resolution of the European Parliament will at least be implemented immediately .
. ( FR ) At a time that is particularly tragic for the Middle East as well as particularly dangerous for world peace , at a time when the United States is no longer providing the impetus for the peace process , reverting to a more partisan approach , a time at which the Arab States seem to be stunned by the position adopted by the Americans , it would appear to be the clear responsibility of the Europeans to take the initiative and to try to overcome the current situation of violent impasse with diplomatic advances .
Alas , however , we have yet to make any significant achievements .
Member States which may have had the diplomatic ability to act are becoming paralysed by the collective mechanisms of the Union , which can only produce joint statements .
The European Parliament resolution is just another manifestation of this European powerlessness .
There are murmurs from France .
The suggestions are appropriate but France believes that it no longer has the strength to push them forward .
The organisation in the occupied territories , of elections based on the theme of peace would act , however , as a lever that would force the Palestinians to adopt a clear position with regard to the Intifada and terrorism .
The recognition of the Palestinian State by all , as a starting point for negotiation , going beyond questions of personality that muddy the waters , would allow the peace process to be relaunched on a more solid basis .
Naturally , the European Parliament resolution makes no reference to these proposals , since , coming from a single Member State and not from a European authority , they cannot by definition , in the Union ' s eyes , be pertinent .
Not being supported by genuine political will , it is very likely that these proposals will vanish into thin air , when they could have put both parties back onto the path to political dialogue .
Motion for a resolution on terrorism ( B5-0100 / 2002 )
. ( FR ) The vote on our motion for a resolution against terrorism means we can state firmly once again that terrorism is evil by definition , is totally unjustified and should be eradicated at all costs .
The main characteristic of and driving force behind these unscrupulous minority groups is the imposing of their ideas and power through violence and fear .
The causes of terrorism should not be confused with the means it employs .
Terrorist leaders , whoever and wherever they are , have need of resources to be able to achieve their goals , namely :
money , first and foremost , from their personal fortunes or obtained through racketeering , criminal activity , drug trafficking or petrodollars ...
foot-soldiers , which they find in fragile environments by playing on nationalism , religion , ambition , dreams , revenge , poverty or despair ...
terror , which they impose on democracies and their citizens that are ill prepared to resist ... and always ready to negotiate compromises ...
We remember all the terrorist movements and their actions over the last few years , whether it be the Baader-Meinhof gang in Germany , the Red Brigades in Italy , movements in Corsica , in Ireland or in the Basque Country , striking every day , not forgetting the massacres at the Munich Olympics , the suicide bombers in Tel Aviv and the networks of the fundamentalist multimillionaire Osama Bin Laden .
All these actions have a common goal : to destroy democratic systems by means of terror .
Combating terrorism should be the main objective of all democracies , wherever they may be .
The ability to call upon a large amount of resources is needed in order to implement measures with determination , to mobilise the citizens , explaining to them what is at stake , and to strengthen the power of the public authorities at both national and European levels .
Without this ... there is not much hope !
This is why I supported the European Parliament ' s forceful and legitimate request to be closely involved in the actions of the Council in this area .
If we are to combat terrorism effectively , public opinion must be roused , and the European Parliament is the best representative of this opinion .
Joint motion for a resolution on development aid ( B5-0034 / 2002 )
. ( FR ) We are living in a world of unprecedented global wealth .
This wealth , however , has never been so poorly distributed .
Inequalities on a global scale have reached intolerable , appalling proportions .
In 1960 , the 20 % of the world ' s population living in the richest countries had an income 30 times higher than that of the 20 % poorest .
In 1995 , their income was 82 times higher .
At the other end of the scale , almost three billion people live on less than USD two per day .
More than 800 million are starving .
In September 2001 , in the ' Millennium Declaration ' , the international community committed itself to halving poverty by 2015 .
The international community must , from now on , make the move from these good intentions to positive action .
Europe must provide the impetus for this action .
Next March , in Monterrey , then in Johannesburg in September at the World Summit on sustainable development , the European Union must take the initiative and make concrete proposals and set a precise timetable to honour these commitments .
This offensive promoting development and combating poverty should be organised around four key ideas .
The first is to increase public aid in considerable proportions until it reaches - at last - the objective of 0.7 % of the wealth of the northern countries set more than 30 years ago .
A major step was taken in this direction by the last ' Development ' Council , which put this objective back on the agenda and called upon the Commission to set deadlines together with the Member States .
We need , from now on , to establish a more precise and restrictive timetable .
Secondly , we need to provide new answers to the problem of the debts of poor countries .
In order to do this , the number of debt restructuring operations that favour the education and primary health care sectors should be dramatically increased , along the lines of the ' debt-reducing and development contracts ' ( C2D ) implemented by France .
We need to go further than the HIPS ' heavily indebted poor countries ' initiative and engage in a vast programme for the cancellation of the debt of developing countries .
We need to think about the conditions of access of developing countries to international financing , in accordance with the guidelines mentioned by the French Prime Minister .
( Intervention cut short pursuant to Article 137 of the Rules of Procedure )
Napolitano report ( A5-0023 / 2002 )
Fatuzzo ( PPE-DE ) .
( IT ) Mr President , I voted for the Napolitano report .
The Convention is extremely important and we all support it .
However , I would like to take this opportunity to state that , in my opinion , there is a lack of democracy in the way the delegates from the European Parliament to the Convention were chosen .
I feel , for example , that Mr Méndez de Vigo would have been much happier if the House had elected him by secret ballot , as the President of Parliament and you yourself , Mr Vice-President , were elected .
Everybody would have voted for him and the vote would probably have been unanimous , but that would have constituted a genuine , democratic selection of candidates and therefore of Members of the European Parliament to this Convention .
I would like to point out here that although ' a good start is half the battle ' , in this case , a bad start means working twice as hard .
I hope that , in future , the appointment of European Parliament representatives to these important bodies will be more democratic .
Mr President , as Vice-President of Parliament responsible for relations with national parliaments , I very much welcome both the tone and the content of Mr Napolitano 's report .
I am convinced that his ideas will help us enhance what is already a good relationship between ourselves and our national counterparts .
I strongly believe that this relationship is vital if we are to ensure that the EU is built on democratic foundations .
However , I agree with some of my colleagues when they emphasise that the regional parliaments which have legislative powers are an equally important part of ensuring democracy in all EU decision-making .
To take my own country , for example , over half the work of the Scottish Parliament is not about implementing laws thought of in Edinburgh or even implementing laws coming from London , but in fact about implementing laws from Brussels - about ensuring that EU laws are properly transposed into Scottish legislation .
So while it is important that we look at national parliaments - and I continue to welcome the emphasis we give to that - we should also now consider how we might embrace the regional parliaments in our work .
I believe this is an excellent and very wise report , much like the rapporteur .
I am personally in full agreement with this report , because I believe it takes the perfect approach .
However , I have not taken part in the vote - despite agreeing personally with the contents of the report - owing to my appointment as a representative of the President of the Spanish Government in the Convention .
Not because I believe there is any incompatibility - which there is not : either legal , material , ethical or any other - but , quite the opposite : the status of MEP - which I share with two other Members who have also been appointed by two other Heads of State and Government , in Greece and Luxembourg - gives added value to the Convention , which is a joint task and not one of opposition .
Nevertheless , also for personal reasons , which are much more symbolic or aesthetic , if you like , Mr President , I have preferred not to participate in the determination of an approach which will undoubtedly serve as a basis for the position taken by Parliament ' s delegation in the Convention .
Although there is no incompatibility of any type , I would like it to be noted that my blank vote is purely intended to reflect the fact that I was present .
. ( EL ) The proposed resolution by the Committee on Constitutional Affairs is a move in the right direction , which is why I support it .
National governments are generally relegated to the edge of the European structure .
Their role needs to be developed , not with yet another institution which will get bogged down in the red tape of the European Union , but by :
improving debates of European issues in national parliaments ,
examining each minister 's programme before it is presented to the Council of Ministers ,
controlling the activities of the Council of Ministers ,
setting up more high-profile committees on European issues in national parliaments ,
involving national parliaments in drafting European legislation ,
strengthening collaboration between the national parliaments and the European Parliament .
We voted in favour of Amendment No 21 , and more specifically paragraph 3 , of the report because we agree with the rapporteur that the European Parliament and the national parliaments within their respective areas represent the people of the EU .
However , we do not believe that increased parliamentarisation of the EU requires the European Parliament ' s powers to be extended where all the EU ' s decisions are concerned .
It is important to remember that intergovernmental cooperation takes place between governments controlled by the national parliaments , which also demand accountability .
We voted in favour of paragraph 7 of the report because we agree in principle with the rapporteur ' s view that it would be an unfortunate development if the governments were to go overboard in developing new instruments for exercising power that exclude the parliaments ' influence .
At the same time , we would emphasise that - in spite of its being insufficiently rooted in parliamentary procedure - the open coordination method has been , and remains , a successful and welcome method of achieving increased integration , cooperation and results in areas not considered suitable for more supranational forms of decision-making .
We voted in favour of paragraph 8 of the report because we agree with the rapporteur that it cannot be regarded as legitimate - in terms either of the practicalities or of providing representation - for MEPs to have a double mandate , that is to say with seats in both the European Parliament and a national / regional parliament .
Where seats in regional parliaments are concerned , we are nonetheless proceeding on the basis that the rapporteur is referring to such parliaments as have independent legislative power and not to such parliaments as have delegated decision-making power , such as the Swedish county councils .
It should be possible reasonably to combine a seat in the latter type of parliament with a seat in the European Parliament .
.
( FR ) The Napolitano report reflects the traditional view held in the European Parliament on its relationship with the national parliaments : that these are isolationist and content to console themselves with the subordinate role of defenders of fragmented national interests .
This view clearly fails to take into account the fact that the most vibrant level of democracy is that of the nation state , and that to disregard this to too great an extent is also to disregard democracy .
The European common good is not decreed from above , from a European democracy that is too weak to be anything other than a kind of technocratic smokescreen , but lies instead in the peaceful dialogue between the interests and aspirations of various national democracies .
There is a point , however , to which the Napolitano report claims , according to the explanatory statement , to have brought ' an extremely important innovation ' : that is , the proposal of some sort of ' joint constituent power ' .
This , in reality , exposes the true intentions behind the report ' s mollifying proposals : the idea is , in effect , no more and no less , to take away from the national parliaments the exclusive right of ratifying European Treaties and , therefore , of defining the competences of the European Union themselves .
This new ' constituent power ' would be shared between the national parliaments and the European Parliament , as well as , as is stated in paragraph 21 of the resolution , by the Commission and the governments of Member States , which is truly unprecedented from the democratic point of view .
Such a reform would constitute a serious climbdown .
The power to revise the Treaties , not to mention the ' constituent power ' , belongs to the people alone , and certainly not to national or European executives ; the people can delegate this power in certain cases to assemblies that have been elected for this purpose , such as the French parliament in the cases specified in Article 89 of the Constitution , but the European Parliament is not one of these assemblies , because no constituent power , or even the revision of treaties , is included in the powers specifically conferred on it by the people .
. The report confines the national parliaments to a role of scrutinising their respective governments , a role which has been curtailed ever since the extension of qualified majority voting in the Council broke the link between European decisions and those taken by each people separately .
It also seeks to widen the powers of the European Parliament , failing to recognise that legitimacy is primarily granted by citizens at national parliamentary level .
In order to revitalise democracy in Europe , it is essential to give each people the visible power of decision at European level .
Consequently , in future we must see national parliaments as standing at the centre of the decision-making process , rather than on the periphery .
The Nice European Council in fact appears to have had an intuition of this when it placed ' the role of the national parliament in the European architecture ' ( and not on the fringes of that architecture ) on the agenda for the next IGC .
Citizens in the European Union generally see elections to their national parliaments ( and , in some countries , elections to the national presidency ) as the fundamental democratic choice between , for example a left- or right-wing government .
The legitimacy of democracy is today based on the elections to the national parliaments and , as a consequence , the institutions of the European Union must be adjusted to this fact .
Most importantly , major decisions in the Council should have to be ratified by the national parliaments .
- ( DA ) SOS Democracy is unable to vote in favour of the Napolitano report because it does not give the decisive role to the national parliaments , which are the only institutions that have a close relationship with the people .
. ( ES ) The fact that the process of European integration is at such a decisive point , as a result of the enlargement under way , on the one hand , and the new political and economic challenges facing the EU , on the other , demands the cooperation of both the European Parliament and the parliaments of the Member States so that the citizens , via their legitimate representatives , may participate in this process .
Hence the timeliness of the excellent Napolitano report and my vote in favour of it .
Since , while it is clearly necessary to guarantee the democratic control of Community policies and decision making , it is also clear that this control must be carried out while respecting each of the areas of parliamentary activity .
In this respect , I believe the commitment given by Mr Napolitano , as chairman of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , to draw up a report in the near future on the role of parliaments in the constitutional regions within this process is particularly positive .
The regions with legislative powers are a fundamental part of the mechanism , and not only because they are closer to the citizens , but also because the parliaments of these regions , as legitimate representatives of the people making up the Union , have the right to participate within the framework of their competences in the control of the legislative process for Community policies and to have a voice so that they can defend their interests .
.
( FR ) Whilst I generally support the Napolitano report , I abstained in the final vote because I believe it premature to conclude against the possibility of having a second European chamber or Senate for the Member States .
It will be the task of the forthcoming Convention to develop these ideas , and to draw its own conclusions on the institutions to be created , or not to be created , depending on the global architecture that will eventually be retained .
. ( NL ) Much of the power robbed from the national parliaments for the sake of European unification has not ended up with the European Parliament , but with the national governments .
That is why the EU ' s existence has enhanced the power of Ministers and Secretaries of State .
The way in which they reach agreements with each other within the Council cannot be verified by the European Parliament or the national parliaments .
If a decision is made which clashes with their national public opinion , they can always say that they themselves wanted things differently , but that it was the neighbours that prevented this from happening .
The Ministers of the neighbouring countries come up with the same excuse .
This intergovernmental method of decision-making is no longer a guarantee that the diverse wishes that prevail in the Member States are taken into account .
I therefore call for an interparliamentary method of decision-making , rather than an intergovernmental one .
The European Commission makes proposals , the European Parliament decides on these at first reading and , subsequently , the national parliaments individually debate the applicability of these decisions to their own countries .
In this model , the Council no longer fulfils an independent , decision-making role .
Unfortunately , the proposals by Mr Napolitano do not go that far yet , but he is right to reinforce the role of the parliaments at the various levels in respect of the governments .
. ( PT ) I felt obliged to vote against the Napolitano report although I acknowledge that its resolution reflects a range of positive concerns about the role of national parliaments , both in exercising control over their governments , especially when these governments are involved in defining and implementing European policy , and in producing this policy .
I also acknowledge , as I mentioned expressly in my speech , that the rapporteur was able , in part , to include in the document some of the proposals put forward in the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , for which I was draftsman .
Nevertheless , I cannot agree to some of the conclusions that have been adopted , which I feel are of great political significance .
Amongst these , I would highlight item 21 , on the emergence - by means of the Convention - of a constituent power , albeit exercised jointly by the European Parliament and the national parliaments , the Commission and the governments of the Member States , and the outright rejection of a future Senate ( item 17 ) , which could , in my opinion , destroy the principle of parity between the Member States of the Union .
Through this explanation of vote I have made my position clear , because , in addition to the objections I have stated , which determined my vote , I feel that Mr Napolitano deserves my intellectual respect for his work and for his efforts to increase the role of national parliaments in the EU , rejecting the simplistic plan to give the European Parliament exclusive rights to represent Europe ' s citizens and to be the guardian of democracy in the relationship with the other institutions of the Union .
Pohjamo report ( A5-0006 / 2002 )
. ( DE ) My group agrees with Mr Pohjamo 's own-initiative report .
Positive effects have not yet been forthcoming , to the extent we had hoped , from the current provisions of the law and from the reform of the structural funds within the Agenda 2000 framework .
The following , in particular , need to be optimised :
the lengthy negotiations on programmes between the Commission and the Member States
the complicated financial provisions
the involvement of the regions in the implementation of programmes and projects
the expenditure on administration , and
the non-binding nature of the monitoring of project implementation .
Unless further structural changes are made in the administration of the Structural Funds , it will continue to be scarcely possible to resolve the problem posed by the decrease in disparities between the Member States not being reflected by a decrease in those between the regions within them .
Such changes must , in particular , cover the following aspects :
time limits on projects
discontinuance of the financing of projects , the realisation of which overruns the timescale envisaged
the redistribution of Structural Funds resources from countries not availing themselves of them to those which have submitted sufficient qualifying projects
greater weight to be given to infrastructure projects which promote employment .
Enlargement of the EU makes it a matter of urgent necessity that the Commission should produce , by 2003 at the latest , definite proposals to guarantee that present Member States should suffer no detriment as regards structural resources and that the countries that are candidates for accession should be treated equally in line with the tasks of a common structural policy .
There is no other way to achieve the objective of long-term reduction of existing differences in levels of development and the consequent enhancement of economic and social cohesion .
The amendments tabled by my group have also supported this statement of political objectives .
- ( NL ) As long as the structural funds remain unchanged , there will be tension between the regional side and the European side .
Viewed from the regional angle , this is about the regions ' own funding to which they are entitled and which they must be able to spend independently and as freely as possible .
From the European angle , this is about European money that can only be made available under strict conditions for use in regions and cities and that must be demanded back if deadlines are exceeded or the planned spending plan deviated from .
These clashing demands can only be brought into line with each other following much official , preliminary consultation and a great deal of inspection .
This means that high expenses and much bureaucracy are involved in spending these funds .
It might be preferable for Europe to confine itself to the redistribution of funds that can be freely spent for the benefit of investments in regions suffering from a disadvantage , a crisis or a geographical location that is economically disadvantageous , and keep interference in spending to a minimum , or eliminate it altogether .
Such a change would allow European officials to be deployed on other tasks on which work still needs to be done and would put an end to the needless re-circulation of funding from rich Member States back to the same rich Member States .
That might result in fewer propaganda hoardings sporting a European flag , but it would be far more effective .
. I wholeheartedly applaud the call for EU Structural Funds to be made more efficient and more result-oriented .
Indeed , Structural Funds are a prime way in which European citizens can be made to feel that the EU is doing something for them and it is crucial that the widespread impression of red tape and bureaucracy is not confirmed .
All too often , the execution of Structural Funds has been bureaucratic and the implementation slow and inefficient .
With considerable successive growth in the amount of money allocated to the Structural Funds , it is vital that the principles of productivity , regional added value and quality should not only be reiterated , but also vigilantly monitored .
The effective allocation of the Funds requires the cooperation of all levels of European government .
National governments have a role to play in freeing up the execution process and I favour the call by MEPs for a more direct channelling of Funds to the regions .
In addition , the Commission should be more proactive in approving guideline documents , thus further freeing up the process .
Finally , the consideration of Structural Funds and enlargement is apt : the EU could use this opportunity to allocate Funds more effectively , first time round .
Musotto report ( A5-0007 / 2002 )
Fatuzzo ( PPE-DE ) .
( IT ) Mr President , I would like to point out - this document concerns the economic and social cohesion of the regions of the European Union - how important it is in the opinion of the Pensioners ' Party and myself that the forthcoming enlargement of the European Union should not bring about any change in the major cohesion policy implemented through the Structural Funds .
I feel that it is the duty of all the wealthiest regions of Europe to contribute , both financially and otherwise , to the progress of all the other , less wealthy , poorer regions , for I am sad to say that there are still poor regions in all areas of the European Union .
With this in mind , I therefore voted for the Musotto report .
. ( FR ) I would firstly like to thank both our rapporteur from the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , Mr Francesco Musotto , and indeed the whole of this committee for the high quality work they have presented .
To vote for this report is , as far as I am concerned , first and foremost to underline the fact that the principle of cohesion and thus of solidarity and the integration of the peoples and territories of the Union is enshrined in the Treaties and , this being the case , it is essential that it be defended .
The fact that the progress made has been uneven , and , more importantly , that unacceptable regional disparities remain , giving rise to the marginalisation of the less developed regions , should therefore be underlined - and this report does so - in an appeal to the States to support the efforts for regional economic convergence made at European level .
The report ' s authors , who , quite rightly , think it essential to ensure an extremely high degree of consistency between action taken at a European level under the heading of cohesion policy , and Member States ' domestic policies that support development , therefore call on the Member States , in accordance with the principles of additionality and subsidiarity , to support this drive for regional economic convergence instigated at European level , by means , for example , of an appropriate investment policy .
This drive is all the more important given that we must overcome the challenge posed by enlargement .
Cohesion should , in this regard , be even greater if we want to avoid these disparities between regions dramatically increasing upon enlargement .
Finally , I will fully support Amendment No 49 , which underlines all the possible shortcomings of the 0.45 % of Community GDP devoted to cohesion policy , if we want to establish an effective cohesion policy that brings genuine solidarity .
. I voted in favour of this report , but would like to stress some key aspects in relation to fisheries policy .
The preservation of historical fisheries interests is inextricably linked to economic and social cohesion in fisheries-dependent communities .
Under the principle of relative stability , the proportions of stocks allotted to given states in given fisheries remain constant .
When catch opportunities increase or decline in a given fishery , all states with legally recognised stakes in that fishery derive a proportional share of the spoils .
Relative stability is fundamental to fisheries policy and the maintenance of fish stocks , and should not be undermined .
Moreover , the importance of the Hague preferences must also be stressed . The Hague preferences recognise the extent to which many coastal communities are fisheries-dependent and offer additional protection .
The socio-economic role of these arrangements cannot be exaggerated - they must be maintained as not only fundamental to the Common Fisheries Policy but also integral to the basic objectives of cohesion policy .
Finally the importance of FIFG funding must be emphasised when it comes to fisheries-dependent communities , and in particular with regard to fleet renewal for safety reasons for a sector that operates in a clearly hostile environment .
.
( FR ) I believe there is a fundamental contradiction between the so-called cohesion policy and the neo-liberal tendencies which dominate in Europe ; in fact , widespread competition and privatisation run counter to genuine harmonisation .
This involves the extension of funds providing the necessary transfers and adjustments , which would , in turn , introduce positive distortions rather than pure market phenomena and the blind quest for profitability .
These funds could be provided by a unified tax on capital returns .
The Musotto report recognises this contradiction in its own way , for example by underlining " the need to adapt competition policy and fiscal policy " .
However , it immediately feels the need to make up for this by singing the praises of a private-public partnership .
In spite of their tentativeness , the report ' s suggestions are sound : it calls for a better assessment of the effects of enlargement and considers the 0.45 % of Community GDP devoted to cohesion policy to be a minimum .
This is why I did not vote against this report , even if it falls far short of the requirements of a genuine policy for solidarity and equality on a European scale .
. The EPLP welcomes the conclusions of the Musotto report on Cohesion .
However we believe it is premature in the debate to take a fixed position on the future options for designating European Assisted Areas .
There will continue to be areas of need in the UK post-2006 and we would like the Commission to assess the role that both a safety net mechanism and transitional funding could play in assisting poorer regions of the UK post-2006 .
It is disappointing that the British Conservatives failed , among others , to support this amendment .
In addition their failure to support a stronger role for local and regional governments in the management of European funding is a blow to democracy and partnership .
. ( PT ) This report has the merit of making a reasonable diagnosis of the current situation with regard to economic and social cohesion within the European Union .
We agree , in particular , with the emphasis it gives to the fact that cohesion is , under the terms of the Treaties , one of the pillars of the Community . We also agree with the explicit reference to the delays in fighting asymmetries in development and in standards of living and even to the steps backward being seen in regions of some countries .
We must also agree with the need the report expresses to provide continuity and to strengthen future regional policy and , therefore , to oppose the possible withdrawal of some regions from Objective 1 , for purely statistical reasons .
Nevertheless , and with regard to the causes of these situations of delay and backsliding , the report does not go as far as we would have liked .
Furthermore , in terms of the inadequacy of financial resources made available for the objective of cohesion , it omits essential aspects such as the absence of a redistributive aspect to the Community budget and the absolute need for a revision of the financial perspectives , all the more important on the eve of enlargement .
The report also ignores some crucial factors for the least-developed regions , particularly the harmful effects and , consequently , the need to revise macro-economic , financial and sectoral policies , which often prove to be profoundly inappropriate for these regions .
One of the greatest achievements of European integration was a result of the decision , in 1975 , to bring about the solidarity and cohesion needed to reduce the gap between the economic levels of all the EU States and regions .
Today , we can say that the way we adapt our Community cohesion policy with a view to enlargement will determine the quality of the Union ' s future development .
The European Parliament has , quite rightly , for a long time supported the idea that an appropriate economic and social cohesion policy cannot be reduced to the level of taking from the rich to give to the poor .
It is the analysis of genuine needs , magnified by the prospect of enlargement , that should be considered as a priority , and not fixed references to budgets set in the past for different contexts .
For , as the European Commission points out , enlargement will increase the development differential between the centrally located territories , on the one hand , and the peripheral and outermost regions on the other .
In this regard , I would call for the outermost regions to continue to be considered a regional and cohesion policy priority , through further advances to be made with the implementation of Article 299 ( 2 ) of the Treaty .
Furthermore , we need to adapt competition policy , particularly national regional aid , and tax policy in order to strengthen regional and cohesion policy , with the understanding that the Structural Funds are not sufficient to counterbalance the handicaps and the delays in development accumulated over several decades .
We also need to prepare for the revision of the common agricultural policy and rural development , in order to better coordinate the urban and rural dimensions of regional development .
Finally , it would appear urgent to create a European monitoring centre for territorial cohesion .
( Intervention cut short pursuant to Article 137 of the Rules of Procedure )
Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou report ( A5-0022 / 2002 )
Fatuzzo ( PPE-DE ) .
( IT ) Mr President , I voted for Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou ' s report , which concerns women in Mediterranean countries , too .
In this regard , I would like to call upon all the Members to undertake to ensure that the European Union unilaterally extends the scope of Regulation 1408 on pro rata payment for the period of time a person has worked in the States of the European Union to all the citizens of southern Mediterranean countries , who have worked for many years in Europe and have the right to receive a proportionate pension for the work they have done in Europe , above and beyond the provisions of the relevant conventions .
Mr President , this report creates a depressing picture of the situation of women in some Mediterranean countries .
It demonstrates that they are disadvantaged economically , that they are disadvantaged in terms of health and , perhaps most significantly , in terms of education , with the levels of literacy among women in some Mediterranean countries way below that of men .
It is important that Parliament draws attention to that issue , but that is not sufficient .
We should also ensure that EU policies are designed to help women improve their standing in some of those countries .
For example , the MEDA programme so far has no lines particularly dedicated to the education of women , to improving the health care of women .
We should look at that .
We should also look at the way our economic relations with some of the Mediterranean countries operate and see if they could be used to enhance the status of women , for example , by supporting women 's cooperatives and other activities .
. ( FR ) At first sight , we could ask ourselves why we need to be particularly concerned about the promotion of women ' s rights in Mediterranean countries .
Equal opportunities policy is the same throughout the European Union .
We do not for one moment think , for example , that due to the particular circumstances or the mentality of men in Mediterranean Member States , implementing equal opportunities policy , a policy which is now firmly grounded in the Treaty of Amsterdam , would be any more difficult there .
We would not even call the men from these countries ' macho ' .
They are certainly no more or less macho than men from Northern States .
But it is clear that , in Mediterranean countries that are not , or not yet , members of the European Union , the situation of women is more worrying in many regards , and that we need , and this is perfectly legitimate , to devote more attention to trying to remedy incidences of unacceptable discrimination .
I am therefore in favour of this report , with two reservations .
I believe that positive actions such as those laid down in paragraph 5b of the resolution and the creation of infrastructure should permit not only women but men as well to combine working and family life .
Paragraph 14 advocates the possibility of creating a Euro-Mediterranean Development Bank .
Do we really need to create a new bank , when we already have the European Investment Bank , which is quite capable of granting loans within the framework of the Barcelona process ?
We need to be wary of creating precedents .
If we create a Euro-Mediterranean Development Bank , why not create one for the Baltic Sea , the North Sea , or anywhere else for that matter ?
( Intervention cut short pursuant to Article 137 of the Rules of Procedure )
Hermange report ( A5-0009 / 2002 )
I voted for this report , which is an excellent initiative for creating a coherent , clear and effective policy at Community level on the problem of illiteracy .
This is a problem that has never received the attention it deserves , probably because until very recently it was taken for granted that the more highly developed countries did not have problems of illiteracy due to their systems of compulsory education .
It should be noted that the last Community actions specifically concerning this problem were approved in 1987 .
Nevertheless , the OECD report on reading and writing , published in June 2000 , clearly shows this not to be the case , in other words , that illiteracy is a reality in our countries , entailing high economic and social costs .
The OECD defined literacy as " the reading and writing abilities that adults use in their everyday lives , at work or in the community , to achieve their objectives , to acquire knowledge and to increase their potential " .
This being the case , the existence of illiteracy is a negation of one of the most basic human rights , which is the right to education , and is also a barrier to access to other rights , because it prevents people from improving their standard of living , restricts access to the labour market , limits individuals ' freedom of expression and , consequently , their participation in society , and prevents them from enjoying the civic rights to which they are entitled .
The figures available to us on the scale of this phenomenon at Community level cannot be underestimated , because they affect a considerable percentage of the population of the Union European between 15 and 65 years of age .
It comes as no surprise , but always with considerable unhappiness , that my country , Portugal , is the worst affected .
Unless something is done , this problem will only get worse .
( The President cut the speaker off pursuant to Rule 137 of the Rules of Procedure )
. ( FR ) Whilst recognising the fact that knowing how to read and write is a right for all , the report will be of little help in promoting a policy that can really make a difference in the fight against illiteracy .
I feel that the references made to teachers and trainers are only useful if we safeguard a genuine recruitment policy in national education , because this is a public service remit .
There are , in effect , tens of thousands of unfilled teaching posts throughout Europe .
The recent demonstrations by primary school teachers and parents in the Nantes region against the closure of classes and for the creation of jobs and a limit on class sizes are an illustration of this .
Finally , it is the damaging effects of liberal policies - unemployment and attacks against public services - that are the cause of an upsurge in illiteracy .
If we are to combat illiteracy , we must also combat poverty .
However , as the report does propose a certain number of positive measures such as equal access to fundamental rights for all , non-discrimination and equal opportunities , as well as specific aid to the EU regions most affected by this by this form of social exclusion , I voted for this report .
Hermange report ( A5-0004 / 2002 )
The EPLP has voted for the Hermange report on the scoreboard implementing the Social Agenda because there are many positive aspects to this report on the European Social Agenda .
However , there are several areas of concern where the report calls on the Commission to supply information on how it proposes to act on a number of requirements that are in the Social Agenda but which the EPLP did not support in plenary in 2000 .
In paragraph 14 the EPLP could not support the call for a European right to strike and abstained . The EPLP feels that this is already dealt with by Member State legislation and is also covered in the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
That concludes voting time .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.35 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Topical and urgent debate
The next item is a debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
Terrorist attacks in India , in particular against the Parliament
The next item is a joint debate on the following five motions for resolutions :
B5-0053 / 2002 by Mr Collins on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group ,
B5-0061 / 2002 by Mr Mann , Mr Morillon , Dr Tannock , Mr Sacrédeus and Mrs Maij-Weggen on behalf of the Group of the European People ' s Party and European Democrats ,
B5-0072 / 2002 by Mrs Frahm on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left ,
B5-0081 / 2000 by Mr Sakellariou and Mr Van den Berg on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists ,
B5-0089 / 2002 by Mrs Lynne on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party ,
on the terrorist attacks in India , in particular against the Parliament .
Madam President , 13 December 2001 was a black day , not only for relations between India and Pakistan .
The attack on the Indian parliament by radical Islamic terrorists was an assault on the nerve centre of the world 's largest democracy , on a freely-elected representative institution and on a multi-ethnic society .
The aftermath has seen troops mobilised on a massive scale and weapons systems massed in a threatening manner .
There is great danger that raids by terrorists will gain them access to these weapons .
The situation has been made more acute by the attack on the American cultural centre in Calcutta , which is suspected to have been the work of militant Muslim fundamentalists .
Pakistan has for some years been suspected of affording Islamic extremists a safe haven and giving them logistical and material support .
This time , though , President Musharraf ordered action to be taken .
Around 1 500 suspects were interned and some 400 offices belonging to Islamic extremist organisations were closed .
This is something that gives cause for hope .
The involvement of President Musharraf , a military leader , in the international anti-terrorist alliance has without a doubt helped bring his country out of isolation .
His words on television to the effect that he wanted to be consistent in fighting terrorism , must , though , be matched by actions .
It is much to be desired that those Taliban fighters who have gone to ground in Pakistan should be unmasked and arrested .
The radical Islamic religious schools , which are an intellectual breeding ground for the Taliban , must undergo organisational restructuring and the reform of the content of their curricula .
What is most important , though , is to investigate the causes of the sympathy for the Taliban and of the continuing adulation of them as freedom fighters over wide areas of the country .
There is a need for intensive intellectual engagement here , which requires that state education be made a priority .
People whose good education at school has gained them self-confidence and the capacity for critical judgement will also be in a position to resist all kinds of dictatorship and all forms of manipulation .
Pakistan must come to accept the idea of religious freedom for minorities .
This has been brought to our minds by , among other things , the most recent massacre during a service in a Christian church .
The Islamic terrorists responsible for it have still not yet been caught .
Anti-Christian discrimination - including at the hands of the public authorities - must become a thing of the past , as must the persecution of other religions .
India has demanded that Pakistan expose and extradite the ringleaders behind the attack on the Indian parliament , and it is quite right to do so .
Actually doing this , though , will require a great deal of patience .
The Indian rocket tests are ineffectual as a means of exerting pressure and constitute a provocation with counter-productive effects .
The Group of the European People 's Party / European Democrats calls on both parties in the conflict to bring all diplomatic means to bear on this crisis situation .
We must see to it that military force is renounced .
It is a matter of concern for me as vice-chairman of the delegation to the South Asia Association for Regional Cooperation that Pakistan should finally ratify and implement the SAARC Convention on Suppression of Terrorism .
Overall , the path mapped out by the Lahore and Simla Agreements must be followed .
The European Union is very well able to play the role of a respected mediator , which surely all the parties want .
Our balanced policy has earned us a great deal of trust over the years .
Both these States and the security needs of South-East Asia as a whole are deserving of our commitment .
Mr President , recently , at the beginning of last month , we faced the unforeseen possibility of a heated exchange between India and Pakistan .
Luckily , this exchange was avoided thanks to the sense of responsibility demonstrated by both sides .
In other words , following the heated clash and the circumstances in which it took place , and rightly so , with the terrorists in Afghanistan , there was a risk of yet more unfortunate developments between two large countries with nuclear capabilities .
However , this does not mean that the problem has been resolved .
In this sense , the purpose of our debate here today is to remind both countries , both India and Pakistan , of their responsibilities towards their people and the neighbouring region .
At the same time , however , we too need to assume our responsibility , as the European Union , to help find a peaceful solution to all the differences in the area , to respect for international law and human rights and to anything and everything relating to the Rule of Law and human rights .
However , this endeavour should not lead us to overlook the fact that Pakistan does indeed have a serious human rights problem , serious problems with democratic issues and serious problems with religious minorities .
These problems are not being raised here in order to accuse Pakistan or in a gesture of friendship towards India .
On the contrary .
They are being raised as urgent priorities which both countries need to address , for their own good , for the good of the area and for the sake of peace in the area .
Both countries are responsible for the stability of the area .
And both countries are responsible for future developments , so that these areas can stop being areas of poverty , misery and conflict .
In this sense , I believe that today 's resolution and unanimous support for it from all sides of the House will make both a symbolic and a substantial contribution .
Madam President , let me say from the outset that I condemn terrorism wherever it takes place .
But I condemn in particular the attacks on the Indian Parliament and the US cultural centre .
There is no justification for terrorism , whatever the perceived provocation .
But we have to look at the root causes of terrorism .
That is why I am delighted that we have widened this resolution , even though we were unable to change the title ; I would not like us to think that we are linking any country or organisation with these attacks .
We still have no real knowledge of who perpetrated them so I am very pleased that the Indian government is investigating it and that Pakistan is helping with that investigation .
It gives me the opportunity to address the wider problem : the threat of war again between India and Pakistan .
I welcome President Musharraf 's announcement that he is clamping down on terrorism , but it is also important to look at the dispute over Jammu and Kashmir , which has been going on for over 50 years .
I repeat the call for the EU to offer its services as a facilitator to both sides and to take account of the relevant UN resolutions .
What I am proposing is something similar to what Senator Mitchell did in Northern Ireland .
The people who continue to suffer are the ordinary people and civilians of India , Pakistan and Kashmir .
People who say a facilitator provided by the EU , the Commonwealth or the UN is no way forward are not offering any alternative .
We have to find an alternative to the bloodshed and to the continuation of this dispute .
I hope we will vote for the resolution , to demonstrate not only our horror of terrorism but also the desire to find a solution to the tension within this region .
Madam President , on 13 December last year an appalling and vicious attack occurred on the parliament of the Indian Union in Delhi , which is their most visible symbol of democracy and secular nationhood .
Let us not underestimate the danger this posed as , had it succeeded in killing the assembled government ministers and opposition leaders , it could have heralded a war between India and Pakistan , both nuclear powers with massive conventional land forces as well - although India has at least declared a policy of no first use of its nuclear arsenal , unlike Pakistan .
The responsibility was soon traced to militant Islamic terrorist groups based in Pakistan , with full support and training from the Pakistani government , and also responsible for the earlier attacks in Srinagar against the Kashmiri State Assembly .
This is in clear violation of Security Council Resolution 1373 forbidding states from sponsoring terrorism against other states .
Nevertheless , I welcome President Musharraf 's change of heart in backing the United States in their war on terrorism which toppled the Taliban regime and destroyed the al-Qa 'ida network in Afghanistan , even though this regime was largely a creation of Pakistan 's interservice intelligence agency ; in particular , his speech of 13 January promising reforms of the madrassas , or religious schools , which fomented so much hatred of the west and bred an atmosphere conducive to the massacre of Christians peacefully at worship last year .
This is a promising start , but Pakistan has yet to accede to the request to extradite the 20 ringleaders of the plot .
There are deep concerns that the kidnapping of Wall Street journalist Daniel Pearl may have involved renegade pro-Taliban members of the Pakistani security forces .
There is now also some evidence from e-mails that the controller of the shoe-bomber Richard Reid , from my country alas , may have been based in Pakistan .
I call , therefore , on Pakistan to ratify the SAARC and all UN conventions on terrorism and I congratulate India on its restraint in the face of provocation and on its joint declaration with the EU in November last year against terrorism .
During the Afghan war in the 1980s we in the west supported Islamic militant ideology in order to oppose the spread of communism .
America , alas , paid the price on 11 September .
Will the west again repeat this mistake ?
Madam President , I should like to express the Socialist Group 's deep concern about the growing phenomenon of fundamentalist terrorism , not only in India but all around the world .
I express our concern about the threat this poses to democratic societies and reaffirm that acts of terrorism anywhere in the world threaten peace and stability , but no more so than in India and Pakistan at the moment .
Both of these possess nuclear weapons and one of them at least has not disavowed first use of those weapons .
We support India 's demands for Pakistan to contribute to a full investigation into the attacks on the Kashmiri State Assembly and the Indian Parliament .
But we urge both sides to do all they can to avoid slipping into the prospect of war .
That will require willingness and leadership on behalf of both India and Pakistan , and President Musharraf in particular .
The only way forward is through negotiations .
We hope that India and Pakistan , with the support of the European Parliament , can take that road rather than the much more dangerous road for themselves and the rest of the world .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I think that we have had a close shave , particularly because a first text was distributed , signed by both Mrs Lynne and Mr Elles , which was truly unacceptable .
The work - particularly work that has been done through the night over the last few days - has significantly enhanced the text and has resulted in a document which , although still not perfect , is acceptable .
We must bear in mind the title of and the reason for this resolution , namely the terrorist attacks in India .
Therefore , the resolution is , first and foremost , an expression of solidarity with the victims of these attacks .
Dr Tannock outlined to us the disastrous effects that this attack could have had on the whole of the ruling class in India .
I think that the resolution underestimates them , just as we , I believe , are to a certain extent overestimating the effect of what are still , at this stage , only statements made by President Musharraf .
As Dr Tannock quite rightly pointed out , not all the madrassas , or religious schools , have as yet been closed down , and it is therefore vital that we maintain a firm approach towards Pakistan .
Furthermore , I would also say to Mr Souladakis that , in this case , balance is no real guarantee of democracy .
We are forgetting that India is a democracy and has been one for over 50 years .
Democracy is and must continue to be a reference point for Parliament .
India is a developing country , which for more than 50 years has continued to strengthen its democracy with the population as it stands .
There is almost no other situation like this in the world .
There is China - India ' s great neighbour , a great market , an Eldorado for many of our fellow Members .
And then , there is this great country that we all too often forget , where the Commission has made a fair amount of progress over the last two to three years .
The first EU-India summit has been held , and has been followed by a second one , but this is really not enough .
By virtue of its system of government and of its will to forge ahead with its development whilst respecting democratic values , India should serve as a point of reference for our cooperation policy with all the countries of the world .
India ' s difficulties are infinitely greater than those of many other countries , in which we continue to tolerate a dictatorial regime , fundamentalism and other similar scourges .
I would therefore like to thank the Members who worked late into the night to transform the basic text and to make this into a document that supports India .
I think that we could have gone further in our support and that we must continue to exercise extreme caution where Pakistan is concerned , because Pakistan has , on many occasions , indicated its good intentions , but it is still not going far enough .
Madam President , I should like first of all to congratulate Mrs Cederschiöld on becoming the first Swedish Vice-President of the European Parliament .
I want to say how delighted I am at her election .
What happened on 13 December of last year in the Indian Parliament was unprecedented . The Parliament of a democratic , pluralistic country was attacked by militant Islamicist groups .
Parliament - the very heart of democracy - was exposed to a brutal assault .
People were murdered .
Democracy as a whole was called into question by these militant Islamicists .
It is important that we ourselves should try to understand emotionally what happened in New Delhi on that day .
Imagine if our own Parliament here in Strasbourg or our national parliaments - in my case , the riksdag in Stockholm - were to be exposed to a terrorist attack .
We should react in the most vigorous way .
It is perhaps difficult for us , as Europeans , properly to understand the real seriousness of what happened .
I want to address Commissioner Diamantopoulou and mention something about the Islamic religious schools , or madrassas as they are called , in Pakistan .
I believe that the Commissioner and the European Union have an incredibly important task when it comes to promoting a form of education in these schools that is based upon the ideas of love and of love of one ' s neighbour and does not see other religions or other political outlooks with the eyes of hatred , for it is in these madrassas and other Islamicist contexts that hatred is disseminated .
Dear friends , the Taliban regime in Afghanistan has fallen , but the Taliban regime ' s mentality of hatred and violence , of calling other people ' infidels ' and seeing them as inferiors , is a frame of mind that still exists .
I would call upon Mrs Diamantopoulou to do everything she can to ensure that it is tolerance and the ideas of love and love of one ' s neighbour that come to characterise education in Pakistan and , of course , in schools in the Middle East too .
Religion should be all about ennobling the soul , promoting lofty ethics and morality and giving people spiritual values - not about serving the causes of violence and hatred .
Pakistan operated as a training ground for the Al-Qa ' ida terrorists .
It was one of three countries in the world that recognised the Taliban regime .
Afghanistan ' s Taliban ambassador to Pakistan was allowed to remain there following the attack on the United States on 11 September .
Pakistan has a very great deal to put in order .
What President Musharraf has said is important .
We are now waiting for him to take vigorous action .
Thank you for your kind words regarding the election of a Swedish Vice-President .
Her election has meant a lot to us Swedes .
Mr President , I too should like to congratulate you and wish you every success in office .
This resolution by Parliament is to be welcomed with satisfaction .
The Members of the House have stressed that what happened was an exceptionally serious terrorist attack against the supreme institution of greater global democracy .
The European Union has unanimously expressed its outrage at this event .
The Council has made a number of statements condemning these incidents and expressing the solidarity of the European Union with the Republic of India .
The Council and the Commission have also stressed repeatedly that Pakistan must continue and expand its anti-terrorist policy .
India is asking for Pakistan to take specific action to demonstrate that it is determined to stamp out all forms of terrorism , a perfectly legitimate request .
Following the attack on 13 December , we have witnessed an unprecedented influx of troops along the border between the two countries and the increased tension and military clashes are causing concern .
We therefore welcome the announcement by the President of Pakistan , General Musharraf , on 12 January , announcing drastic measures to combat terrorism and religious fanaticism .
It is a step in the right direction and will help to defuse the tension between India and Pakistan .
The Commission will continue to draw both sides ' attention to the need to cooperate rather than take the military option .
Next week , when the European Union and India meet at ministerial level on 14 February , the troika 's message will be twofold .
First it will assure India that it has its full support in combating terrorism , as agreed in the declaration against terrorism at the second summit , and secondly , it will encourage both sides to return to the negotiating table as quickly as possible and to start withdrawing their troops .
Thank you , Commissioner Diamantopoulou .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 6.30 p.m.
Humanitarian aid for Goma
The next item is a joint debate on the following five motions for resolutions :
B5-0058 / 2002 by Mrs Maes , Mr Rod and Mr Lannoye on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance ,
B5-0065 / 2002 by Mr Van Hecke and Mrs Maij-Weggen on behalf of the Group of the European People ' s Party and European Democrats ,
B5-0073 / 2002 by Mr Sylla , Mr Miranda , Mr Sjöstedt and Mr Koulourianos on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left ,
B5-0082 / 2002 by Mrs Sauquillo Pérez del Arco and Mr Van den Berg on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists ,
B5-0090 / 2002 by Mrs Sanders-Ten Holte and Mrs Dybkjær on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party ,
on humanitarian aid for Goma .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it never rains but it pours , but this especially applies to the distressed population in the east of the Democratic Republic of the Congo .
Not only have they suffered under conditions of war for years , resulting in numerous refugees , and occupation by neighbouring Rwanda , their plight has now also been compounded by volcanic eruptions .
Recent tragic reports confirm the miserable situation the population is in .
The short dry season has started and a blanket of heat has descended on the country .
There is toxic dust , and toxic vapours are emerging from the lava .
The population has no firewood and uses the heat of this lava stream for their cooking fires .
You understand that this is a miserable situation involving a city which - at least in part - is reminiscent of Hiroshima in terms of destruction .
The section of the city that was not affected by the eruption lives its normal life , insofar as this is possible under these circumstances and under the occupation .
This means , therefore , that it is very difficult to distinguish the real victims from the others , and it is currently hard to tell who is suffering the most .
This is a report which I have also found confirmed in a recent communication by the Bishops ' Conference which complains about the fact that the rations supplied are , in fact , insufficient , while the food supply is adequate ; that a large section of the city has been razed to the ground but that it is hard to tell who are , in fact , the people who have really been hit .
Surveys have been carried out , but the results of these are yet to be confirmed .
Fortunately , a stream of international aid has been set in motion , and the European Union has played a prominent role in this .
I feared that , in my speech here , I would have to pass on a few complaints , for they are obviously brought to my attention .
For example , I hear that all aid has to go via Kigali , and that the situation is being taken advantage of there .
On the other hand , I have been told that Kigali airport is the most convenient in terms of freight handling , and that aid is no longer being hindered at the moment .
I know that aid has been supplied by the Democratic Republic of Congo to Bukavu and that it has to leave from there . However , that aid is labelled as aid from the Congolese population , and the occupying forces therefore do not allow the goods to be distributed .
I therefore want to put your minds at rest in a way , but the measures announced by the European Parliament are absolutely vital .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would actually like just to further underline Mrs Maes ' impressive description of the sufferings of the population , but I also wish to address a few other aspects , which perhaps have rather more to do with organisation and also with the political environment .
Organisational matters first : we hope that ECHO , the European Union with its aid , will no longer be hindered by anybody and will be able to get aid to the spot as quickly as possible .
We also hope that this applies not only to the city of Goma , but also to the area surrounding it , including Bukavu , where there are also refugees , and Rwanda and Burundi too , where refugees are also scattered .
We must give this aid , and quickly , to all those persons affected .
That is my first point .
The second point is that this again throws the spotlight on the weakness of the organised state and on its absence in the Congo .
The peace process needs to be firmly supported as soon as possible .
We have to help the various parties to see reason as soon as possible in order to facilitate reconstruction in the Congo , so that administrative , and also democratic , structures may be restored and so that this great country 's descent into chaos may be halted .
A great task is before us , and the exemplary aid we are currently able to provide is perhaps an incentive for the various participants in the conflict to listen to the European Community and avail themselves of our mediation .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I of course agree wholeheartedly with my two fellow Members .
As you know , the eruption of the Nyiragongo volcano in Goma , in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of Congo , is believed to be the most serious in central Africa for 25 years .
I would firstly like to pay tribute to the people - numbering between 300 000 and 500 000 - who initially fled Goma , but who are now returning because they are committed to their hometown .
We must bear in mind that this is a humanitarian and ecological disaster , which has occurred at a time when 80 % of the farm workers had finished sowing their wheat and corn .
We must bear in mind that it is the most fertile agricultural land that has been buried beneath lava , which has flattened houses and destroyed public buildings , particularly those housing NGOs .
What is more , this tragedy has happened in a climate - as the previous speakers said - of violence and conflict in the Great Lakes region .
As well as this tragedy , I think that we must now fear , because of the lack of clean drinking water , a spate of epidemics , cholera and dysentery in particular .
We already know what this type of epidemic can lead to , particularly after the so-called ' tropical ' genocide in which 50 000 people were killed in the same region of Goma .
There has even been an explosion - we have seen pictures of it - in a petrol station .
We have seen people looting and others leaving with jerry cans on their heads , going in search of petrol .
I think that all this is also contributing to the climate of insecurity , which we must tackle .
Although we can now welcome the fact that , as Mrs Maes said , the European Union has been quick to play a very active role on the ground , and that humanitarian aid has finally reached Goma , certain questions have , nevertheless , been raised and I think that we must try , along with the Commissioner , to provide an answer .
First of all , in 1977 , the same volcano began to erupt .
It is deeply regrettable that houses were rebuilt on a volcano , whose embers were still so active .
This was one of the questions raised in Goma , but I am raising it here because of all the other similar situations throughout the world .
Houses are rebuilt in areas where similar disasters have already happened .
Furthermore , I think that this tragedy must encourage everyone to respect the requirements drawn up for the ' ten-year action against natural risks ' and that the European Union must play a greater role in this .
Finally , we must seize this opportunity to compel all political forces , and particularly those that are at conflict , to guarantee that help is provided to displaced people and refugees .
The Commission and the Member States must play a more active part in the international ten-year action that I mentioned .
Lastly , since cooperation between the European Union and the Democratic Republic of Congo is now being resumed , I think that we must push our partners to bring an end to conflict and to establish a fair and lasting peace .
I think that , at the very least , these conditions are necessary if we want to stop the same conflict from happening again .
We must bear in mind - and this is my final point - that other disasters can happen ; we know , for example , that Lake Kivu contains huge methane resources and that the lava which is flowing into these waters risks is causing many other problems as well .
I thank the European Union for having taken swift action , but I would like to stress that we must step up our work and , through this , we can establish a fair and lasting peace .
Madam President , the eruption of the Nyiragongo volcano has demonstrated two realities which present a challenge to the whole international community in general and , specifically , for the European Union as well as the countries of the region .
The first reality is the extreme poverty in which thousands of people live , not only in this eastern region , but in the whole of the Democratic Republic of the Congo , a poverty which is aggravated all the more by the war which has been devastating that country since 1996 .
Figures have been presented : it has been said that more than 300 000 people need assistance , that 30 % of the population is homeless and that 12 000 homes need to be rebuilt .
In this respect , the resolution we have approved this week , which establishes links between emergency aid , rehabilitation and the development policy , has been very timely .
The second reality is the hatred which has been brewing up between the people of the east and the neighbouring population of Rwanda , a hatred which has been demonstrated by the rejection by the people of Goma of the hospitality offered by Rwanda and the massive return of this population to their homes , which have now been taken over by the volcano , despite the risk of further eruptions .
These two realities should lead us to come up with a European Union strategy and action which involves us in this region .
It is clear that a good reconstruction policy is required for Goma , as well as a policy on forecasting possible new eruptions and control of the Nyiragongo Volcano .
Nevertheless , none of this strategy will achieve effective results unless the foundations for a democratic system in the country are consolidated , as well as a broad social consensus which guarantees stability and peace .
But that will be of no use unless there is confidence in that stability throughout the region .
It is therefore important that this inter-Congo dialogue which is restarting in South Africa in Sun City puts an end to this conflict .
We also believe it is important to organise a regional conference which reconciles the countries of the Great Lakes region and brings back the confidence which has been lost to its various peoples .
The resolution we are presenting is a collection of desires , principles and strategies which we wish to see applied in order to deal with the eruption of the Nyiragongo Volcano , without losing sight of what was said previously .
We support the global plan for 2000 managed by ECO and we ask that this plan , which is very important for the African region , and for the achievement of the objectives previously expressed , be speeded up and that this aid does not arrive late , which has unfortunately often been the case .
I should like firstly to respond to Mrs Maes ' comment by referring to an ancient Greek saying : " Åíüò êáêïý ìýñéá Ýðïíôáé " .
That roughly means " one bad thing can easily lead to many others " .
I am afraid this is the case in Congo .
The Goma office of the Commission 's Humanitarian Aid Office was directly in the path of the lava flow .
But a four-man team of ECHO experts , including disaster response and water specialists , was on the ground to assess needs within 36 hours of the eruption .
ECHO Flight , the Commission 's humanitarian air service based in Nairobi , has been made available , bringing in the United Nations Disaster Assessment Team , volcano experts and other key personnel .
Joint assessments conducted by ECHO and the agencies on the ground resulted in the announcement of an emergency decision on Sunday , 20 January .
EUR five million is covering the immediate needs of 100,000 people .
That is about one-third of the affected population .
Operations are focusing on four main areas : water and health , shelter and non-food items , food , and coordination and logistics .
The head of ECHO 's Africa Unit visited the region from 30 January to 1 February .
The mission confirmed that urgent needs were being met and that effective coordination was in place .
What are our next steps ?
First , the immediate emergency is now being managed by the agencies and resources already available .
Further in-kind donations and the introduction of new agencies should be coordinated with the agencies already on the ground , to avoid potential duplication .
After careful appraisal of the options , efforts should now begin to focus on balanced , medium-term assistance with resettlement of the homeless and the rehabilitation of essential social infrastructure .
Finally , concerning Mr Sylla 's main point , the high media profile of this disaster should not distract our attention from the scale of the humanitarian crisis caused by five years ' conflict in Congo , already ECHO 's biggest customer - EUR 32 million in 2002 .
The Commission would stress the need for an early and peaceful solution to the conflict through the implementation of the Lusaka Agreements and the Inter-Congolese Dialogue .
Thank you , Commissioner Diamantopoulou .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 6.30 p.m.
Human rights
The next item is a joint debate on the following 28 motions for resolutions on human rights :
B5-0052 / 2002 by Mr Pasqua on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group ,
B5-0066 / 2002 by Mr Morillon , Mr Galeote , Mr Van Orden , Mr Cushnahan and Dr Tannock on behalf of the Group of the European People ' s Party and European Democrats ,
B5-0074 / 2002 by Mr Papayannakis , Mrs Ainardi and Mr Cossutta on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left ,
B5-0083 / 2002 by Mr Sakellariou , Mrs Napoletano , Mr Van den Berg and Mrs Terron i Cusi on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists ,
B5-0091 / 2002 by Mrs Malmström on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party ,
B5-0097 / 2002 by Mrs Hautala , Mr McCormick , Mr Wuori , Mrs Boumédienne-Thiery , Mr Jonckheer , Mrs Rühle , Mrs McKenna , Mrs Isler Béguin , Mrs Schörling , Mr Lannoye and Mrs Schroedter on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance ,
on Guantanamo Bay ,
B5-0054 / 2002 by Mrs Schroedter , Mrs Lambert , Mr Wuori and Mr Staes on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance ,
B5-0067 / 2002 by Lord Bethell , Mr Oostlander and Mr Posselt on behalf of the Group of the European People ' s Party and European Democrats ,
B5-0075 / 2002 by Mr Brie on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left ,
B5-0084 / 2002 by Mr Sakellariou , Mrs Krehl and Mrs Lalumière on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists ,
B5-0092 / 2002 by Mrs Thors on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party ,
on the case involving Gregori Pasko and the closure of TV6 in Russia ,
B5-0055 / 2002 by Mr Rod , Mrs Maes and Mrs Isler Béguin on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance
B5-0062 / 2002 by Mrs Caullery on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group ,
B5-0068 / 2002 by Mr Corrie , Mr Gemelli and Mrs Maij-Weggen on behalf of the Group of the European People ' s Party and European Democrats ,
B5-0076 / 2002 by Mr Marset Compos and Mr Cossutta on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left ,
B5-0085 / 2002 by Mr Scarbonchi , Mr Fruteau and Mr Van den Berg on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists ,
B5-0093 / 2002 by Mrs Sanders-Ten Holte , Mr Van den Bos and Mrs Dybkjær on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party ,
on the elections in Madagascar ,
B5-0063 / 2002 by Mrs Caullery on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group ,
B5-0069 / 2002 by Mr Posselt on behalf of the Group of the European People ' s Party and European Democrats ,
B5-0077 / 2002 by Mr Marset Campos on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left ,
B5-0086 / 2002 by Mr Van den Berg on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists ,
B5-0094 / 2002 by Mr Maaten and Mrs Dybkær on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party ,
on the elections in Cambodia ,
B5-0057 / 2002 by Mr Rod , Mrs Maes and Mrs Lucas on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance ,
B5-0064 / 2002 by Mrs Muscardini on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group ,
B5-0070 / 2002 by Mr Bowis , Mr Gemelli and Mrs Maij-Weggen on behalf of the Group of the European People ' s Party and European Democrats ,
B5-0078 / 2002 by Mr Brie on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left ,
B5-0087 / 2002 by Mrs Ghilardotti and Mr Van den Berg on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists ,
B5-0095 / 2002 by Mrs Sanders-Ten Holte , Mr Van den Bos and Mrs Dybkjær on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party ,
on Eritrea .
Guantanamo Bay
Madam President , Commissioner , what has been going on in Guantanamo Bay ?
That section of the European intelligentsia whose approach is still marked by naïve optimism and which still believes that , after 11 September , we can respond to violence without using violence and to war without using weapons , has spoken out about the conditions in which al-Qa ' ida fighters , captured in Afghanistan , were transported to Guantanamo Bay .
Let us try to imagine what would happen if , in the light of the tragic experience of the revolt in Mazar-i-Sharif , the Americans had not taken all the necessary precautions to enable these fanatical fighters to be safely transported ; fighters who , for years , have been trained to seek martyrdom by carrying out acts of the most mindless violence .
Had they not been treated in this way and had they simply been collectively transported by aircraft , they would have become unbalanced and uncontrollable .
What is going on now in Guantanamo Bay ?
All eyewitness reports testify that the prisoners are being treated well and that the injured are receiving all the care needed for their recovery .
So , why is this urgent resolution now being tabled , given the wave of solidarity that Parliament voiced unanimously after the attacks ? The only possible reason is so that we can , in the name of fine principles and grand sentiments , distance ourselves from the war that the Americans are continuing to wage against international terrorism .
No , ladies and gentlemen , this war cannot be waged by applying international conventions , which were approved at a time when we needed to protect fighters engaging in traditional battles , and when civilians were not an automatic target , as they are now .
The war waged by terrorists against defenceless people renders all the Geneva Conventions null and void .
The essence of the war against terrorism resides , first and foremost , in collecting information , the aim being to prevent further attacks by infiltrating groups in order to destroy networks which , as we all know , still exist on our territory and in the United States .
This is what the Americans are trying to do at Guantanamo Bay .
We can only congratulate them on their efforts .
That is why our group will not be associated with the joint resolution tabled by other groups , but we will table our own resolution , which , in essence , calls for a revision of international law so that we can adapt to the conditions of the new era that began in New York and Washington on 11 September 2001 .
Madam President , military manoeuvres and Guantanamo analyses aside , mankind is on trial now , as are our willingness and ability to sustain a world in which the rules of law agreed a priori will prevail , because only then will we retain the moral and political right to judge everyone else who is indifferent to or tramples international rules of law underfoot , be they terrorists , the Taliban , anyone at all .
The European Parliament cannot demand any less than what is being demanded by various legitimate voices in the United States , at the UN and even in the European Union .
By Mr Powell himself , by Mr Robinson , even down to Mr Solana .
The world cannot be governed by the law of the Far West , including Texas , or by the customs and habits of the town of Leeds .
Those with the fastest guns and the slowest reflexes to ideals and institutions cannot take the law into their own hands .
Because otherwise we shall end up , Madam President , with a world in which what we see is tragedy rather than cinema .
Ladies and gentlemen , and I appeal here also to my fellow Members on the other side of the House , when we rally against the death penalty , we are not defending the wretched crimes of some murderer or rapist .
We are defending ourselves , our perceptions and our culture .
It is for the same reasons that we are calling for the prisoners at Guantanamo to be treated as required under current international law or even American law , which cannot of course be limited to members of the Taliban who are American nationals .
This sort of discrimination is unacceptable even in the jungle .
Madam President , this resolution seeks to emphasise the essential point that the fight against terrorism , which will be long and hard , must be conducted as far as is possible in compliance with international law and the Rule of Law .
This call comes both from United States society and this House itself , which I hope will adopt the resolution .
With regard to the al-Qa ' ida fighters held at Guantanamo Bay who were taken prisoner in Afghanistan , there are two problems .
The first is that of their detention , in that there are disturbing International Red Cross reports on the conditions in which they are being held .
The second is the legal status of the detainees : there is some uncertainty regarding this but the fact that John Walker , an American citizen , is being tried by a civil court while the other detainees are being tried by a secret military tribunal is there for all to see .
This is unacceptable .
General Morillon may well be right when he says that the Geneva treaties need to be updated , in that the Convention provides for the status of prisoner of war but , where such status is uncertain , provision needs to be made for the existence of prisoners of an undeclared war , for there is no reason why they should have fewer guarantees or receive less care in terms of respect for human rights as far as detention conditions are concerned .
The resolution also makes the important request that the United Nations Security Council set up a court responsible for Afghanistan , so that both the issue of the legal status of the prisoners and that of the detention conditions can be addressed .
In endorsing this request , we will be taking a very sensible step which will also help to advance the fight against terrorism .
Madam President , we have all seen the pictures from the base at Guantanamo Bay of the prisoners with their orange-coloured overalls .
The issue of how they are being treated has given rise to international concern .
We have protested in the European Parliament , and we are not alone in having protested .
Most countries - except , for once , Cuba where the base is situated - have in actual fact protested .
The fact that there have been no protests in Cuba may possibly be due to the fact that the Cubans are pleased that the focus has been shifted from the way in which they themselves treat their prisoners there , but that is not perhaps a subject for discussion right now .
There is some confusion about the legal status of the prisoners at the base at Guantanamo Bay , and this issue needs to be clarified by a competent court .
Such a court could be set up by a UN Security Council resolution .
Irrespective of what crimes and evil acts the prisoners at Camp X-Ray may have committed - and which we would vigorously condemn - the prisoners must be treated in accordance with international and humanitarian standards and principles .
Until such time as their legal status has been established , they must be regarded as prisoners of war .
The chairman of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , Graham Watson , said yesterday in the House that we are actually in favour of a review of the Geneva Convention .
It would be good if newer and more modern rules could be established that could be applied to prisoners and to acts of terrorism in situations in which , as Mr Napolitano said , there has been no declaration of war .
It would be good if the whole Parliament could support this .
This Parliament supports the United States and the international fight against terrorism .
We have shown this very clearly through our vote earlier today .
When democracies engage in such a fight , they must however show respect for human rights and legal principles .
I therefore share the concern expressed by my fellow MEPs where the military courts are concerned .
It is unacceptable that just one Taliban - an American Taliban , John Walker - should be brought to trial before a civil court when others are to be tried before military courts .
We require that there be common rules and that everyone be treated in the same way and be given ordinary legal rights and legal protection in civil courts .
It should nonetheless have been possible to avoid a large part of this debate if the United States had ratified the protocol concerning the International Criminal Court so that there had been a permanent court in which people who had committed acts of this kind could also be brought to trial in accordance with international rules .
I would really urge the United States to ratify that protocol .
Madam President , Parliament must deplore in no uncertain terms President Bush 's military order permitting the secret trial of prisoners in Guantanamo Bay by a military commission , which may adopt its own rules of evidence , judge and pass sentence .
This is outside American jurisdiction .
As has been pointed out by other speakers , the only American al-Qa 'ida member so far captured is to be tried in a court in Virginia with full legal representation !
This military order breaches all provisions for a fair trial as guaranteed by the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights , to which the US is a party , such as the presumption of innocence , choice of counsel , impartial and timely hearing , and the right of appeal to a higher court .
The US Government has introduced a category of unlawful combatants , an unknown term in international law , while refusing to grant the suspected al-Qa 'ida fighters and Taliban troops captured in Afghanistan the status of prisoners of war .
These concerns have been highlighted by renowned lawyers throughout the world , who contest the legitimacy of forcibly taking those now detained in Cuba out of Afghanistan without any extradition order , as well as their status as combatants , and calls for them to be treated as ordinary criminal suspects with all associated rights .
We must also take into account the fact that some of these people , who are merely suspected of being al-Qa 'ida supporters , have been deported from Bosnia to Guantanamo Bay .
The reports of ill-treatment of prisoners is absolutely shocking .
Nobody can deny what we have seen for ourselves on television , including reports that they have been shackled , hooded , sedated during transfer and their beards forcibly shaved .
This sensory deprivation is something that was criticised in Ireland in the past in relation to prisoners in Northern Ireland - even by our own government .
Yet everyone is turning a blind eye to what is happening in Guantanamo Bay .
We have to speak out in the interests of international justice , respect for human rights and respect for the Rule of Law .
America should abide by those international covenants as well .
Parliament would do very well to speak out and send a very clear message that we do not agree with the policy they have adopted .
Madam President , I fully support the USA in its handling of the detainees in Guantanamo Bay .
It is fully in the interests of Europe 's citizens that the American security forces be allowed to interrogate these suspects .
This would not be permissible were they classified as prisoners of war under the 1949 Geneva Convention , since POWs are only obliged to divulge their name , rank and number , whereas unlawful combatants - their correct classification , in my view , according to the provisions of Article 4 ( 2 ) of the Geneva Convention - can be interrogated .
I have to say to speakers on the other side of the House that a declaration or non-declaration of war is an irrelevancy under the Geneva Conventions .
The US needs to interrogate these individuals as it is an essential part of the worldwide struggle against terrorism .
The decision by the US to classify them in this way is , therefore , not vindictive but practical and necessary , but it exposes the inadequacy of the anachronistic international jurisprudence in this area .
Furthermore , it is my belief that many of these individuals are so dangerous that they would not have hesitated to attack their own guards .
If they became aware that one of their fellow detainees was likely to crack under interrogation , they would have made efforts to kill him as well .
The only possible alternative - beyond the physical restraints which were placed upon them , both in transit , when they might well have bitten their way through the avionic cables in order to down the planes , and on land - would be the use of high doses of intramuscular tranquillisers which , although effective , would have carried significant risks to the detainees and would have required medical and nursing personnel to accompany them .
There is no evidence that the Americans are treating them cruelly or inhumanely , and we should support them rather than engage in speculative and ill-informed criticism .
My concern is twofold : firstly , as regards what will America do with those it does not file charges against who , if returned to their own countries of origin , may face torture and death for reasons of unrelated Islamic militancy ; and secondly , with regard to paragraph 5 of the resolution , which suggests a role for the international criminal court , which has yet to get off the ground ?
Unfortunately , as well-intentioned as this may be , my understanding is that certainly domestic terrorists , rightly or wrongly , are excluded from the Rome Statute provisions , but it may be that international terrorists could fall under its remit .
This is not clear at present .
I have a number of additional concerns about the ICC , such as command responsibility , which blames military commanders even if they had no knowledge of the crimes committed , and also the fact that amnesties and peace and reconciliation processes would become more difficult to achieve between belligerents .
Nevertheless , this whole area of jurisprudence ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Madam President , regardless of their situation , today millions of people have seen in the media the degrading conditions in which the prisoners have been transported and have seen on television the humiliating conditions they have been subjected to inside and outside the sadly famous cages .
It is not simply a question of condemning the attitude of the United States authorities , but also of rejecting the shameful comments made in the initial days by the base ' s military commanders .
Some of them , in very bad taste , showed disdain and racism towards the prisoners .
A superpower which is not just a military , but also a civil , power should , in my opinion , set a proper example of respect for human rights , even if two twin towers had been destroyed for each of the 50 states of the Union .
Whatever happens , they should always show full respect for human rights .
Nevertheless , I hope that 11 September has not numbed American public opinion so much that it has become blinded and cannot react in a decent a dignified fashion within the United States itself .
In any event , many Europeans are prepared to remain vigilant , to remember that it is essential to maintain our values and principles in this war which we must wage against terrorism and fanaticism .
Or are we going to be prepared to renounce the values we claim to defend at this point in European construction ?
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this is not the first time that those who consider themselves the guardians of western culture , those who give the rest of the world lessons in democracy have proven to be the guardians of barbarianism .
We see them imposing embargos on Iraq , where they have killed thousands of children .
We saw them in Yugoslavia , together with their friends on this side of the Atlantic , killing civilians , flattening infrastructures and destroying the environment .
Barbarianism is a fundamental aspect of imperialism .
Mistreating any person is a crime .
Mistreating prisoners of war is an even more serious violation of international law .
And let there be an end to the discussion as to whether or not the detainees in Guantanamo are prisoners of war .
If the Americans were waging war on Afghanistan , then they are prisoners of war .
If the Americans were not waging war on Afghanistan , then the detainees have simply been kidnapped .
And they have been transferred to occupied territory on the island of Cuba on purpose , as a serious provocation to the heroic people of Cuba .
The Americans are making no secret of what they are up to with the backing of their friends , and unfortunately some of their friends are here in this Chamber .
They want the whole world to know what is in store for anyone who falls into their hands .
But , ladies and gentlemen , however terrible their barbarianism , it will not stop the march of history .
The people will see to that .
Mr President , I am speaking on behalf of Gerardo Galeote , signatory , together with General Morillon , of the PPE resolution on this issue .
I have arrived late for this debate , but I have had time to listen to some speeches and I believe we should return to the basic issues .
I believe there are three basic issues : firstly , terrorism is the great threat to the Rule of Law and to open and democratic societies today ; secondly , the United States and Europe share the same vision , the same social organisation and , of course , the idea that respect for human rights is the very cement of our organisation .
Thirdly , we must clearly state that , if the European Union flies any flag , it is the flag of respect for human rights .
On this basis , we clearly can and must raise our voices and , rather than ask , say , because asking would mean believing that the prisoners in the Guantánamo base are not being treated in accordance with humanitarian principles and the truth is that all the indications suggest that they are .
I am not going to enter into the argument about whether or not the Geneva Convention applies to them .
We in the European Union must say that , in the case of any doubt , the principles of the Geneva Convention must be applied , but that the Geneva Convention itself lays down a legal basis to resolve all those issues which may endanger the security of the organisation or the prisoners themselves , while a judicial tribunal establishes whether they have the right to protection under the Geneva Convention or not .
So far , Mr President , I have the impression that they are being treated absolutely correctly and that therefore this debate is unfocused .
This has probably been an error in terms of European public opinion - if not in terms of American public opinion - , a public relations error , because the truth is that it has been the United States itself that has published these photos which so offend our sensibilities .
We must clearly continue , and we will continue , to be vigilant , but always on the basis of the idea that we are fighting this war together .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , what is it that differentiates a Taliban-style regime from a democracy ?
I believe it to be , above all , respect for constitutional legality .
Whatever the temptations to deviate from the path of constitutional legality , the fight against terrorism can only be carried on if the Rule of Law and also , above all , international agreements are respected .
The USA , then , should not even give the impression that that it does not regard international agreements , the Geneva Convention , and so on , as binding when it comes to the treatment of terrorist suspects .
That is also the reason for our resolution .
Let me take this opportunity to say something else .
The lady who spoke before me said that Europe and the USA have the same vision .
That is , unfortunately , not entirely true , as the fight against terrorism in which the Americans are currently engaged is not , from our point of view , a very effective one , although it is a fight against terrorism which , as such , we all support .
I might just say that the Americans had a highly ambivalent , not to say , sometimes even tolerant , attitude towards terrorism when it suited them , but , following those first fearful seconds on 11 September , they have , unfortunately , again left the path of multilateralism and of the quest for allies .
I do not want to defend any of the regimes of North Korea , Iran and Iraq , which differ greatly from each other .
Yet this simplistic way of lumping all these regimes together and making them out to be an axis of evil in fact demonstrates that the US government , despite Secretary of State Powell 's very honourable attitude , is unfortunately taking an approach that does not effectively combat terrorism .
We know , for example , that there are several groups in Iran that are not very keen on going down the same road as President Khatami , his foreign minister , and his government .
We are also aware , though , that there are powerful forces in Iran in favour of going down this road , and I therefore believe that , no matter how unequivocal the fight against terrorism , we have to make it clear to the Americans that their way of fighting goes against constitutional legality and is not very effective .
Mr President , the Commission notes the various concerns expressed by many honourable Members at the legal implication of the United States decision to deny these detainees prisoner of war status under the Geneva Convention .
We have all seen the photographs taken of prisoners detained at the United States military base in Guantanamo and have read reports about their treatment .
Despite the uncertainty about their formal status there has been no proof that the prisoners are not being treated humanely .
This has to be the fundamental question .
The European Union has a long-standing ongoing dialogue with the United States on human rights issues and in the field of justice and home affairs .
In the majority of cases there is agreement between the European Union and the United States .
But where we disagree , for example on the death penalty , we put our case and discuss our differences frankly .
I agree with those honourable Members who believe that this issue strengthens the EU 's argument in favour of the establishment of an International Criminal Court .
We will continue to pursue this line of argument with our United States counterparts .
The European Union will continue to monitor the situation in Guantanamo . We will do it carefully and will not hesitate to raise this issue bilaterally with the United States whenever appropriate .
I would like to conclude by repeating what Mr Patten has already said in the Tokyo Conference of donors for the reconstruction of Afghanistan .
Our main concept is justice for events , and this is the precondition to win peace as well as to win the war .
The case of Grigori Pasko and the closure of TV6 in Russia .
Mr President , it is an honour for a small group to be allowed to open the dance , as it were , and I would like to do so by saying that without freedom of the press , democracy cannot flourish .
The case of Grigori Pasko must make that clear to us .
It is a heavy blow to the freedom of speech in Russia , to a country born of perestroika and awoken by it .
It takes us back to the suppression of the free expression of opinion during the Soviet era .
Hence our criticism of it , for the accusation is still founded on the secret martial laws of the Soviet Union , which are not recorded even by Russia 's Ministry of Justice .
In them , military personnel are forbidden to talk to foreigners .
They cannot even go shopping any more , as for a long time many of the traders in Russia have been from other countries .
That is why we have appealed to Mr Ustinov , the State Prosecutor-General , to review this case without delay .
We call to mind the case of Alexander Nikitin , whose appeal took sixteen months , especially bearing in mind the fact that Gregori Pasko is extremely poorly accommodated .
There are not even windowpanes in his cell , and that in winter .
Gregori Pasko does not want a pardon .
I wish to point out to the Commissioner that there are remarkable false rumours circulating about that .
This is not about an admission of guilt .
He is in the right !
He is within his rights to use freedom of speech .
I would therefore like to ask the Commissioner to tell Mr Patten that this topic must at last find its way into the discussions between the EU and Russia !
Mr President , certain Members of this House , and certain forces , tend to apply more stringent standards to a small country such as Madagascar , which we will be discussing shortly , than to a large country such as Russia .
We are , though , obliged to do the very opposite .
Russia is a member of the Council of Europe , and has a special partnership agreement with the European Union , so , on human rights issues , we must apply stringent standards to this country even if it is a powerful one and partnership with it is in our own interests .
The Russians signed up to stringent standards when they joined these organisations , and now they must meet them .
What has been done to Mr Pasko is therefore wholly unacceptable .
Mr Pasko is a person who has acted in the interests of the people of the European Union , Russia , and its Asian neighbours in warning of dangers menacing the Russian people and all of us .
As a Russian democrat , as an environmentalist , and as a human rights activist , he deserves our support .
He campaigns for freedom of opinion and constitutional legality in Russia , and so , in contrast to those who are trying to silence him , he is a patriot .
This case in particular , then , obliges us to speak plainly and to demand that Russia 's secret laws , martial laws , and military courts should disappear and that Mr Pasko be set free , not by being pardoned , but by the utterly unfair and unjustifiable charge against him being withdrawn .
There is one other thing we must say loud and clear . There is a need to create the conditions in Russia for the restoration of nationwide independent media .
The closure of TV-6 is a scandal that cries out to heaven , and stands out as the conclusion of a coordinated policy engaged in by the Kremlin and by President Putin himself .
I therefore ask you to support this motion for a resolution .
Thank you , Mr President , in my country , we often say that it is beyond anyone ' s comprehension .
I was very much reminded of this phrase during a recent incident at the Russian Kultura channel .
In a programme , the presenter recommended a recently published book on the position of intellectuals under the Stalin regime .
He had deduced very subtly that the publishers must have thought the time had come to reflect on almost forgotten survival techniques .
This is a discerning way of ridiculing the Kremlin ' s authoritarian press policy .
However , the penniless directors at TV-6 have little to smile about these days .
Last month , their channel was taken off the air by judicial order .
In that way , the last , national , private channel , with its own independent reporting , disappeared in Russia .
More than half of the Russian population were able to receive the TV-6 programmes .
From now on , these citizens will have to rely on the two public channels , ORT and RTR , to provide them with information .
In short , the forced closure of TV-6 certainly spells a decline in the Russian press landscape .
The present draft resolution is therefore right to point this out .
Has TV-6 ' s fate now been sealed for ever ?
No , for , next month , the Ministry of Press Affairs will decide on a new licence for Channel 6 .
There is therefore a chance of this independent broadcasting channel being given a new lease of life .
Interestingly enough , the day before yesterday , it received public backing for this from the right and the left political opposition camps in the Russian Federation .
This option is definitely not the Kremlin ' s preferred choice .
The leaders in Moscow much prefer the idea of turning Channel 6 into a special sports channel .
In their view , this also fits in perfectly with Putin ' s new campaign for national fitness .
Whether watching television for hours will indeed produce a healthier nation is very much to be doubted .
With a view to the desired de-politicisation of society , however , it is an effective instrument .
This draft resolution also makes reference to the case against the military journalist Grigori Pasko - with very good reason .
The obvious link between his case and the closure of TV-6 is that both rest upon a shaky legal foundation , something which is not compatible with the fundamental principle of the Rule of Law in the Russian Federation .
This is one of President Putin ' s basic principles , which we gladly share with him .
Given the expressions of endorsement conveyed by Russian society to Grigori Pasko and the editors of TV-6 , there are surprisingly many more like-minded Russians .
This sober resolution is a welcome affirmation for them and is designed to ensure that justice prevails for Gregori Pasko personally and that press freedom in general is protected in Russia .
Mr President , Mrs Schroeder mentioned the case of Mr Nitikin .
The two cases involving Grigori Pasko and Igor Sutyagin are more or less identical .
Although Mr Pasko was sentenced in 1999 , the Kaluga regional court has only recently acknowledged that there was no legal basis for his imprisonment .

He is still in prison .
This illustrates the Russia of today , Russia under Mr Putin , the Russia of Mr Putin ' s friend , Mr Oostlander , who had us vote on a report on Russia - which I voted against - and in which we approved substantial funding of programmes for the media and for freedom of the media , for an independent judiciary and for the protection of the environment .
At almost every part-session , however , we have to remark upon the fact that , in these areas and in many others , things in Russia are not working .
This is the policy of the European Union . In other words , we are funding the fight to protect the environment and , at the same time , we have to fight to have environmental protesters released from prison and so on .
This is a ridiculous policy .
It is obvious that Mr Prodi ' s concerns do not go much further than Gazprom and gas .
We all know this and I urge those who tabled texts to include a small oral amendment .
I also urge the Commission to express its strongest opposition to the Russian authorities .
I do not think that this is a matter for the Council alone .
Moving on , it is most shameful that we are not spending enough time discussing the situation in Chechnya .
Not a day or week goes by , however , when there is not an article on Chechnya in our newspapers .
I urge you to read the latest article by Mrs Politovskaya in ' Courrier International ' magazine .
What is happening in Chechnya , which is still part of Russia , even though it should not be , is absolutely atrocious .
Of course , there are no pictures like those taken at Guantanamo Bay ; there are no pictures but the situation is obviously much worse .
Madam President , the Commission shares Parliament 's concern about the cases of Grigori Pasko and the closure of TV6 .
Against the background of our joint efforts with Russia to establish closer political and economic relations , the European Union has repeatedly made clear that it expects Russia to act in accordance with the values that it committed itself to respecting when it entered the Council of Europe and the OSCE .
These basic principles , including free and independent media , necessarily constitute an integral part of our partnership , underlying the strategic partnership that we are building .
Besides legal considerations , editorial freedom in Russia has suffered a number of setbacks in recent months .
This is a worrying development .
In addition , the Pasko case raises concern due to the dim and unclear circumstances surrounding his trial , including the lack of any public incriminating evidence .
At any rate , we will continue to use all CFSP instruments to support the causes of independent media and editorial freedom in Russia , including by raising all relevant cases in the framework of our bilateral political dialogue with Russia .
In addition , the Commission will continue to devote special attention to supporting civil society and independent media in the context of the European initiative for democracy and human rights , for which Russia will be a priority in the short and medium term .
Elections in Madagascar .
Mr President , the results of the first round of the presidential elections , which were held on 16 December 2001 in Madagascar , have been the subject of great controversy and conflict between the two leading candidates , namely the outgoing president , Didier Ratsiraka , and his rival Marc Ravalomanana .
It is claimed that Mr Ratsiraka has rigged the election results and his intentions remain a mystery .
He is not stepping down and his silence is leading to fears of violent actions being carried out by his supporters .
Although the Ministry of Home Affairs attributes only a small majority to Mr Ravalomanana , he is claiming to have won the first round and is calling for the second round to be cancelled .
However , the official results mean that the two men must face one another in a second round and the international community is hoping and praying that it will be organised .
Mr Ravalomanana appears to enjoy the support of the people , as hundreds of thousands of people have demonstrated in his favour , bringing the country to a standstill with a general strike and claiming victory over the opposition .
This strike is having disastrous consequences for Madagascar ' s economy , and last week cost between USD 8-10 million .
The losses incurred , following 10 days of strike action , have already exceeded Madagascar ' s annual education budget .
Let there be no misunderstanding about this .
This is not a question of us supporting one candidate over another , and I have no more sympathy for Mr Ravalomanana than Mr Ratsiraka .
What could be a cause for concern for the future are his autocratic tendencies , which came to the fore when he was the capital ' s mayor , and if elected , Madagascar ' s power would be in his hands .
Human rights supporters are becoming disillusioned .
But what we need , first and foremost , is respect for democracy and the Rule of Law .
That is why it is essential that the two candidates agree to the ballot being checked and that the High Constitutional Court agrees to compare the results .
This comparison is the only democratic means of establishing the real results of the ballot .
The Commission must do everything in its power to resolve this conflict , which is pulling the country apart , but also to help in establishing a genuine Rule of Law .
The conflict must be resolved with respect for human , political and civil rights , but also for political pluralism .
Respect for fundamental principles is essential in consolidating the democratic process .
Mr President , after the dark period of colonialism and dictatorships in the developing countries , I feel that it is positive that we are talking today about elections in these countries , even though their social and civil structure is weak , as is the concept of democracy .
It is difficult to distinguish between the parties , given that every culture and every society needs to select its own representatives .
I do feel , however , that we must reiterate the need for transparent elections , for we must promote the development of democratic awareness and culture just as we must promote the growth of civil society .
Moreover , through the instruments available to us , the Cotonou Treaty and the ACP / EU Joint Parliamentary Assemblies , we must propose systems and methods of democratic control , ensuring they are appropriate to the current level of civil society in those countries .
We will be able to move forwards if we succeed in getting across the message that democratic growth , the safeguarding of human rights and the creation of a pluralist State - and therefore of consensus within a pluralist society - will enable this country to grow , for it needs so badly to be actively included among the world ' s civil societies .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , on 25 January 2002 , Madagascar ' s High Constitutional Court published the result of the elections .
The slow procedure and the quasi-monarchic nature of the regime that has been in power for almost 20 years , which , in particular , had led Madagascar ' s government to refuse the presence of international observers , and the ambiguities found in the public statements made by the opposition , sow more than a seed of doubt as to whether these results are reliable .
But are Madagascar ' s leaders solely responsible for this parody of democracy ?
Why was this country , which is one of the poorest countries in the world , not the focus of particular attention from international public opinion before these regrettable events occurred ?
Have the countries of Europe , and France in particular , forgotten the past they share with Madagascar ?
Ladies and gentlemen , the Madagascans do not need us to take them by the hand , nor do they need us to make electoral choices on their behalf . However , Europe cannot , under any circumstances , stand aside and do nothing .
In spite of the ' good behaviour ' that the observers have emphasised - which is one of the Madagascan people ' s defining characteristics - the situation is exceptional for this country .
More than 500 000 people take to the streets every day to demonstrate on a scale that has not been seen since the country gained independence . Madagascar has been brought to a virtual standstill by a general strike that is having disastrous consequences , and the support for which is as strong as ever despite being in its tenth day .
We cannot remain indifferent , given the serious nature of this situation .
We must therefore adopt initiatives to help the people of Madagascar to rediscover a dignified way of life .
And this will only happen if the second round takes place in a transparent fashion ; in other words , if the international organisation and if the European Union ensure the elections are conducted in the proper manner .
We must demand that the two candidates show respect for the Rule of Law and safeguard civil peace so that the electoral problems do not escalate into an ethnic dispute .
We must quite simply call for the voice of the people to be heard and for their verdict to be respected .
Mr President , the Commission , which stands by human rights , respect for democratic principles and the Rule of Law , is particularly concerned and worried about the political situation in Madagascar . Time is short and we are under pressure to monitor the elections , which are currently being prepared .
The Commission will not be able to send observers for the second round of voting on 24 February because Madagascar was not on the Commission 's list of priorities for 2002 , including for reasons which originate in the country itself .
However , the European Union is prepared to support the election process and the Commission has decided to send a team of technical experts to the second round of elections in Madagascar with instructions to support a consortium of local observers .
Elections in Cambodia
Mr President , the elections in Cambodia , which at least represented progress by virtue of being the first local elections for decades , were preceded by an electoral campaign in which the media were manipulated by the ruling party and persons in positions of power , who exploited them for their sole benefit .
A tide of intimidation directed at the opposition parties culminated in innumerable violent deaths and mysterious murders .
That being so , these elections cannot be described as free in the true sense of the word , even though our colleagues have reported from Cambodia that the ballot itself seems largely to have been conducted in a correct manner .
We must , though , register the fact that there is still a great need for democracy to really take root in this country , which has been tested by adversity and has suffered more than any other in the world from the horrors of the twentieth century .
No other country in the world has seen a totalitarian rampage such as took place in Cambodia under the Khmer Rouge , and so the wounds are not going to be healed overnight .
We must , though , nonetheless see to it that we apply clear standards and promote democracy and the Rule of Law - and that can only be done through the local communities .
I therefore appeal to the Commission and the Council to systematically promote and support the newly-elected local assemblies , by which I mean not only the representatives of the ruling party but also those of the opposition parties , which must not be allowed to degenerate into fig leaves , but which are needed so that this first tentative step towards democracy may result in real democracy and not just a propaganda show .
We therefore need training and development for local politicians ; they , their access to the media , and free media themselves , need to be fostered .
These need to be the priorities of our future policy on Cambodia .
Forces such as Funcinpec , too , as well as others , need to be promoted by us , so that a genuine and stable multi-party system may arise in this country that has suffered so much more than any other .
Mr President , the European Commission agrees with Parliament that priority must be given to supporting basic democratic institutions in Cambodia .
That is why we spent EUR three million in the form of technical assistance to ensure that the recent municipal elections ran smoothly and why we sent observers from the European Union at Cambodia 's request .
The European Commission coordinated a total of 120 observers in Cambodia on the day of the election .
This is the first time we have sent observers for purely local elections .
I must say that I was especially pleased that Carlos Costa Neves headed the mission , as this shows that Parliament and the Commission are now working even more closely together on election observer missions .
According to initial reports , preparations for the elections and polling arrangements went smoothly and voters arrived peacefully and in an orderly manner .
We did , of course , receive reports of incidents of violence , murder and intimidation which are giving us serious cause for concern and which took place despite the fact that both the government and the other political parties stated they wanted no violence during the elections .
And we consider that media coverage of the elections was biased .
As the electoral process has not yet been completed , the results have not yet been announced and accusations and appeals have not yet been filed , it is too soon to draw any final conclusions as to how the elections passed .
But clearly , for the first time in its history , the people of Cambodia had the opportunity to vote for local councillors and they turned out en masse in order to do so .
The European Commission representation , together with European Union diplomatic missions in Cambodia , will continue to monitor progress in the post-election period .
Only then shall we be in a position to evaluate the full importance of efforts to ensure that this country continues on the road to democracy .
Eritrea
Mr President , we , who supported Eritrea ' s struggle for independence , are alarmed by the changes in this country 's governing authorities , while the tragic consequences of the recent conflict with Ethiopia are already causing suffering .
In September 2001 , 11 members of the Eritrean opposition , including several former ministers who had published a letter calling for a return to democracy by the ruling party , were arrested by the government .
As well as the arrests , a ban , described by the authorities as temporary , was imposed on the private press .
The elections were also adjourned and the formation of new political parties was prohibited .
Journalists and Eritrean dissident politicians were gagged by the regime .
These repressive measures , which violate freedom of expression , are worrying and unacceptable .
They blatantly contradict the Eritrean authorities ' proclaimed desire to undertake democratic reforms .
Furthermore , the expulsion in October 2001 of the Italian ambassador , who represented the European Union on the ground , severely undermined relations with Eritrea .
Yet , in order to enable relations between Eritrea and the European Union to return to normal , it is essential that human rights and fundamental freedoms be respected .
For this to happen , the Eritrean Government must not only release all political prisoners and journalists , but it must also lift the ban on all independent journalists .
That is why the European Union must re-examine its relations with Eritrea in the light of the Cotonou Agreement , Article 96 of which calls for an inter-Eritrean national conference to be held , bringing together the various political leaders and representatives of civil society , with a view to finding a solution to the current crisis and to setting the country on the path to democracy and sustainable development .
Mr President , Commissioner , I ask you to share the sorrow as well as the anger I feel in speaking as a friend of Eritrea .
From 1889 to 1952 Eritrea was under the flags firstly of Italy , then of Britain .
It was then given by the international community to Ethiopia in federation , and then it was annexed by that country .
It then suffered 32 years of war during which its economy and its environment were ruined and its people dispersed .
We then came to 1993 and its referendum for independence .
I was there as a UN observer .
There was a spirit of hope abroad in that country .
The refugees were returning , reconstruction was beginning to take place .
90 % of people voted in that referendum . 99 % voted for independence .
President Isaias was elected president .
With a moderate lifestyle and a period of optimism stemming from it , we hoped for the best .
For some years the problem was border conflict .
Now sadly the problem is internal .
Human rights have deteriorated , opposition is not tolerated , eleven former leaders of the government party have been arrested , the press is suppressed and journalists arrested .
The Italian ambassador has been expelled .
Multiparty elections which were promised for last December were cancelled and now parties themselves have been banned .
Democracy has been cancelled in Eritrea .
Eritrea is desperate for support in rebuilding a country ravaged by war .
They need our aid , but aid must not be without guarantees of good governance .
To our friends in Eritrea we say : " come back to the world community of democratic government . Turn away from totalitarianism " .
To the Commission I say : " be firm " .
Human rights are not just for our benefit . They are not to make us feel good .
They are for the benefit of the people of Eritrea and Eritrea needs those human rights now .
Mr President , Commissioner , as the previous speakers have already said , the situation in Eritrea is becoming increasingly serious as far democracy is concerned .
The Eritrean Parliament , which is made up of elected members who all belong to the People ' s Front for Democracy and Justice , has decided to ban the formation of political parties .
The independent press has been suppressed and many journalists , politicians and political opponents , including former government ministers , have been arrested , accused of treason against the national assembly .
There is an increase in repressive measures being taken to control the citizens , especially students , two of whom died while imprisoned in the desert .
The Italian ambassador has been expelled . The state of the economy and of citizens ' living conditions is becoming increasingly serious .
The non-governmental organisations operating in Eritrea report situations which have reached hitherto unknown severity : even doctors , nurses and paramedics have been removed from hospitals and sent to the front , leaving the people with no health care at all .
The violence inflicted on the people , particularly women and children , is indescribable .
The international community cannot just stand by and watch .
We need to intervene as swiftly as possible to help define the borders .
The UN Security Council and the Algiers Commission have committed themselves to doing this , but we need a European delegation , a troika , to go to Eritrea and we need to reassess relations with this country on the basis of the Cotonou agreements .
We need to demand the announcement of parliamentary elections - already scheduled , moreover , for December 2001 - elections which must take place under international supervision .
We must demand the release of all political prisoners , and that the freedom of the press , the freedom of association , the freedom to develop society and the freedom to form political parties and trade unions be restored .
All this must be an essential prerequisite if the Union is to resume the financing which is absolutely vital for the reconstruction of the country ' s war-torn economy and for its development .
The Council and the Member States need to adopt a coordinated approach to relations with Eritrea which is as effective as possible and such as to contribute quickly to the process of achieving peace at the country ' s borders and within Eritrea .
The ACP / EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly will take place as of mid-March .
We hope that , at that forum , we will be able to debate the processes announced previously as having already taken place , and that we will be able to find a way to initiate a peace process with the Eritreans as well , to restore democracy and , most importantly , to restore to the citizens , men , women and children acceptable living conditions which are no longer shameful .
Mr President , before saying anything else , I would like to express my total mistrust of the present leaders of Eritrea and my absolute condemnation of their actions .
The situation in Eritrea is extremely critical , and we now have a better understanding of what prompted this people to go to war against Ethiopia .
However , the solution reached was not a mutually agreed solution but a concession obtained from Ethiopia , which won the war by military force .
Moreover , Eritrea brought down a regional resolution at the ACP Assembly of November 2001 by refusing to discuss the issue of relations between the two States .
With regard to the Italian ambassador , we should ask why he was expelled .
He was expelled for the ' crime ' of conversing with Eritrean civil society rather than just with the country ' s leaders .
Therefore , we must be resolute in addressing this situation , first and foremost in order to free the Eritrean people from the ruling power .
I feel that maximum effort and total commitment on our part will be needed to bring growth to civil society , to create a world that is civilised and not excluded from the assembly of the civilised nations .
That the Commission use the Cotonou Agreement to this end is not just necessary but , given the situation , its responsibility .
We cannot allow the situation in this area to persist .
Mr President , recent developments in Eritrea are causing the European Commission a great deal of concern , and we feel that arresting political protesters and muzzling the press are making the situation in Eritrea even worse .
It is good that issues such as the arrest of political protesters , the electoral law and the bill on political parties have been debated in the long-awaited gathering of the national assembly in Eritrea but we are , of course , sorry that no decision was taken on when detainees will be referred to the courts or released and that the formation of political parties has again been put on hold .
We hope that the committee set up to safeguard the future of the press in Eritrea will be able to help get the restrictions on the private press lifted soon .
The Commission is working with the presidency and the Member States , so that it can react in a forceful manner to the present crisis .
Without question , the whole endeavour is based on international law , human rights and human rights conventions and our efforts will be directed towards making sure that political dialogue with Eritrea continues and is reinforced within the context of article 8 of the Cotonou Agreement .
A visit to Eritrea by the high-level troika is being planned as soon as the report by the Boundaries Commission is published , hopefully within the next few weeks .
Because of the tension between Eritrea and Ethiopia , the Commission believes that every effort should be made to prevent the conflict from escalating .
And the Commission needs to make an active contribution towards conflict prevention and the restoration of peace and stability in the area .
However , we need to tread very carefully and avoid any action which might leave the political leaders in the area with their backs to the wall .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 6.30 p.m.
Earthquake in Turkey
The next item is the debate on 2 motions for resolutions :
B5-0071 / 2002 , by Mr Van Orden , Mr Morillon and Mr Posselt , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group ,
B5-0080 / 2002 , by Mrs Ainardi , Mrs Figueiredo , Mr Papayannakis , and Mr Alavanos , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group ,
on the earthquake in Turkey
Once again , Mr President , Commissioner , tragic events have forced our attention on Turkey , following yet another earthquake recently .
I think we owe it to our neighbour to provide every type of assistance , financial , humanitarian and , I would add Commissioner , long-term assistance .
Our resolution says exactly what we are calling for and there is no need for me to comment on it .
What I would like to say is that , if you take a long-term view of the problem , because earthquakes are endemic in this area , you will soon see that we do not have a practical policy for earthquakes , a damage-limitation policy , a policy on repairs , assistance , anti-earthquake measures to protect us , the European Union and all its neighbouring countries , including of course Turkey .
However , we do have the means and the centres and the researchers and I wonder , Commissioner , if we are using them properly .
This is not the first time we have discussed this question and I should like to take advantage of this unfortunate incident to raise it once again .
Mr President , as a representative of the Group of the European People ' s Party and European Democrats , which is Christian Democratic in character , I wish to express our deep and sincere sympathy with all the victims of the terrible earthquake in Turkey .
We would also express our sympathy to the Turkish Government and to everyone in Turkey .
What has happened shows that , despite all the conflicts of political opinion , the most important thing is still life itself .
It is important for the Turkish authorities and the EU to do everything possible to get aid through as soon as possible .
The events in Turkey highlight the need , at international level too , for some form of emergency force to respond to appalling natural disasters of this kind .
The fact is that the international TV companies are on the scene much more quickly than those of us from the European Union and those from various aid organisations .
Let us work to ensure that aid gets through more quickly .
In conclusion , I would just mention the fact that , the last time something similar happened in Turkey , there proved to be some coming together of Greeks and Turks .
Mr President , I should like to express my most sincere sympathies and undivided support for the Turkish people , hit yet again recently by another earthquake , with lives lost and extensive damage .
I hope that those who lost their loved ones and those who were left homeless or lost their possessions will soon find the strength to recover from the shock of this unforeseen disaster .
I should also like to mention here that the Greek government immediately expressed its support and sympathy and offered help to the victims of this catastrophic earthquake , and to pass on to the European Parliament just how much the Greek people sympathise with the suffering which the earthquake caused the Turkish people and how close it has brought them once again .
The spontaneous response of the people , especially when disaster and suffering strike , is the ultimate expression of sincerity and faith in coexistence and solidarity between nations .
I trust that in the future , in the very near future , these two nations , Greece and Turkey , will be brought closer by happy rather than tragic events , such as the accession of Turkey to the European family , the European Union , within which these two nations will enjoy and serve the same values and ideals of democracy and personal freedom , values and ideals which unite and safeguard their common desire for prosperity , peaceful coexistence and cooperation .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it goes without saying that we all sympathise with and support the victims of the earthquake in Turkey and which , as a previous speaker said , is the second earthquake to hit Turkey in under two years .
Obviously , action to help the victims speaks louder than words of support and we have no choice here but to admit that there is no mechanism at European Union level to provide help in these and similar natural disasters .
And another thing : we could say of the area of Turkey which was hit that it is an area where poverty attracts misfortune .
If buildings had been built to earthquake standards , we would have had fewer victims . Even the director of the earthquake institute in Istanbul stated that there is no building control committee in the area to check that buildings meet specifications .
So let this too be an incentive to improve our earthquake defences .
Mr President , the Commission shares the European Parliament 's interest in and concern for the humanitarian situation of the victims of the earthquake in Turkey .
I should like first to reply to Mr Papayannakis 's question on dealing with natural disasters .
The Commission has already proposed , some time ago now , that a service be set up at European level to deal with natural disasters .
This proposal concerns not just earthquakes , but floods , fires and major accidents such as those which occurred recently in Austria and France , and makes provision for a first decision-making level resulting in a form of cooperation and proper coordination of national mechanisms , so that exponential results can be obtained from the mechanisms in the individual Member States for dealing with disasters .
As far as the specific question of the earthquake in Turkey is concerned , our representation in Ankara has assured us that the Turkish authorities responsible for dealing with emergencies have not asked for help and that no help with civil protection or humanitarian aid are required at present .
And that is after cooperation between the Commission and the government .
According to our information from the Red Cross , humanitarian requirements are being met relatively well .
The Red Cross has said that it is providing 7,000 tents and 10,000 blankets , as well as survival kits for families , and the government has sent 1,000 tents and 3,000 blankets for people obliged to sleep out of doors .
This is the situation so far , according to information from our representation and the Red Cross .
We therefore have no plans for the time being to assist Turkey under ECHO .
The Commission will monitor the situation in Turkey closely and will work with other donors so as to encourage a coordinated international effort so that priorities for action can be clearly defined from an orderly statement of the needs and problems of the area .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 6.30 p.m.
State of implementation of working time directive
The next item is the report ( A5-0010 / 2002 ) by Mr Koukiadis , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the Commission report : ' State of implementation of Council Directive 93 / 104 / EC of 23 November 1993 concerning certain aspects of the organisation of working time ( ' Working Time Directive ' ) ' ( COM ( 2000 ) 787 - C5-0147 / 2001 - 2001 / 2073 ( COS ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , I am particularly honoured to present the report on the first five years ' implementation of the working time directive .
Working times , like wages , have been one of the main subjects of employee claims throughout the history of industrial relations .
These claims and success with them are down to the trade union movement , because the arrangements which it has brokered have restored workers ' dignity , improved their standard of living , reduced risks to life and limb and , by deregulating working times , given them time for a political and social life .
Despite the fact that health and safety legislation forms the legal basis for the directive , we must not underestimate its other aspects .
That is why the Member States must safeguard this acquis as the cornerstone of social cohesion .
At the same time , it is also why I have the right to express my disappointment in a number of states for their unwillingness to transpose the directive into national law on time , despite their self-evident obligation to do so .
I should also like to comment on the fact that the Member States have not provided detailed statements of national arrangements which allow the Commission to clearly assess if they are complying with the arrangements set out in the directive .
For example , it is totally unclear if and to what extent it applies to all public-sector workers .
Implementation so far has given rise to a series of disputes and / or straightforward infringements .
One of these issues is the issue of doctors on duty , although this links up with the more general issue of equating readiness to work with working time and , in this sense , it also applies to other categories of workers .
The ruling by the Court of Justice , whereby readiness to work requiring the worker to be present in the workplace and to have alert physical and mental faculties qualifies as regular paid working time , is in keeping with the traditional approach under labour legislation .
Another issue is the infringement of the right to leave where there is a limited contract of employment .
Here too , the Court of Justice 's ruling that the right to leave is a basic right to which even temporary employees on a limited contract of less than one year are entitled will help in the fight against infringements .
A third point which deserves the Commission 's attention is the woolly definition of maximum working time .
It is strange there is still controversy over the exact meaning of a definition which has applied for decades .
The transposition of the directive in certain countries in the form of collective agreements is also a major issue .
This is a matter of general interest .
Without question this method , which promotes collective autonomy , must be encouraged .
However , it must be used in a way which produces the same results as it would if the directive were transposed in a legislative act .
This has not been the case in the past , either because sectoral collective agreements have been used , rather than a general cross-sector agreement covering all workers , or because there are no collective agreements which apply to all workers .
Finally , again in connection with arrangements under traditional industrial relations , there is the problem of special arrangements for specific categories of particular types of workers such as women , mothers , persons with disabilities , children etc .
Special care must be taken with arrangements for these categories of vulnerable workers and an initiative must be taken to improve them in the light of past experience so that they can be integrated into the European Union 's policy of increasing the number of women in work and making it easier for persons with disabilities to access the job market .
I should like to use the last part of my intervention to comment on what is to become of traditional arrangements following the emergence of new forms of work , where the principle of flexibility and traditional job security are being turned into employability .
We need courageous innovations here if we are to guarantee the principle announced at Lisbon of combining flexibility with protection and this principle needs to be translated into industrial relations by taking specific measures to organise working times .
If we are to replace traditional job security with employability , we need a new approach to working time arrangements because new problems are emerging , such as how to turn part-time employment into full-time employment , what to do about weekly rests and the ban on working on public holidays , how far to adjust working time arrangements where paid work is turned into self-employment , how to control the application of specific working time arrangements in the case of teleworking , what new balance must be struck between home life and work and , finally of course , how can we make time spent on lifelong learning count as working time .
In closing , I should like to add that the European trades unions rightly want to highlight all these issues relating to modern forms of work as immediate priorities in a widespread campaign which they are planning to start on 14 February to follow on from today 's debate .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like it to be noted that I am speaking in place of Mr Pérez Álvarez , who has been the shadow rapporteur for this report on behalf of my group and who is able to attend this sitting .
On his behalf and on my own , I would firstly like to thank the rapporteur and say that I am pleased with the work he has done and with the positive attitude he has adopted towards the amendments which had been presented by Mr Pérez Álvarez .
Directive 93 / 104 / EC is a continuation of Directive 89 / 391 / EC , on the introduction of measures to encourage improvements in the safety and health of workers at work , with the idea that the creation of the internal market must lead to an improvement in working and living conditions , by means of approximating legislations .
In this respect , the Commission ' s report is a general description of how the Member States have transposed and applied the aforementioned directive with results which clearly indicate that the method and result could be improved .
It has been demonstrated that not only the temporary delay in compliance with the transposition period and , consequently , the non-application of the Directive within the time limit , but also that the exclusions and exceptions have been due to criteria which are not always clear .
Therefore , transposition , by means of collective agreement , has not always been accompanied by the desired success for this instrument of social dialogue .
The amendments presented by Mr Pérez Álvarez were aimed at highlighting and providing a remedy for these shortcomings and the amendments I am going to mention now have the same aim .
Amendment No 1 , because the confusion between the concepts of ' exclusion ' and ' exception ' , which are always in the singular , must not become an opportunity to sidestep the mandatory nature of the directive .
Amendment No 2 , proposing an additional clarifier , which is not intended to replace , but to clarify and extend the content of the paragraph , also by means of concepts and definitions which guarantee the application of the Directive , faithful to the idea that things should be judged by what they are and not what they are called .
We believe it is important to expressly highlight these two points for the sake of improving the living and working conditions of workers .
All of this must done in accordance with Article 31 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union , " Fair and just working conditions " .
Firstly , that " Every worker has the right to working conditions which respect his or her health , safety and dignity " , and secondly , that " Every worker has the right to limitation of maximum working hours , to daily and weekly rest periods and to an annual period of paid leave " . Both aspects - health at work and working times - are clearly linked , and all of this is aimed at a more just society governed by the respect for the individual and collective rights of workers .
Mr President , as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Fisheries , I would like to compliment Mr Koukiadis on his report and thank him for the consideration he has given to the conclusions of the Committee on Fisheries , for whom issues of safety are a high priority .
Mr Koukiadis ' report directly concerns only the first of what are now three directives on working time .
He pinpoints variations in interpretation , types of derogation and manner of transposal as contributing to defects in its implementation .
Such problems could be compounded by the fact that different rules apply to different sectors .
For example , fish processors are covered by the first directive but those engaged in fishing as such by the second .
It is difficult to predict the effects of this for two sectors that are so closely related to one another .
Similarly , potential changes in the nature of aquaculture may mean that different rules are needed for the future from those that fit its character today .
That is why we are asking the Commission to monitor these aspects of implementation in future reports .
It may be that there are other sectors for which a similar approach would be helpful .
It is desirable that individual sectors are covered by rules that are genuinely appropriate to their own particular situations .
However , many implementation problems might be avoided and quicker adaptation made to technological and other change if such rules could come out of agreements between the social partners .
We point to the agreement between the European Community Shipowners ' Association and the Federation of Transport Workers in the EU as an example of best practice in this regard .
Finally , with safety so much at stake , we hope that the rules will become accepted as setting minimum standards to improve upon , rather than maximum ones to adhere to simply because that is what the law demands .
Mr President , I should like to sincerely congratulate the rapporteur on his extensive and critical work on this report on the working time directive .
It was indeed quite an urgent issue to be tackled , given the controversial discussions at the several sessions of the Court of Justice on this very matter .
Before I speak on a number of matters to do with the working time directive , I must say that I am very pleased that a couple of Member States have already implemented a huge number of different legislative , administrative and collective agreements in this regard .
I also feel that the measures taken by the supranational decision-makers go in the right direction , since the Commission 's new directives cover the areas excluded from the scope of the original directive .
However , there is still a lot of work to be done .
We all know - and the rapporteur did well to criticise it - that some Member States resort to the tactic of claiming that their existing legislation covers the provisions of the directive .
I cannot understand , therefore , why they hesitate to implement a fairly flexible directive in the large amount of time available .
I therefore agree with the report 's encouragement of the Commission to investigate why the Member States refuse to comply with some of the directive 's provisions .
We should insist as well on controls on the conditions of application of the directive to new working-time patterns , for example , precarious work , part-time work and fixed-time work .
In addition to that I see a strong need to focus more intensively on the increasing number of homeworkers .
The Commission itself has made strenuous efforts with regard to open and distance learning within the Leonardo da Vinci programme , for example .
I feel obliged then to ask you : why do we not give stronger encouragement to the social partners to negotiate the relevant working-time issues ?
Nevertheless , the report could have gone further into detail , as it unfortunately neglects so-called self-employed workers .
I am convinced that the need to include this category within the directive is a matter we should all support and in doing so we should merely be adding further to a well-drafted report .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the working time arrangements which we are examining here are part of the neo-liberal policy to reverse the industrial relations which the working classes have fought hard to achieve .
This policy undermines workers ' rights by applying flexible forms of work and working time arrangements and undermines full and stable employment by replacing it with part-time and temporary employment .
The aim , of course , is to increase the level of exploitation of the workforce and maximum the profits of big business .
Which is why an attempt is being made to abolish the stable seven- or eight-hour working day and weekends off and why collective agreements are being ripped up and limited contracts are being extended .
Workers must be on standby whenever and for however long their employers choose .
In addition , making part-time employment the rule not only hits workers in their pay packets , it also makes it practically impossible for them to acquire pension rights .
The result of the European Union 's policy is an increase in under-employment which , in some countries , already stands at over 30 % .
We support a different policy , a policy which extends workers ' rights and fights against capitalist restructuring .
We are fighting for the repeal of the legislative framework which imposes daily working time arrangements and flexible forms of employment .
We support full and stable employment , eight hours a day , five days a week , more extensive social rights and pay rises commensurate with today 's needs .
Thank you , Mr President , EU citizens are very prosperous and enjoy the fruits of that prosperity .
This is expressed in the level of welfare experienced by them .
Consequently , the protection of employee welfare in an economic climate which centres on productivity and efficiency deserves all our care and attention .
Citizens ' welfare is therefore served by sound legislation on working hours and hours of rest .
As an extension of the rapporteur ' s approach , I should like to draw your attention to Sunday ' s being a collective day of rest .
In my view , the rapporteur gives too little attention to the importance of this in his approach .
It is one of the tasks of the Member States , in line with customs and traditions in the Member State in question , to designate a day of rest .
I am delighted to note that in 9 of the 15 Member States , Sunday has been officially designated a day of rest .
These Member States have taken the order from Parliament in 1996 seriously and realise that a day of collective rest is of great importance to families , extended families and other social networks .
Research in the Netherlands has this week shown that consumers have little or no interest in shopping on a Sunday .
It is therefore of major importance that allowance be made in social legislation for the fact that Sundays are to be maintained as days of rest within the European Union .
To Christians , Sunday has the specific significance of a day of rest designated by God , which goes back to the day of Christ ' s resurrection .
As such , this day of rest is deeply engrained in European culture .
After all , there is more to life than production and consumption .
Mr President , Commissioner , the Commission report before us is not merely necessary .
It will bring a great deal of work in its train in the Member States .
The rapporteur has taken a great deal of trouble about the analysis , and for that I am very grateful to him .
The directive strikes me , though , as something of a patchwork rug .
There are too many loopholes with national regulations crocheted in elsewhere , making individual interpretations possible and the whole thing impenetrable .
What is most fundamentally at issue is the protection of workers , a cause which we have taken up .
Both the Commission and the Member States , therefore , have to be urged not merely to adopt the definition and interpretation of particular concepts , but to check precisely on potential deviations from specific legal provisions , in order not to cause any confusion which might , at the end of the day , result in the opposite of what was actually intended .
Most uncertainty in the Member States concerns the maximum permitted working time , although clear limitations are laid down in Article 6 , Article 18 , and in the final provisions .
The possibility of also using collective contracts or agreements between the social partners to transpose the directive should be seen in a fundamentally positive light .
All that is needed is for this to actually happen , and when it does , it must be completely in the spirit of the directive , without a back door or the possibility of evading its provisions at a halfway stage .
It is also urgently necessary to reach a clearer definition of the concept of ' standby duties ' , and , above all in view of the judgment of the European Court of Justice , to implement it completely along those lines .
The judgment in Luxembourg clearly brought out this directive 's weaknesses , and it is regrettable that the Commission has to lag behind on this point .
The Koukiadis report will be a great help in the work in hand .
I hope we will actually find the points listed by Parliament still in the directive when the time comes to transpose it .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate Mr Koukiadis on his excellent report on the implementation of the working time directive and agree with the last speaker , who pointed out that there are loopholes in the working time directive , although these are being closed as time goes by .
I should like to remind the House that there have been significant developments over the last two years in connection with doctors ' working times and in connection with working times in the fisheries industry , not to mention the recent directive on workers in haulage companies .
The Commission report on the implementation of the working time directive contains a general review of how the Member States implement the directive .
The Commission is not obliged to publish this report but we felt , politically speaking , that it was conducive to greater transparency and openness .
This means , as Mr Koukiadis rightly pointed out , that the transposition of the directive varies hugely from one Member State to another .
Here too , we must to admit to the need to reconcile economies and societies with very different customs and practices , which is why the agreed framework is flexible and does not insist on uniform , inflexible solutions which it would be impossible to put into practice and which would make it hard to even agree on a framework .
The Member States have been given considerable room for manoeuvre in transposing the directive .
The directive allows a number of exceptions based on legislation or collective agreements , thereby giving the national authorities the flexibility I have already mentioned .
The Commission is happy with this multi-faceted approach and has no ambitions to push for uniform solutions in this sector .
However , I should like to comment on a number of specific recommendations made to the Commission .
The report calls at various points for the Commission to monitor transposition and take the necessary steps if the directive is not transposed correctly .
We are in agreement here and the proceedings available to us when Community directives are infringed have already been instituted or are due to be instituted in the cases referred to .
As regards the definition of working time and the implications of the ruling by the Court of Justice in the Simap case , which found that the time spent on duty by medical staff in first aid teams counted as full working time , the Commission is examining the implications of this case and has already held a meeting between the national authorities and the Commission services and is planning to schedule a study of the legal situation and the implications of this ruling on health systems and other sectors .
The European Parliament report also calls on the Commission to clarify where exceptions are justified on the basis of industrial agreements .
There is a clear reference to the specific term in Article 18 ( 1 ) allowing the Member States to deviate from the upper limit of 48 hours , provided that the worker is happy to work the extra hours .
Here too , I should point out that there are safety valves to avoid measures and implications which are unacceptable to the worker .
The only country to have made use of this exception is the United Kingdom .
The same directive stipulates that the Council must review this provision at the Commission 's proposal , accompanied by an evaluation report .
And I can assure you that the Commission will be submitting the evaluation report in question .
I should also like to stress that the national authorities in every Member State will be filing national reports in 2002 , analysing the practical implementation of the directive in question .
The Commission will use these national reports to draft a summary report on the implementation of the directive in the Member States , which will give us a clearer picture .
I should like to close with a few comments on new work models .
Obviously it is hard to apply traditional working time to new forms of work and the debate on lifelong learning and time compression is a major issue .
What I can say here is that social dialogue is already playing an important part and will play an even more important part in the future .
The social partners and their discussions and agreements on the role of lifelong learning and the principles of teleworking and the agreements already reached in specific sectors demonstrate that , in the initial stages , individual agreements at European level can create the right conditions for moving forward , if necessary , to a legislative framework .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 6.30 p.m.
Stimulating Internet access
The next item is the oral question ( B5-0003 / 02 ) , on behalf of the Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , to the Commission on stimulating Internet access .
Mr President , I should like to welcome Mrs Diamantopoulou here this afternoon .
I know she will be speaking on behalf of Mr Liikanen .
We are obviously disappointed that he is unable to be here .
We understand the pressures on the time of Commissioners .
We know that across the Commission there is great interest in this subject and , in particular , in a number of the areas for which Mrs Diamantopoulou is responsible , this issue will also be of crucial importance .
The thrust behind our question - which is tabled at a timely point in the run-up to the Barcelona Summit - is that the need across the European Union to deliver access to information society services and to encourage the climate in which new services will develop has to be at the foundation of the Lisbon goal to deliver the most competitive knowledge-driven economy in the world .
I emphasise " knowledge-driven " because what we are talking about is the ability to achieve the widespread dissemination and availability of that knowledge .
Part of the problem with this topic is the whole issue of jargon , and our question perhaps falls into that trap by talking about flat-rate Internet access .
Perhaps colleagues will bear with me if I just set out why that is so critical .
If the Internet is really to deliver its full potential as a global knowledge network , as an instantly accessible medium , then we have to encourage people to use it in such a way that they become detached from the feeling that , with a time-based connection , they have to hurry through what they are doing , that the facilities are not always there and available to them .
That really is what this is all about .
It is making that huge library of information and services available in such a way that people can have continuous access to it at a price they can afford . That is really at the heart of this question .
We know that quite a lot has moved forward .
I am pleased to have been a member of the teams in the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy and the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , which have worked very hard with the Commission to push through directives on matters such as the unbundling of the local loop and the whole of the electronics communications package .
We understand our role and responsibility here .
The ultimate delivery of these services will have to come from the marketplace .
It has already happened successfully in mobile telephony ; it is already happening now in the marketplace as new investment is going in .
However , we have to encourage investment in the backbone capacity that will carry these services and encourage people to develop the new services that will take advantage of that increased capacity .
What we are talking about is moving from the relatively small knowledge pipelines that are coming into our houses and our businesses to much larger pipelines of knowledge .
New services will be delivered with them .
For example , a full-length movie will be delivered in seconds rather than hours , as it is at the moment .
In conclusion , we look forward to hearing how the Commission is going to encourage that development of fast Internet access , how it is going to stimulate that provision across the Member States , what further action may be necessary , and what further support we can give to this crucial aim for the future of the European economy .
My special thanks to the honourable Member ; this is indeed an exceptional issue which is a top priority not just in the European Parliament and the Commission but in each individual portfolio , because an electronic Europe is at the top of everyone 's agenda .
The summit in Lisbon called for cheap , high-speed networks for accessing the Internet .
For reasons which you yourself explained , this is the cornerstone of a European knowledge-based economy , the cornerstone of policy for a Europe of justice , equality and inclusion .
As you state in your question , Internet access charges are an important factor .
There is the matter of flat-rate charges for access - as you quite rightly said , there is a problem of terminology and how to translate terms into all the languages and I have to say here that there were words which I recognised in English but not in Greek - so , flat-rate charges for access based on flat-rate connections by Internet service providers and the new telecommunications companies which have taken over the networks of the former monopolies .
The national regulations of four Member States , the United Kingdom , the Netherlands , Spain and France require the former monopolies to provide all market factors with flat-rate Internet access .
This is known as the FRIACO principle , which means Flat Rate Internet Access Call Origination .
This service will soon be up and running in Italy too .
The industry maintains that FRIACO results in increased use of the Internet and , because there are no time charges , users spend more time on the Internet and become Internet literate .
It also maintains that , with all these FRIACO services , consumer demand for broadband access and services is increasing .
The Commission welcomes the decisions by the regulatory authorities in the Member States which I referred to earlier and encourages the use of this model in the other Member States .
The Commission 's support and encouragement take the following forms : first in the open network provision committee , the forum chaired by the European Union , in which the regulatory authorities and the ministries of the Member States are represented in their advisory and regulatory capacity .
This issue will again be on the agenda of the open network provision committee at its meeting on 20 February 2002 .
Secondly , in the seventh publication on the application of the package of regulatory arrangements in the telecommunications sector which it submitted to the European Parliament and the Council in December 2001 and in which it specifically supports flat-rate narrowband Internet access as a gateway to broadband access .
Similarly , as you too mentioned , binding decisions have been taken within the wider context of the continuing implementation of the e-Europe action plan .
The Commission is also making sure the regulation on unbundling local loops is applied correctly .
Unbundled access to local loops allows newcomers to compete with established service providers by providing high-speed data transmission services and constant Internet access using digital subscriber line technology .
The Commission also referred to this aspect of high-speed Internet access in its seventh publication , together with the provision of equal access to high-speed Internet access services retailed by established service providers .
The Commission is also encouraging guaranteed fair and equal terms for the provision of short leased lines which take costs into account . These are another form of access to the Internet and are important mainly to small companies and companies using the data services of newcomers to the telecommunications market .
So the Commission is clearly operating at two levels .
On one level it is backing specific cooperation policies and the use of models which are already a success , and I have said how , and on the other level it is monitoring the application of binding decision such as regulations which , of course , play a very important role .
As far as disseminating and consolidating broadband technology is concerned , the Commission acknowledges in its report to the European Council in Barcelona that this technology is not at present being provided and used by the Member States as quickly as we would expect .
This being so , the Commission has proposed to the European Council that it set a target date of 2005 for the provision of broadband technology throughout the European Union .
Thank you , Commissioner .
Rail freight in the Channel Tunnel
The next item is the joint debate on :
the oral question ( B5-0004 / 02 ) by Mr Savary and others , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , to the Commission on rail freight in the Channel tunnel ;
the oral question ( B5-0005 / 02 ) by Mr Davies and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , to the Commission on rail freight in the Channel tunnel .
Mr President , since 7 November the SNCF has suspended all cross-Channel rail freight services because of fears for the safety of its staff at Calais following threats from those seeking to enter the UK illegally .
As a result , Channel Tunnel freight services are now in a state of deep crisis .
However , we are pleased today that both French MEPs and British Labour MEPs have pushed for a debate , and indeed that the ELDR Group has joined us in calling this debate this afternoon .
We need cooperation , not conflict , to resolve this particular problem .
No more naming and shaming , no more buck-passing ; we need the British government , the French government , the SNCF , Eurotunnel , EWS and others to start working together more effectively .
A lot has been done , but there is a lot to do .
Added to my list is the European Commission .
Articles 28 to 30 of the Treaty and Regulation 2679 / 98 guarantee the free movement of goods .
That means free movement through the Channel Tunnel .
I thank the Commissioner for intervening in this particular crisis and for responding positively to requests from myself and others .
In the past few days a security fence has been built and we welcome that .
But policing is still only between the hours of 9 p.m. and 3 a.m.
We hope to be able to persuade our French colleagues of the need for 24-hour policing and adequate police numbers .
We need the SNCF to resume services as soon as possible and we need urgent modifications to locomotives to ensure they do not need to stop at Calais purely for technical reasons .
These are practical measures that will make a big difference in the short term .
We hope you , Commissioner , will continue to act to ensure that this vital link in the single market is restored .
Mr President , the Commission is worried about the fall in rail freight due to security problems at the SNCF station .
This situation is having an adverse impart on the distribution of freight transport services between the modes of transport on this important route .
This is damaging rail transport and runs counter to the Commission 's collective view of the role of rail transport , as set out in the White Paper presented in September 2001 .
The partial suspension of rail traffic through the Tunnel is reducing the use made of its potential and , as a consequence , the return on the investment in this vital European transport infrastructure .
The Commission has been fully apprised of the situation since it emerged in November .
In application of Regulation No 2679 / 98 on the free movement of goods , the Commission services asked the French authorities to take all the necessary measures to restore the smooth flow of traffic back in November .
They also asked for regular reports on developments in the situation .
According to our most recent information , the situation has improved slightly .
The police are patrolling the area , rail capacity has been increased , where possible , from 1,200 to 1,600 tonnes .
Work on the Frethun freight terminal started in December and a reinforced fence is expected to be completed at the beginning of February .
Security installations on the site , such as video cameras and heat detectors , will be in place by the end of June .
Contacts with the French authorities will be maintained , Commissioner Bolkestein has suggested meeting his French and British counterparts and the ministers responsible for the internal market in order to discuss the matter on the fringe of the next Market Council on 1 March .
Our objective is to restore the free movement of goods by June at the latest , once all the work on the terminal has been completed .
My last comment refers to asylum and external border controls .
The policy of the Union and the Member States on asylum and external border controls is also in jeopardy .
The Commission believes that approving harmonised rules will help stop certain Member States from being more attractive than others and it has already tabled proposals along these lines .
Mr President , we used to have a joke in the United Kingdom about there being fog in the Channel and the continent therefore being cut off .
Now it seems more a case of people loose in the Tunnel and trains and trade cut off - which is altogether more serious .
The effects of the restrictions are very damaging to free movement and employment : thousands of jobs are at risk .
I have to say that for those affected , removing the restrictions by June sounds a very long way off .
The problem is the proximity of the Sangatte camp for refugees : it is too close and should be moved , and makes policing very difficult .
This Tunnel is an asset and enterprise which is jointly owned and benefits both France and Britain , as well as the wider Community of Member States .
It is probably the single most important physical link drawing Britain and the continent together .
The difficulty of policing illegal immigrants is damaging to this process and must be resolved soon .
I call on the Commission to press the French authorities to take action .
I call on the United Kingdom government to offer more assistance to its French counterparts and to the hauliers and businesses concerned , rather than seeming to turn a blind eye to their concerns and difficulties and spending more time harassing truck drivers and train operators with prosecutions and fines .
The authorities need to take action and not take it out on other innocent parties .
Mr President , firstly , I should like to pay respect to my colleagues Mr Watts , Mr Savary and Mrs Darras for bringing this point to the House for our consideration .
It is ironic that I speak on this subject because , as a rapporteur , I helped push through this House the issue of free movement of goods at border areas where there was disruption .
Primarily it was meant to attack the issue of industrial relations at borders .
But this is interesting : I praise and applaud the Commission 's lateral thinking about the application of these articles that have been laid before them .
I knew then , as I know now , that the requirements set down in that particular set of articles were merely mechanistic , that it comes down to political goodwill .
People here today will appreciate that it requires all parties to pay attention to what is happening at the Channel Tunnel and to make sure that they do not allow it to be obscured by the mere arguments , cultural or political , that exist there .
There are problems . In this particular issue there are problems of slender resources - we understand that - whether of the police or of security personnel at the areas where they are involved .
But we need to get freight through unfettered .
Let us also recognise that this is an international problem .
People have been displaced as a consequence of wars and of major disruption and there are also economic émigrés who will pay any price to get into the UK .
Quite often it is a price paid to criminal gangs , there to exploit the motivation of these people .
Real solutions , therefore , lie in the hands of politicians coordinating their actions at government level .
Peace and development in the areas of the world facing crisis are also what we must strive for .
In France we have also seen , all too unfortunately , human tragedy that has left in our minds the human aspect of all that is going on there .
The attempts of the French authorities to tighten security are welcome .
The highest level of vigilance must continue to be demanded , as Mr Watts has said .
Attending to this question in the House confirms the international status and interest which it deserves .
Not just the Channel Tunnel , but other issues as well , will be resolved by such processes .
This gives us just such a platform to launch that process .
Mr President , first of all I would be grateful if Commissioner Diamantopoulou would convey to Commissioner de Palacio my personal thanks for the work that I know the Commissioner has already undertaken in this regard .
Coming from one of the more remote parts of Europe , namely Scotland , it is so important for us to be connected with the centre .
The problems we face at the moment are acute .
I refer to exports and the logistical problems that are being created , as well as the problems for the rail freight companies generally .
What is an acute problem could , if matters are not dealt with properly , become a chronic one .
Commissioner Diamantopoulou has already referred to the fact that what is happening with the Channel Tunnel is counterproductive to the policy which we all want to see pursued , namely that of getting freight on to the railways and off the roads .
Given the present situation within the United Kingdom , the difficulties that it has in exporting and the railways there , and looking to the future of the whole transport policy of the European Union , I sincerely hope that as much pressure as possible can be brought to bear from all quarters to get this problem resolved as quickly as possible .
Mr President , I follow Mrs Attwooll as one of the other Members for Scotland in this House .
I am very grateful to Mr Watson and to the Liberal colleagues who put forward the questions which promote this debate today .
It is a vital debate .
To try and make the point Mrs Attwooll was making yet more vivid , 30 miles away from the house in which I live in Edinburgh , midway between Edinburgh and Glasgow , at the town of Motherwell , lies the most northerly freight outpost of the trans-European network into the United Kingdom , the Motherwell Eurocentral depot .
We have been told in recent weeks that the carrier out of that port , EWS , will not be able to afford to continue providing a service out of Scotland at the current available number of trains per day .
It would be a crisis for Scotland , and therefore a crisis for transport across the Union , if that happened .
It is well known , for example , that the Scotch whisky industry depends heavily on rail freight to get malt scotch and blended scotch into the European market .
Heavy losses are being made on a vitally important trade .
In these circumstances it is encouraging to be told that the Commission takes this matter seriously , but it is not encouraging to be told that all will be well by June , because the information we are receiving from the commercial parties involved is that they cannot last until June at present levels .
This is a time when people throughout the European Union people are asking themselves the question : Do we obtain the benefits which we are promised from our membership of the European Union ?
These benefits particularly relate to the opportunity to trade freely across the Union .
Other benefits which have been promised are those arising from intermodal transport - that not everything should go on the roads .
That affects not just people in Scotland ; it even more affects people down the motorway routes through England , if far too much heavy freight traffic goes down there .
We need traffic on the railways .
We also need traffic by sea .
We are very grateful to Commissioner de Palacio for the work she has put into securing the new ferry link between Scotland and Zeebrugge , but if we are going to have a sensible transport policy which really does spread the load and save the roads from excessive use by heavy traffic , we must have this railway line kept open .
I am grateful to colleagues who have raised this question .
I am grateful to the Commission for taking it seriously ; but I want to know as well what compensation will be available to ensure that those who have lost money are not prevented from trading altogether by the uneconomic conditions now prevailing on this route .
Mr President , the free movement of people , goods and services - one of the cornerstones of the internal market - is in various ways at stake in this matter .
The free movement of people , but also of goods , should not lead to the unverifiable movement of asylum seekers as a result of open borders .
Untenable situations have arisen at the Eurotunnel caused by stowaways on trains .
As a consequence of this , restrictions have been in place for three months now , as a result of which the volume of goods by rail through the tunnel has at least halved .
This loss of turnover causes disproportionate damage to the Channel Tunnel operator , who is not even certain that the sanctions for stowaways are now in place .
The discussion on the White Paper on transport policy is in full swing .
Despite all the differences of opinion , almost everyone involved is agreed that the growth in the transport of goods must not unilaterally end up on the roads .
Rail , in addition to water , is a sound alternative .
The restricted use of the Eurotunnel has forced many companies to transport goods by road for the time being .
There is a fear that , once again , the reputation of rail transport will incur lasting damage .
In order for transport capacity to recover , the underlying problem has to be solved .
This is not the place to discuss the problem and tragedy of illegal immigrants in Europe .
However , the asylum policies of the two countries on either side of the Eurotunnel is undeniably responsible for the drastic decline in the transport of goods by rail though the tunnel .
The United Kingdom has to contend with the dubious reputation of pursuing a flexible immigration policy and of hardly fighting illegal employment .
Whether this is an accurate description or not , the British government fails at any rate to discourage refugees .
On the other hand , French asylum policy can be referred to as being two-faced .
The large stream of refugees via France is not stopped until they reach the Eurotunnel and are held at the camp near Sangatte .
This amounts to a concentration of hundreds of desperate people only 3 km away from the Eurotunnel , the gateway to England , their country of destination .
Locked up in a camp within walking distance of the gate to the other side . Surely this is tantamount to leaving the fox to watch the geese !
Asylum seekers deserve our sympathy , for they too are ultimately the victims of ambiguous rules , random implementation and inadequate inspection .
It is high time that the French authorities detained the asylum seekers in France , for example near an international airport , from where , upon being refused admittance , they can return to their own countries .
The sad images from Frethun require both the Commission and the Council to do everything in their power , not only to remove this impediment , but also to tackle the cause .
They must not be allowed to shirk their responsibilities while the market for the transport of goods is being disrupted in this way .
Mr President , I am truly perplexed by the oral questions tabled by the Group of the Party of European Socialists and the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party on the disrupted Channel Tunnel rail freight services . This disruption was caused by refugees trying to enter Great Britain illegally .
Judging by the oral questions tabled , the main , or even the only problem , is that of the disruption to the freedom of movement of goods through the Channel Tunnel , and therefore the losses incurred by rail freight companies which could be exacerbated - I shudder at the thought - by unfair competition between the various methods of transport to the detriment of the railways .
Like my fellow Members , I strongly regret the losses incurred by the rail freight companies and I would even add that , in my view , it is illogical that France , whose socialist government bears the responsibility for this matter , is not severely punished , morally and financially , for its inability to maintain public order .
However , I would also like to say , ladies and gentlemen , that this matter poses much wider and much more serious societal problems than just unfair competition between private operators .
That is why I will add a set of additional questions to those tabled by the PSE and ELDR Groups .
First of all , some of the people who attempt to enter Great Britain illegally are asylum seekers , but some are illegal immigrants , even in France .
How do many illegal immigrants manage to reach the heart of Europe , having passed several internal borders , without being noticed ?
This is a fundamental issue that should be resolved .
Furthermore , what measures are being taken to immediately escort these illegal immigrants back to the European Union ' s external border ?
My second question refers to the fact that a large number of asylum seekers who attempt to enter Great Britain are from Afghanistan .
However , as far as I know , the Taliban regime has now been eliminated and these people can return home .
What measures are therefore being taken to repatriate them ?
My third and final question refers to some people 's belief that if we had a single European asylum policy , we would not have such problems .
Of course , this might mean that refugees would no longer receive unequal treatment in different European Union countries .
But does the Commission think that the overall number of asylum seekers would go down ?
If it does , how exactly would this be achieved ?
On the other hand , this might mean that if the European asylum standards were aligned at a high level - which is what the Commission regularly states it intends to do - the overall number of asylum seekers in the European Union would significantly increase .
Mr President , I join my Scottish colleagues in asking the Commissioner to help us to resolve this situation as urgently as possible .
It may surprise the Commissioner to have such a representation from Scotland , but Scotland is probably one of the greatest victims of this situation in the Channel Tunnel .
Because of the reduction in transit through the Tunnel , we do not have a mere three services a night - we have none , because the service from Scotland to the continent has been withdrawn completely .
As Mr MacCormick said , it is no longer possible to transport Scotch whisky to the Continent or to send our microcircuits to Paris , Frankfurt or Milan .
But more than that : it is no longer possible for us to import parts and continental products by train .
Costs for both exports and imports are increasing , as are road congestion and pollution .
A service which did something to bring Scotland closer to the golden triangle of Europe has been lost , and so Scotland returns to the periphery .
This is a tragedy , and why ?
Because we seem incapable of organising our immigration systems on a European basis and of providing adequate security to ensure that any such arrangement works .
Clearly there are faults on the French side of La Manche and on the English side of the English Channel , but the victims are my constituents - hundreds of miles from Dover and Calais - in Scotland .
I call upon the UK government to resolve its immigration system , in collaboration with its neighbours , so that it does not attract tens of thousands of desperate people .
It is surely not coincidental that the UK is one of the only European countries without identity cards .
I call upon the French authorities , from their old allies of the Auld Alliance , their Scottish cousins , to enforce real security at their end of the Tunnel so that the rail freight service to and from Scotland can be resumed .
I call upon the Commissioner and the Commission to knock all their heads together urgently in order to reach a solution to this absurd state of affairs .
Mr President , I apologise for my late arrival and I would like to thank you for rescheduling my speech to a later time .
The reason why we tabled this question is because the public sees the problem at the Eurotunnel site - since it involves two large European countries and also since it concerns our security and asylum policy - as requiring intervention by the European Union .
We cannot let this situation rumble on , as it would then illustrate Europe ' s lack of power .
This situation also implies that we have envisaged solutions that can be applied to other borders and to other locations that are under pressure from migration .
We are therefore calling , since the asylum policy and judicial and security policy are not sufficiently harmonised , for the Commission to work with France and Great Britain so that strong measures can be taken in three areas .
The first area is to re-establish , as far as possible , the freedom of movement , particularly that of rail freight in the Channel Tunnel .
What is happening , despite considerable investment by the rail operators and the SNCF in particular , contradicts our policy of moving towards using rail rather than road .
The second area is that if we fail to harmonise security legislation and mechanisms , we must take coordinated and coherent measures in the two countries to combat those involved in human trafficking , by increasing controls and introducing stiffer penalties , as this activity constitutes an intolerable attack on human rights and is a shameful trade .
As far as the third area is concerned , what is happening at Eurotunnel demonstrates the urgent need to harmonise Europe ' s asylum policy .
This is because what is happening there , and what France and England are being remonstrated for , is a problem which may concern all European Union countries in the future .
We know , thanks to the experience of what is happening throughout the world , that there will never be a perfect and wholly reliable solution , given the disorder in the world and the growing disparities between North and South .
The first and most important solution , the fundamental solution is , of course , to have a much more generous and more balanced development policy .
However , since we do not have this and as a short-term measure , I think that we must implement common measures in the two countries , so that we can ruthlessly track the people who trade on illusions - human traffickers , in other words .
I think that this is very important .
Lastly , I personally hope that , rather than leaving the these two countries to face their responsibilities alone , we find , with the help of the Commission , measures which are strong enough to be held up as an example and that can be applied to other locations in Europe .
Mr President , clearly we are having trouble applying one of the basic principles of a free Europe , the principle of the free movement of goods .
Numerous approaches have been voiced , from the possibility of invoking articles in the Treaty to intervention by the Commission to persuade the French government to act more quickly .
The current legislation of the European Union allows the Commission to institute infringement proceedings against a Member State found to be obstructing the free movement of goods .
However , these proceedings are subject to strict criteria when the obstacle is created by a few private individuals and the Commission can only act if the authorities in question fail to take the necessary measures .
This clearly does not apply in the present case .
Serious efforts are being made , contacts between the Commission and the French government have proven useful and we shall continue to work along these lines .
The French government has already closed the site in question , a study has been carried out and initial efforts have been made to install the technology required but , of course , the level of policing , the number of police officers required and the installation of the high-tech equipment needed are matters for the French government .
The second point I should like to make brings us to the root of the problem .
Why has traffic been suspended ?
Why are there constantly problems with train traffic through the tunnel ?
Why are illegal immigrants trespassing on various sites used by rail freight transporters ?
I think , as several Members have said , that the root of the problem is to be found in common European policy ; we need a common asylum policy to discourage immigrants from trying to reach specific Member States .
So the Commission has already tabled a number of proposals on procedures and rules for granting refugee status and minimum common requirements for receiving asylum seekers .
Another proposal sets criteria and mechanisms for determining the Member State responsible for examining asylum applications .
These proposals stipulate that , if an asylum seeker remains in one Member State for an extended period , then that Member State is responsible for examining the asylum application .
This means , in this particular case , that asylum seekers will be unable to acquire refugee status in Britain after an extended period in France .
So I think that , when it comes to finding an immediate solution to a problem which is having a significant impact on certain areas , especially remote areas in Scotland , as well as on the European continent , and on trade relations with Great Britain , the French government alone is responsible .
It needs to take action as quickly as possible to complete the plan submitted and it is working with Great Britain and the Commission in order to do so .
As far as a long-term solution to the problem is concerned because , as numerous Members have said today , the problem today may be on the border between France and Great Britain , but tomorrow it could well surface somewhere else in Europe , we need a fast decision on a common asylum policy at European level .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The joint debate is closed .
Ladies and gentlemen , the sitting is suspended until voting time at 6.30 p.m.
( The sitting was suspended at 6.10 p.m. and resumed at 6.30 p.m. )

Vote
Report ( A5-0010 / 2002 ) by Mr Koukiadis , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the Commission report : ' State of implementation of Council Directive 93 / 104 / EC of 23 November 1993 concerning certain