Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday 30 March 2000 .
Madam President , for the past six months to a year , the Committee on Development and Cooperation has been calling on the Commission to do something about the drought in Ethiopia .
Nothing has been done although there was an instant reaction from the Commission when the fact that 12 million people are under threat of famine in Ethiopia came to public attention .
I suggest that this week , as a matter of urgency , Commissioner Nielson be called to this House to explain the delay by the European Union in responding to a drought that has been continuing for the past three years .
We seem to be able to get weapons there for the Eritreans and Ethiopians to continue the war of aggression against each other over nonsensical issues and , at the same time , while the European Union and the Western World export weapons to Ethiopia and to Eritrea , the famine continues and the lives of millions and millions of people are threatened .
I have been in this House since 1984 , and rarely have I seen such neglect - such wilful neglect - by the European Union in dealing with a famine of this kind that we knew was on our doorstep .
It is a great shame that every time an issue like this is raised with Commissioner Nielson , or raised with the Commission , he passes it off as if it did not matter - as if he did not believe this was happening .
Commissioner Nielson must come to this House and explain his use of PR men and spin doctors in this disgraceful display of neglect .
Despite statements to the contrary , they can most certainly get two billion dollars ' worth of weapons into the conflict in Ethiopia and Eritrea .
The whole issue is a reflection on the inability of this House to act .
Mr Andrews , there is of course no need to start a debate on the subject .
I should just like to point out that in a few moments the House will be voting on whether to add another item to the ' Human Rights ' section and one of the proposals made by two groups is specifically to do with the problem of the famine in Ethiopia .
Madam President , as many of us know , last Friday saw the inauguration in Vienna of the Monitoring Centre for Racism , Xenophobia and Antisemitism .
I would like to thank you for your forceful intervention .
At this very important juncture , you said that racism , xenophobia and antisemitism are totally incompatible with the defence of human rights and the dignity of the human person .
You stated this very clearly and powerfully and thus sent a message of confidence to the people of Austria and to all the other peoples of Europe .
Many MEPs , representing almost all the Parliamentary groups and many of the Member States , were present , as of course were many Austrian MEPs and the President of the Committee on Citizens ' Rights , Graham Watson .
They all asked me - and I am very willing to act as their messenger - to thank you for your speech , which made us proud to be Members of this House .
Thank you , Mr Imbeni , for your extremely kind words .
I would like to tell all the Members of Parliament who attended this moving and very important ceremony how well I believe we all represented the European Parliament , and I know that none of the participants failed to notice our attendance in large numbers .
I believe it was very important for this House .
Thank you , Mr Imbeni , for your comments .
Madam President , if I have been informed correctly , the Council has postponed its statement on Iraq and it will not now be made this week .
Would it be possible for you to ask the Council to make a statement on Ethiopia in place of the statement on Iraq ?
This point would then be filled , depending , of course , on whether the Council is able to oblige .
Mr Hänsch , we shall deal with this point when we come to the draft agenda in a few moments , and we shall make a decision at that time as to how to handle the situation .
Madam President , I should like to draw your attention to an internal matter .
Some members of staff of the European Parliament both here and in Brussels , when they try to enforce European Parliament rules - in other words , no smoking in no-smoking areas or any of the other European Parliament rules - are sworn at and abused by some Members of Parliament .
In other parliaments ushers are treated with the respect that they deserve .
I would hope that happened in the European Parliament .
If the situation does not improve , do you know if there are any disciplinary procedures we could take against those Members who treat the staff in such a disrespectful manner ?
Disciplinary procedures ? I do not think so , but I do promise to consider very carefully the comments you have made regarding both the no-smoking areas and attitudes towards the ushers .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , reading the international press is an interesting activity should one wish to know how certain MEPs keep themselves occupied here .
Most of the time , the press reports are read with a certain element of interest , fascination or surprise , bearing in mind that the European Parliament is a House which comprises many chambers .
One can form one ' s own opinion and keep quiet .
However , there was one incident last week about which we cannot keep quiet any longer .
During an outing as part of his election campaign , a prominent Member of this House , Mr Berlusconi , thought it necessary to make extremely hurtful jokes - they were not even remarks - about people dying of the terrible disease of AIDS .
You will have to forgive me if I tell you what Mr Berlusconi said , but I think it is difficult to judge if you do not know the content .
Mr Berlusconi made the following joke : do you know why an AIDS sufferer needs to take a bath filled with sand ?
The answer is in order to get used to lying in the soil .
These words were spoken by a Member of this House .
I refuse to believe that anyone here would keep calm if this joke was aimed at Jews or blacks .
I think that a reaction from yourself , Madam President , would be wholly appropriate .
I would , at the same time , ask the chairman and leader of the Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats for his opinion on this matter .
I can only say that these remarks have shocked me deeply .
In solidarity with all the millions of people who suffer from this terrible disease , I can only express my shame on behalf of the honourable Member , Silvio Berlusconi .
( Applause from the left )
Thank you .
The Member you have quoted is not here to answer you or to defend himself ...
( Mixed reactions )
Madam President , we have read in the newspapers that five million euros ' worth of Parliament property has been purloined and that Parliament ' s finances have been poorly managed .
In addition , a report by the Court of Auditors of the European Communities is due shortly on the use of resources by Parliament ' s political groups , and it is not a flattering picture .
These are big issues , and Parliament must address them seriously .
I wish to speak about some small matters which I would not normally raise in the parliamentary plenary session , but it is astonishing that the bureaucratic machinery of the House is unable to rectify such small matters .
I have already , on many occasions , bemoaned the fact here in plenary that Parliament ' s television system fails to produce a picture for Finnish television .
Finland is the only country whose television picture cannot be picked up in Parliament .
I would have hoped that such a small matter as this would be sorted out .
The Dutch often complained about the lack of Dutch television during parliamentary part sessions .
They now get two channels , and I hope that we Finns will now get at least one .
And then , might we not still hope for hot water in the pipes , which has not been available during this new Parliament ' s term of office ?
I have already complained about this on various occasions in parliamentary sittings .
What is the problem with you bureaucrats , that you cannot sort these things out in this House ?
Meanwhile you allow five million euros to be stolen !
Thank you , Mr Seppänen .
It is not just a little detail .
You are probably aware of the considerable effort that went into arranging for our Dutch Members to have a television channel in their own language , and the problem with regard to Finland has not yet been resolved .
Mrs Banotti , who is dealing with the matter , will be able to give you the latest details .
Madam President , at least three times I went searching for our Finnish colleague to assure him , as I was assured in the last plenary part-session , that he would be handed a card that would enable him to not just hear , but to see Finnish television in Parliament .
I am really sorry that he has not been handed that card .
I will attend to it this week .
In the College of Quaestors we have also discussed - because we too are concerned - robberies that are taking place within Parliament .
I can assure you that the Quaestors are working on it .
Thank you , Mrs Banotti .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , considerable changes have been made to the proposed agenda .
Reports have been shifted around and time slots have even been changed .
Tomorrow we will start at 8.30 a.m. for the first time .
One would have hoped that , due to a heavy agenda , the reports would be spread evenly over these five full days here at Strasbourg , but that is not the case : on Friday , two reports have been dropped and only three oral questions are down on the agenda .
We are now faced with a dilemma .
As elected members of our national parliaments , we represent our electorate and this must be reflected in all votes .
However , the agenda for Fridays , for this Friday and for previous Fridays , is often so light that many MEPs genuinely believe that they can spend their time more productively in their own countries .
I therefore wonder how we are to fulfil our obligations in the best way ?
I have talked extensively to MEPs from various groups on this matter and we concluded that Parliament must make a choice : either we give the agenda on Fridays sufficient weight so that more Members attend the votes or we do away with it altogether .
This is not an anti-Strasbourg campaign but a plea for more Members to be present during the votes and also for an increase in Parliament ' s prestige .
You received an e-mail last week about our intention to apply for the quorum on Friday .
The Conference of Presidents has also received a letter on this matter .
However , the agenda is not heavier as a result . If anything , as I have already stated , this coming Friday ' s agenda is lighter .
Our plans , therefore , remain unchanged , and this means that if , on Friday , the necessary 209 Members are not present , then the vote will not take place .
This is something about which we wanted to give you plenty of notice , so as to enable you , by being either present or absent , and not just by what you affirm , to make it known what you want on Fridays : to make the agenda more substantial or abolish it .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would ask you , please , not to use points of order to start a debate on this matter which would keep us here all night .
In return , I promise that I shall raise the matter at the Conference of Presidents .
The Group leaders have heard your points . There clearly is a problem and it is one that we shall examine at the Conference of Presidents when the next agenda is determined and , of course , more generally after that .
Madam President , I would like to very briefly respond to Mr Seppänen very briefly ; not regarding the matter of Finnish television , but the first point which he raised .
I am aware , of course , that about 10 days ago a certain article from the European Voice was recycled again and again across Europe .
As rapporteur for the discharge of our own institution ' s budget , I would have appreciated it if Mr Seppänen had taken the trouble to cast an eye over my report , which expressly and critically dealt with the issue of the inventory and which was available in all languages to all my colleagues here in the House from 10 February .
I would also appreciate it if we could use this as an opportunity to take a little more interest in our own documents , our own recommendations for decisions , which are equally critical , not least of ourselves , rather than just giving knee-jerk reactions to certain press agencies .
Thank you , Mr Ribeiro , we shall look into your statement very carefully .
Madam President , I would like to bring to your attention an incident last week where two football fans were tragically murdered on their way to watch their team play in the UEFA Cup .
Football is a sport which transcends the world .
Almost every country plays football .
It is known as a beautiful game .
In about three months Belgium and Holland will play host to Euro 2000 .
There is every likelihood that incidents such as those that happened last week will be repeated again in Belgium and Holland .
Can I ask you , through your good offices , to contact all the Member States who are involved , to try and keep such problems to a minimum ?
Thank you , Mr Miller .
We shall do so .
We have often voted on recommendations on sports-related violence and what you tell us is rather worrying .
Madam President , Mr Hänsch made an important observation a moment ago and , since his point forms part of the agenda as a whole , I would like to add my thoughts as well .
First of all , I would like to say that the Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats supports the proposal , now that the Council ' s declaration on Iraq is not taking place , to replace Iraq with Ethiopia .
This is a very sensible suggestion in my view .
We would also like to see Iraq treated as an Urgency because , eventually , Parliament will need to pass its verdict .
Just because the Council is not ready , that does not mean that we in Parliament cannot bring the matter up for discussion .
On a final note : we would appreciate it very much , partly in the light of the alarming television pictures we have seen lately , if Zimbabwe too were to be included under the human rights heading .
We have a comprehensive package which will probably enable us to cover all the points which are important to this Parliament .
Mr van Velzen , you will have the opportunity to make your comments in just a moment , as we are about to move on to the agenda .
Agenda
Madam President , we would prefer Turkey to be given priority , although if we move it from Wednesday to Tuesday , then there is still room to discuss Ethiopia on Wednesday , if the Council agrees .
So , Tuesday Turkey , Wednesday Ethiopia .
Madam President , I do not think that proposal is such a good one because , if I am properly informed , the Council will not be attending on Wednesday .
I would prefer it if we could hold the debate on Ethiopia when the Council is present .
Madam President , I would suggest that this will give us the opportunity to adopt a short resolution on Ethiopia .
Madam President , it would be a great help to many of us if we could vote on item IV first , for I believe there is a large majority in favour of our proposal under item IV .
We shall then be able to withdraw our proposal under item I.
In other words , Mr Haarder , you would like us to move directly to the proposal to replace item IV ' World forum on education ' with an item on ' Iraq ' , which you tabled in case your first proposal was not adopted .
If I have understood - please correct me if I am wrong - you are going to withdraw your request to replace the item on the ' Non-proliferation Treaty ' , and it is item IV that we shall be replacing , if the House agrees , of course .
Unless you want us to proceed directly to the vote on replacing item IV ?
Madam President , I should be glad if we could vote on item IV before I decide about that .
Madam President , if I have understood correctly , the Liberal Group has moved that the point concerning the non-proliferation treaty be replaced by Iraq .
For goodness sake , let ' s vote on it !
If you want to cancel that and put Iraq in place of the world forum on training , then you must move that and we will then vote on it under item IV when it ' s the world forum ' s turn .
Yes , I think that is clearer .
I would rather keep to the order in which the proposals were received .
I shall now put to the vote the request from the liberal group to replace the item on the ' Non-proliferation treaty ' with a new item entitled ' Iraq ' .
( Parliament gave its assent )
On the subject of ' Human Rights ' , I have received a request from the Group of the European People ' s Party / European Democrats to replace the fourth sub-item ' Death penalty in the United States ' with a new sub-item entitled ' Zimbabwe ' .
Who wishes to speak in favour of this proposal ?
Madam President , since we now have Ethiopia , which we wanted to add , elsewhere on the agenda , I would like to ask the mover of the motion whether he would agree to adding Zimbabwe as a fifth point .
It is okay to have five points .
If we take Zimbabwe as an additional point , we could vote for it .
The originators of the proposal seem to be happy to agree to that .
Thank you for that .
There is therefore no need to vote on this proposal since it has been withdrawn .
I then received five proposals to add a fifth sub-item to the ' Human Rights ' section .
Madam President , I would like to be clear that if we have agreed that Zimbabwe would be the fifth point then there is no point in voting in any other points because we already have five points on the agenda .
Madam President , I would like to speak in favour of adopting a resolution in connection with the oral question to the Commission on the consequences of last December ' s storms .
The citizens would not understand it if we simply held a debate without then saying what proposed solutions and options the European Union can offer .
I therefore ask that a resolution be taken in connection with the oral question .
Child pornography on the Internet
The next item is the report ( A5-0090 / 2000 ) by Mr Kirkhope , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the initiative of the Republic of Austria with a view to adopting a Council Decision to combat child pornography on the Internet [ 10317 / 1999 - C5-0318 / 1999 - 1999 / 0822 ( CNS ) ] .
Madam President , in 1996 I had the great honour of representing the UK Government at the World Congress , which was held in Stockholm , Sweden , under United Nations auspices , on the subject of the sexual exploitation of children .
At that time we took a number of initiatives which we believed would help children , the most vulnerable section of our society .
Mostly they were concerned with issues such as sex tourism and general abuse in countries all over the world .
They did not , in general , relate to matters concerned with the Internet - this new technology , which has come in at an enormous pace in the last few years ; a new technology which has the ability to do good things but also the ability to do evil things .
There are very few regulations which are concerned with what the Internet is used for .
Whilst a lot of countries are keen to see their citizens benefit from the good things it can offer and whilst e-commerce itself is becoming a major feature of life , we have not yet seen any proper regulations to protect those who are abused , and particularly those who are abused by the use of images of themselves in a pornographic manner .
That is the reason for my report - to protect children , to try and help children to avoid being abused in this particular manner .
My report , for the first time , puts forward a definition .
We have been short of a definition until now .
Although there was an initial Austrian initiative , which this report supports , it did not contain a definition .
In our report we have entered a definition which we hope will be acceptable internationally .
We can only deal with this matter if we deal with it in an international fashion .
We are only dealing with it at European level now , but hopefully the world will react , whether it be through the auspices of the United Nations once more or , indeed , through the common sense of other countries .
If we are lucky , we will see a world approach to outlaw these very bad practices .
We have required within our report that European nation states should have action plans for dealing with the abuses which take place .
We are concerned with the production , sale , distribution and deliberate possession of pornographic images showing children . We want to stamp out this appalling abuse .
In our report we wish to make sure that police authorities throughout Europe take action to deal with these matters .
We want to encourage and , indeed , in some circumstances , require nation states to look at their present laws , to make sure that they are able to investigate these abuses and bring people who abuse children in this way before the appropriate courts .
We are faced with a difficult task , not only in regard to the definition which we have decided to offer , but also because so many countries have different attitudes as to what , for instance , is a child .
We have tried to reach a compromise in our deliberations . I believe that we have managed to do so .
I wish to offer my thanks , as rapporteur , to all those who have been concerned , not only on my own committee - the Committee on Citizen 's Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs - but also on the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market and on the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport as well .
We have had nothing but positive contributions .
In my own committee this report was adopted with 27 votes in favour and one abstention .
That I regard as very helpful and a good sign for the future .
Because of all the support for this initiative , both within the committees and from public reaction , I am very hopeful that once it has been considered by Parliament it will be taken up and put into effect and will assist in protecting that vulnerable section of society that needs protection in this fast-moving and growing area of new technology .
Madam President , child pornography is a loathsome form of crime .
Measures at transnational level are required , especially due to the denationalised nature of the Internet .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Kirkhope , for his most excellent report .
In this regard , it is perhaps particularly pleasing that it is from Great Britain that Mr Kirkhope comes .
It is good that he has defined child pornography , and I believe we have arrived at a satisfactory compromise .
It is particularly good that Mr Kirkhope has also stated that everything that has the appearance of being child pornography shall also be included under this definition .
Contact points or special units shall be set up in the Member States according to the draft .
This will hopefully lead to better investigations .
There is a need for more expertise in this area if it is to be possible to carry out professional investigations .
Europol will be involved , as will the candidate countries .
It is a good thing that crime in third countries will be punished in accordance with national legislation .
The definition of " children " - that is , the age up until which a person is to be considered a child - has been formulated in order to show that we want to create the most effective level of protection where child pornography is concerned .
Our line of argument allows for flexibility in defining the age-limit that strikes the hardest blow to child pornography .
It is a question of creating the most effective protection for children so that they are able to hold on to the childhood that they are entitled to .
All children should have the right to a childhood !
That ought to be a basic human right .
For many years the European Parliament , the Member States and a whole range of organisations , by virtue of various legal bases , agreements and resolutions , have been tackling the issues of child protection , children ' s rights , sexual abuse , sexual exploitation , sex tourism , trade in children and women and child pornography on the Internet .
The initiative of the Republic of Austria with a view to adopting a Council Decision to combat child pornography on the Internet will place an obligation on the Member States , and obligation is the crucial word here , to take measures to combat child pornography on the Internet .
This obligation must have legal implications .
The importance of the Internet is obvious to us all .
It has come to be indispensable as a modern communication tool .
We need it for exchanging information , for learning and for all sorts of operations .
However , increased use of the Internet also means increased access to violence and pornography , not least child pornography .
Children themselves have access to violence on the Internet , which must be objectionable to us all .
Parents are powerless in the face of this phenomenon because they cannot keep up with this technological progress .
We are extremely concerned , especially in the new MEDIA 2000 programme which is being drawn up , as to how we should deal with this problem in the future .
Consequently , an urgent need has arisen to combat child pornography on the Internet effectively .
This requires efficient software to determine the country of origin , to trace the images and to catch the perpetrators and those producing the images .
This in turn requires extremely advanced technology .
We need specialists who can develop access codes , which will also necessitate certain restrictions being placed on media freedom .
We need to network all the relevant organisations , the welfare organisations and NGOs , to facilitate rapid action and effective procedures .
However , we must not forget one thing : the main reason why children are forced into this is poverty .
We must combat poverty and intolerance and take this as our starting point .
This is the key to prevention .
It means that we must understand the children , but also that we must protect the victims , offer them assistance in reintegrating and help them to rediscover a normal life .
We must not , therefore , simply act in a preventative fashion ; we must offer long-term help to those children affected .
- ( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the need has grown over the last ten years for a policy for children , based on the 1989 United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child , which has been ratified by all Member States .
The attention that has been paid to this issue has increased considerably in all Member States .
Nevertheless , at European Union level , even though children represent around one fifth of the Union ' s population , specific attention is very rarely paid to their needs in economic policies and in other areas .
Thousands of children all over the world suffer serious and systematic violations of their fundamental rights , from domestic cruelty , which goes undetected and unpunished , and the economic exploitation of their labour , which robs them of their childhood and education , to their use in war ; from being forced to play the horrific role of child-soldier to their use in prostitution or pornography .
According to the estimates of the Economic and Social Committee , there are more than five million children working in Europe .
Most of these children work in areas such as pornography , drug trafficking , child pornography and sexual tourism .
These children are in particular need of society ' s protection .
The evolution of the Internet , its incredibly rapid development and its importance today raise the question of its use for these reprehensible purposes .
In the last part-session , here in Strasbourg , we discussed what needs to be done about the Internet . The European Union ' s desire is to make more rapid progress in terms of e-commerce and to make a firmer commitment to the new technologies and to education .
Today we have been discussing what we need to prevent and combat , and that is the circulation and distribution of child pornography , which has been increasing at an alarming rate .
And although it may be true that we have to encourage web-site administrators and service providers to define their standards of conduct and to regulate themselves , and encourage Internet users to inform the authorities whenever they discover child pornography , it is nevertheless true that Union and national law bear some responsibility .
Mr Kirkhope ' s excellent report makes it very clear how much we still have to do and where we need to improve , in terms of establishing specialist units , strengthening cooperation and exchanges between States , in terms of Europol ' s activities and the efficiency of Member States ' actions , including , where necessary , the revision of their own legislation and the procedures in force in these areas so that we can guarantee the effective imposition of criminal sanctions .
As far as the responsibility of the Union itself is concerned , I am delighted at the fact that the Charter of Fundamental Rights that is being drawn up considers the specific rights of children , and takes account of the areas in which the Union can provide considerable impetus , specifically in these matters .
Madam President , in my opinion perversion is undoubtedly on the increase if , in addition to a child being sexually exploited , the event is recorded , in whatever fashion , and then reused for financial gain .
These events are occurring every day , every hour and perhaps every minute .
The perpetrators are using the most up-to-date technology to distribute their material and in the Internet they have found a medium which is more suited than any other to acting anonymously .
Paedophiles are limited only by their own technical capability or the equipment which they can afford .
When seen against its virtually unlimited potential , society and the state have thus far had very little at their disposal to counter illegal activity on the Internet , in particular since cyberspace has no states or geographical and political borders and its alluring feature is its worldwide accessibility .
The Internet itself cannot commit crimes .
What is criminal is the behaviour of some 3 to 5 % of Internet users who misuse the Net for illegal purposes .
95 to 97 % of the Internet is legal .
The Internet is therefore a reflection of society as a whole .
Just as in the real world , crime is very much a part of the virtual world .
All the same , the Internet is not beyond the law .
The problem of crime on the Internet cannot be resolved by any state in isolation .
For this we need uniform worldwide crimes and definitions so that law enforcement authorities can work together in global terms and not in opposition .
In the area of child pornography in particular , where the rights of children are continually being trampled underfoot , there is an urgent need for global regulation .
The EU has already taken several measures towards this , which I will not go into any further here .
I would like to congratulate Mr Kirkhope on his report .
It is a high-quality text .
Nevertheless , to effectively combat child pornography , it is necessary , in my opinion , for Europol to be immediately informed of cases of child pornography and for the exchange of information with the competent authorities to be carried out quickly and directly , as stated in Amendment No 20 from Gerhard Schmid .
All the proposed measures are suitable and necessary to effectively combat child pornography .
However , we must not forget that , in addition to the technological and police measures , we must also combat poverty , ignorance and prejudice in order to improve society ' s image of children and children ' s image of themselves and to offer help to the victims ; thus far , victim support has played too insignificant a role .
We need a social climate in which the victims of vile crimes are not left to fend for themselves whilst the perpetrators are shielded through failure to act and fear of embarrassing revelations .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Mr Kirkhope for his excellent report .
There is no doubt in anybody ' s mind : the physical and emotional integrity of children and the protection of victims of sexual crimes are of fundamental importance and must lie at the heart of the Union 's concerns .
Despite earlier initiatives by the Commission and Parliament , the misuse of the Internet and its harmful and illegal content have only increased , and it is time and again apparent how difficult it is to combat child pornography .
What exactly needs to be done in order to combat child pornography effectively , especially on the Internet ?
First of all , we need to set up an easily accessible and recognisable contact point .
In fact , the Netherlands was the first country to set up such a contact point back in 1996 , on the initiative of the Internet providers .
Secondly , for the purposes of enforcement , police forces and the judiciary need more expertise regarding the Internet and ancillary digital technology .
This is simply lacking .
Officials need to be trained well , otherwise they will be unable to combat child pornography effectively .
Lastly , the penalties must be harmonised in Europe and must be increased .
If not , the Internet will remain a threat and it will never be the challenge which it could be .
Mr President , Commissioner Vitorino , ladies and gentlemen , firstly , I would like to congratulate Mr Kirkhope .
In fact , his name fills us with hope .
Mr Kirkhope ' s document has lifted the lid on a great deal - a great deal of child suffering and human suffering .
We are delighted that there is now a definition at long last .
Secondly , that this phenomenon must be increasingly brought into the open and binding measures must be drafted . This includes setting up contact points , such as those in Belgium and the Netherlands , and also in the other EU Member States and candidate countries .
After all , there is quite obviously a correlation between child pornography on the Internet and trafficking in children .
This correlation is evident in the countries of origin , the transit countries and the host countries in the European Union .
This is also borne out by the studies carried out by police forces in this field with regard to under-age asylum seekers . They disappear on their own , or even accompanied , from asylum centres and reappear within the world of prostitution .
This correlation is also evident in the case of possibly kidnapped and missing children .
Recently , mothers recognised their own children on a porn website which could be viewed at police stations in France .
We also know that details of people ' s identity are used or misused by people with connections in the world of child porn websites .
In order to conceal their own identity , they use the bank details of others .
In order to stamp out child pornography , we need a multi-disciplinary approach .
The police and criminal investigation services must be able to do their jobs well .
This means that the politicians need to ensure that the police can do its job effectively .
The police within the European Union work differently from the police in some candidate countries , as other MEPs have already pointed out .
Politicians too should believe that child pornography exists on the Internet .
The NGOs are doing a great job .
To finish off , I would like to point out that some pimps use the Internet to distribute photographs of young people engaged in prostitution .
Mr President , Mr Kirkhope ' s report has the virtue of drawing the Council ' s attention to a dreadful criminal activity .
While I support the action stipulated by the report , and I too would like to congratulate the rapporteur , I still think the proposed measures do not match up to the scale of the problem before us .
Communication technologies transform data .
The Internet thus has formative and demultiplying effects on the trade and traffic in child pornography .
This trafficking is on a scale hitherto unknown in terms of its extent and the geographical areas covered .
It is an urgent state of affairs , and specific action must be proposed in order to deal with the networks that exist .
In all the States of the Union , individual paedophile acts are suppressed , but ignorance and inefficiency still reign in the suppression of networks .
What we have to deal with here are ephemeral , evolving sites , which adapt constantly and which are complicated to monitor .
This state of affairs makes it essential to draw up a survey of paedophile networks within the countries of the European Union .
The existence of these networks confirms the need for a common judicial area .
Once again , the rapporteur urges the Union to approach the Member States , and ask them to make an effort to harmonise their national legislation in this area .
I share his opinion but , given the cross-border nature of the problem , the response must be at Union level .
The common judicial area does exist with Europol , Schengen and Eurodac .
Let it be noted that it is used primarily , and indeed exclusively , to control the flow of migration and to suppress illegal immigration .
But even if action was undertaken in each Member State to create specialised units working in liaison , as the report advocates , that would not solve the problem of the networks because their work would still be restricted by national borders .
There is no problem identifying the parties involved in trafficking child pornography , who are often repeat offenders .
What is needed is prevention , in order to counter their activities and to dismantle their networks .
The European Union must provide itself with a suitable structure , a European instrument to enforce information exchange and action .
This instrument must be such as to make it possible to address States directly in order to urge them to pass on information , but also to issue orders so that the networks can be dismantled .
The Union should be in a position to apply penalties to any State which does not fulfil its criminal law obligations in the matter of combating paedophilia .
The Dutch police have drawn up a file of several hundred children from a CD-ROM containing 10 000 images or sequences of child pornography available on the Internet .
Interpol has acknowledged having a file of 800 photos .
Why are these valuable documents not used ?
Who are these children and what is being done to locate them ?
If there are records of offenders , it must be possible to keep records of victims .
It is our duty , ethically , as human beings , to do everything we can to find them .
For all these reasons I think the European Union must make combating this form of crime a priority .
Mr Kirkhope ' s report is filled with good intentions , but further proposals must be made in order to deal with the present situation .
I think the Commission and the Council should take action which is up to the task of dealing with the high stakes of this crime that affects thousands of innocents .
Mr President , in the wake of Mrs Klamt ' s report on sex tourism , Mr Kirkhope ' s excellent report takes us back to a debate on one of the sordid moral deviancies in this modern society of ours .
The action proposed by the Austrian Government is heading in the right direction , which is that of strengthening the prosecution of anyone deliberately producing , selling , disseminating or owning materials relating to the sexual exploitation of children .
What , however , are we to think of the limited personnel and financial resources allocated at the present time to the police departments responsible for monitoring Internet networks , which are , by definition , worldwide ones ?
To govern , however , means to make plans .
And we have to investigate the deep-seated reasons for this scourge in order to attempt to find an effective cure for the problem .
Admittedly , there is at root the unspeakable vice of certain parties , whose possible distress could never be any justification for these crimes , and the lure of easy profits for the producers and distributors of documents of this type .
We must bring our attention to bear , however , on the economic poverty of the parents who are led to exploit their own children in order to survive , or the poverty of abandoned and defenceless children who have lost their points of reference , and think this is their only way out of the situation .
Our society , and often this House , claims that the future of humanity is freedom without responsibility and rights without duties .
This is an irresponsible attitude .
We are now paying the price for this permissiveness which some parties have been championing as the way of progress for over thirty years , but what progress do we see , except progress in the loneliness of our peers , the broken families and the children left to fend for themselves who , almost naturally , turn to drug addiction , sexual promiscuity , sects and alcoholism .
Respect for human dignity , as the Council decision rightly claims , first involves the uncompromising affirmation of the destructive nature of these abuses and also involves appropriate policies which , in Europe and in third countries , enable families to accommodate , educate and protect their children , and enable children to regain their essential points of reference , which are goodness , truth and beauty .
The legitimately and ultimately repressive message of this report will only be heard and be useful if , at the same time , we clearly reassert the basis of a life-enhancing culture , a culture which respects life , applicable to all people in all places , and if , at Member State and Union level , we provide the practical resources necessary to achieve this .
Mr President , many comments have been made on Mr Kirkhope ' s report , which makes many interesting points , and I would like to do more than add a few banal observations to these comments , but I shall nonetheless begin by saying , first of all , that child pornography is the product of essentially two phenomena .
The first phenomenon is the boom in pornography in general , and the second is , obviously , the exploitation of children for sexual purposes .
I mention the boom in pornography in general because I do not think it is possible to isolate child pornography completely from the rest .
The consumer experiences a phenomenon of habituation , if I can call it that , in the face of the incitements to pornography displayed on television , in hotel chains ( and that includes here in Strasbourg or Brussels ) or in all the magazines in view on shop shelves , and necessarily is driven ultimately to seek ever stronger stimuli , like a drug addict .
This is what happens , and that is why those people who , in France in 1987 , for example , thought it right , in the name of freedom , to strenuously oppose the common-sense measure of removing pornographic magazines from display in newsagents ' shops , and keeping them under the counter , as it were , have to bear some responsibility for the measures which they are condemning today .
Just now I heard Mrs Ainardi , a left-wing Member of Parliament , complaining , for example , that a number of files have been compiled but are not used in any way for investigation or prosecution purposes , as they should be .
I should simply like to remind my fellow Member that one of the very first measures on jurisdictional , judicial and police matters taken by the left-wing government in France was to order the destruction of the file on sexual perverts .
We should not , therefore , be astonished that our society is in the position that it is in , and that child sex abuse is commonplace .
Is this , though , not also the inevitable continuation of a number of measures which have already been taken ?
For example , in the area of trivialising homosexuality .
I am well aware that not all child pornography necessarily ...
( Mixed reactions ) ... you see , you are proving the truth of what I am trying to say .
Some of our fellow Members who are here condemning child pornography are also demanding , for example , that homosexual couples ( indeed why should we limit it to couples ? ) should be able to adopt children .
This is the total reversal of the idea of adoption , whereby adoption is no longer in the interests of the child adopted but only in the interests of the adopting adult .
This is necessarily the first step on the road which leads ultimately to the deviancies of child pornography .
I know , I am well aware of Mr Schulz ' s customary protests .
They are not going to stop me asking whether this horrendous decline in moral standards is not also a continuation of the morality of the termination of unborn children ?
Why , when one is prepared to accept state-controlled hospitals organising terminations of unborn children , should one find it absolutely scandalous in moral terms to abuse children , once born , for the sexual pleasure of adults ?
That , ladies and gentlemen , is what I wanted to say .
Such practices have met with leniency , as we all know , within the Member States up to and including at the highest levels of their political classes .
We therefore do not want a situation where you cannot see the wood for the trees .
International cooperation is needed in this area , admittedly , as is Europol action , and why do we not extend Interpol ' s mandate ? If child pornography must be fought , however , then it must be fought as such , whatever the means of transmission !
Whether by personal networks , by telephone , by Minitel , no one considers bringing back censorship or opening mail on the grounds that child pornography may also be sent by post .
The Internet , Minitel , the post are nothing more than the medium .
It is the originators we must combat .
It is not the Internet itself which is to blame , but the child pornographers , and they must be punished severely .
Everyone knows perfectly well that that is not the case today .
( Applause and mixed reactions )
Mr President , the pioneers of the Internet saw the electronic highway as the ultimate means of communication and the road towards a new social order .
It was important for it to be subjected to as few rules as possible .
It has since become apparent that the Internet is merely a reflection of our society .
In addition to a wealth of information and expertise , it also reflects the criminal underbelly of society , including child pornography .
The nature of the Internet is such that it has become easier to disseminate child pornography anonymously , rapidly and across national borders .
This is a good reason to take action against this as a Union .
Our children should be protected against this disrespectful exploitation , which reduces them to mere toys and leaves them damaged for the rest of their lives .
I therefore welcome the Council ' s current proposal and Mr Kirkhope ' s report with open arms .
I do wonder , however , whether too much is not being asked of the Council through Parliament ' s adding new elements to the description of the criminal offence of " child pornography " .
Harmonising criminal law at European level is quite different from creating European criminal law .
Another difficult point is the age limit up to which pornography is considered child pornography .
I myself am in favour of an age limit of 18 , rather than 16 , years .
But the current compromise , in which both ages are mentioned without opting for one or the other , is confusing .
I do not think that we can seriously expect the Council to adopt this text , but that does not detract from my appreciation of the work which the rapporteur and the Commission have put in .
Mr President , as someone who is deeply dismayed by the on-going out-of-hand condemnation of Austria by fourteen Member States , I am particularly pleased that the initiative for the report in question has come from Austria .
This matter has preoccupied us for a long time , too long in my opinion .
Its importance is demonstrated by the constantly increasing incidence of such delinquency .
Nevertheless , irrespective of the importance of efficient law enforcement in this area , we must not depart from the principle of criminal-law liability and postulate strict liability .
The report is therefore on the right track .
In my opinion , the most urgent need is to create , as soon as possible , in all Member States and in the candidate countries , the legal and technological capability to search the contents of the Internet for child pornography .
Finally , I would like to reiterate the view which I have held for some years that an obligation must also be placed on providers and , by way of conclusion , may I again stress that it would perhaps be useful to formulate a uniform definition of " children " within the Union .
Children are taking on various ages in this Union .
Mr President , Commissioner , it has already been mentioned on several occasions that the proposal for a joint initiative by all the EU Member States goes back to the initiative of the Austrian Federal Chancellor , Dr Wolfgang Schüssel , who , as Foreign Minister in 1998 , presented it to Europe within the framework of the Austrian Council Presidency , as well as to the United Nations in New York , in order to bring about a resumption of the draft joint action to combat pornography on the Internet .
The motivation for this initiative was clearly that all those who wish to make policy for the future must , on the one hand , have the courage to carry out necessary reforms and , on the other , must positively and effectively avail themselves of the opportunities afforded by technological and global development and human resources , all the while taking responsibility for pointing out risks and undesirable developments and for drawing the necessary boundaries .
Anyone who does not take action against children and minors being abused and lead astray is jeopardising the future .
The aim of the Austrian initiative was , as previous speakers have pointed out , to draw attention to the fact that the Internet , given its special nature , offers new and , in the light of its scope , not always positive , opportunities , indeed incredible opportunities for the distribution of child pornography .
Pornographic material can be distributed via the Internet in unlimited amounts and by the most direct route .
There is the danger that children themselves may surf the Internet and come across pornographic images of their peers , thereby sustaining psychological damage .
Combating child pornography and the misuse of the Internet is , therefore , both a worldwide and a specifically European responsibility and we call upon all Member States to take action in light of this report .
We welcome the debate on the age limit .
However , I share the view of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport that we should have fixed the age limit at 18 and I hope that the initiatives will lead to the highest possible age limit being set in all Member States .
We welcome the fact that there will be a uniform definition and I support all measures to also place providers under obligation since today ' s discussion can only be the start of a debate and of initiatives and is far from the end .
Actions must follow .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in a debate in which so many things have already been said I need not repeat myself , but I cannot fail to respond to two comments by Mr Gollnisch who , unfortunately , as usual , has now left the Chamber .
Mr Gollnisch is a fascist delegate in this House who takes advantage of every opportunity , not least in this Chamber , to slander others .
It is the left-wingers or the gays who are responsible for child pornography .
He beautifully tars everyone with the same brush .
The left-wing French Government is responsible for the abolition of the criminal register of sex offenders and is therefore responsible , in the logic of this arch-fascist , for child pornography .
This is the type of poison which he spouts here .
Then he slips away because the sole reason why this pack of hounds sits in this Parliament is to permanently set upon others and then slink back into its holes to evade the responsibility of debate .
At any rate , these fine people do not participate in parliamentary work and it is time that this was made known because they are only ever speaking for the benefit of the visitors .
Then it all sounds so wonderful .
The reality is that these fine people do not partake in 99 % of the work .
They spout their poison and then push off .
I share the opinion of Mr Hager that we should also place an obligation on providers .
I think this is a worthy point which Mr Kirkhope should take into consideration in his report .
I also expressly support the view that we should not move away from criminal-law liability .
It cannot be right to release from criminal-law liability one of the primary areas where human dignity is violated , particularly taking into account the special need to protect minors .
I believe this must be made clear , even if it has sometimes been disputed by the groups on the left .
On this point , Mr Hager is correct .
One final comment : the permanent availability of sexual material in the exclusively anonymous private sphere , which is conditioned by the structure of the Internet , and the attendant fact that sexual abuse is removed from public and , hence , social controls , is one of the central challenges with which we are faced as a result of this new aspect of human lifestyle .
We cannot resolve it simply through Interpol and more stringent criminal law .
The Internet , as evidenced by child pornography , presents totally new challenges to our subjective , individual sense of responsibility .
We should discuss this in at least as much detail as the tightening of criminal law .
Mr President , child sex abuse is a criminal offence , whether it is committed by homosexuals or heterosexuals .
The distribution of child pornography on the net is also a criminal offence , and so is making child pornography .
Victims of paedophile activity are often facing lifelong trauma with some of them turning into child abusers themselves .
The distribution of child pornography is facilitated by the Internet .
Not only is the scale of distribution magnified , but there is a risk of the offence being trivialised .
Various MEPs have already spoken a good deal in the wake of this commendable report , commenting for example on how good and necessary it is that there should be contact points , that the police should have the relevant expertise and that there should be clear penalties .
These are all points underlined by Mrs Plooij .
But anyone who is at all familiar with this sordid subject matter knows that the contact points are inundated with information and that - in stark contrast with this - the number of people who analyse this information is very limited .
I feel sorry for them , not only because of what they are witnesses to , but also because of the volume of material in respect of which they must feel powerless .
We pretend that we are all agreed on this , but this is not so in practice .
In actual fact , there is a great deal of resistance .
Tourist areas , also within our own European Union , do not want to admit that poverty forces poor children into prostitution .
The Internet has the aura of progress .
And when it comes to harmonising our legislation at European level , reference is made to all kinds of grand legal principles .
I think that whoever wills the end must also will the means .
Mr President , It is good that we are having this debate on child pornography on the Internet .
Apart from a few rather coarse , ignorant contributions from my opponent , what has been said has been very sensible .
I would like to point out that , in actual fact , many paedophiles assault children that are close to them .
It is not divorce , alcoholism or anything else that encourages this behaviour .
It is fairly well known that being sexually aroused by children is not exactly normal behaviour , and for that we should be grateful .
The Internet makes exchanging pictures easier , and it is this we should be discussing .
I agree totally with Mrs Maes that we have excellent police authorities working with these issues .
However , in relation to how the problem has increased , there are not enough of them to be able to examine the whole situation .
It is , therefore , a shame that we are immediately about to call in Europol .
We have had discussions with representatives from Europol with respect to trafficking in women and children , and they say that they have two reports .
However , these reports are not official , so only Europol is aware of Europol 's own activities .
This is a problem .
The police that I have been in contact with in my own country , Sweden , who are working on these issues via Interpol , need , of course , more support , just like their colleagues in other countries .
For this is not only an issue within the EU .
There is also much to do when it comes to Thailand , the Philippines and other places around the world , something the police authorities are working on .
It is not exclusively in Western Europe that this issue is being dealt with .
There is one aspect of this matter that has not come up very often in the responses to this report , but which I would , nevertheless , like to raise in the debate , namely the rehabilitation of the victims .
The problem with the Internet is that the pictures are so clear .
Older children are at risk of being continuously pursued on the net and of being recognised for ever and a day .
We must consider how we in the Member States are to take care of the children that have been victims of this crime and whose photographs are on the net .
In Sweden we have also had experience of people finding their way into the school system or child care because they are paedophiles .
It is a shame that we have not discussed the enormous cutbacks and extensive privatisation in these areas .
Of course , we must perhaps also ensure , as a preventative measure , that no-one works alone with children , either in the private or the public school systems or within the child care profession and in other positions .
I truly welcome this debate . However , I would like us to remember that paedophilia is not a common , widespread activity , a fact for which , as I have already said , we must be grateful .
Mr President , likewise dismayed by the persistent out-of-hand condemnation of Austria by the 14 Member States , I consider it particularly important and I am pleased that we are showing unity in this matter .
I only have the following points to add or raise with regard to this excellent report ; firstly , the appropriate training of specialists to be able to also prosecute the perpetrators ; secondly , the need for the capability to carry out legal proceedings at international level ; and thirdly , the need to be able to punish crimes committed in third countries under domestic law .
Finally , I would like to express my satisfaction that the Member States of the EU are so resolutely and actively supporting this Austrian proposal and not just taking refuge in soundbites and clichés .
Mr President , Commissioner , as long as there is a demand for child pornography , it will be produced .
As long as there is a trade in pornography , the Internet will be used to carry it out , because the Internet offers an extra benefit , namely it masks the consumer and keeps the supplier , for the most part , in the shadows .
However , as long as this demand exists , there will also be abused children scarred for life .
I therefore welcome this initiative , which was finally put forward so comprehensively by the Austrian Presidency .
Above all , I welcome the proposals for expanding the initiative which the rapporteur , Mr Kirkhope , has made .
He has made a major contribution to the instrument , which the Member States can now take up , being more efficient than ever before .
I would like to pick up on five points which seem to me to be particularly important in the fight against child pornography .
My first point is that not only should the sale and distribution of child pornography be punishable , and indeed should incur punishments that will act as a deterrent , but that the possession of child pornography itself should also be punishable .
My second point is the age limit .
It cannot be set high enough .
I therefore appeal that the target which the Committee has set itself , i.e. of establishing the age of 18 as standard at European level , be implemented as soon as possible .
16 is just the first step .
The target must remain 18 .
My third point is that we need experts in the fight against child pornography on the Internet .
And it is even more important that these experts join forces , that they are coordinated , and here again Europol presents itself as the appropriate institution .
My fourth point is that the register of persons who have been convicted of the distribution of child pornography or of the sexual abuse of children will hopefully be implemented across Europe as quickly as possible and that access will be available to all Member States and Europol .
My fifth point is that we should proceed according to the personality principle in order to punish criminal acts as efficiently as possible .
In conclusion , I would like to appeal first of all to the individual responsibility of all those who use child pornography for their own gain .
They are responsible for its being produced and for the harm it causes children .
I would also like to appeal to the Member States , in the interests of the most vulnerable members of society , to implement as quickly and efficiently as possible the measures proposed by the rapporteur in his excellent report and by the Austrian initiative .
Mr President , thank you for the well-reasoned proposal of the rapporteur !
In this context I would like to propose , in order once again to show the consequence of the proposals , a few follow-up measures , because it is not only e-mails which can be sent anonymously , but letters also .
This is why all public post-boxes should be closed and it should only be possible to send letters at the post-office following official verification of ID .
The second point concerns telephones , because telephone calls can also be made anonymously .
All telephones should also be gotten rid of , except for a few telephone boxes which should , of course , be monitored by the police .
Then all fax machines should be gotten rid of as quickly as possible - nothing else springs to mind !
Mr President , the Commission would like to join several of the speakers in thanking the rapporteur for his excellent report on the draft Council decision .
As has already been stressed , the aim is to intensify actions to prevent and combat the sexual abuse of children , with particular reference to the production , possession and distribution of child pornography through the Internet .
The Austrian initiative to reintroduce the draft joint action to combat child pornography on the Internet , on which Parliament has already delivered a favourable opinion , is welcomed by the Commission .
One essential and positive aspect of the text is the encouragement of international cooperation , which is already well developed in other areas of the fight against criminal activities , such as drugs and illegal immigration .
As the Internet ignores national boundaries , those tracking down Internet crime must also be able to cross them .
International cooperation therefore has to be encouraged as much as possible .
The Commission has been closely involved in international activities and initiatives addressing this issue , such as the International Conference on combating child pornography on the Internet , which was held from 29 September to 1 October 1999 in Vienna .
It was jointly organised by the Austrian and United States Governments and the Commission under the STOP Programme .
The conference adopted conclusions and recommendations that are being actively followed up .
The Commission therefore welcomes the fact that the draft decision underlines the need to engage law enforcement authorities and industry , especially Internet service providers , in a constructive dialogue aimed at improving mutual understanding and sharing respective experiences .
There is a clear need to identify appropriate fora where law enforcement and industry 's concerns can be addressed and to encourage the development and implementation of codes of conduct and best practice .
We should bear in mind that the key role must be played by self-regulation and by the individual responsibility of those who use the Internet .
The Commission has long been concerned about child pornography on the Net .
In order to fight against it , it proposed a multiannual Community action plan on promoting safer use of the Internet by combating illegal and harmful content on global networks .
The Council and Parliament adopted it on 25 January 1999 .
The action plan provides support for concrete action in four areas : a European network of hotlines , self-regulation by industry , filtering , and rating and awareness .
In addition , the Commission , and the Union as such , is involved in the work of the G8 , creating a 24-hour points of contact network .
It is also involved in the current negotiations on a draft convention on cyber crime in the framework of the Council of Europe that will address the specific problem of paedo-pornography on the Internet .
The Commission fully supports the position expressed in the draft report that the subject of child pornography on the Internet should involve the approximation of the laws and regulations of the Member States .
We are convinced that agreements on common definitions , common charges and common sanctions need to be established for certain forms of crime .
We have included in the scoreboard on the creation of an area of freedom , security and justice a specific action aimed at criminalising the sexual exploitation of children , with particular reference to child pornography on the Internet , as called for by the Heads of States and Government at the Tampere European Summit .
A proposal for a framework decision on common definitions , common charges and common sanctions will be put forward after the summer .
The Commission will participate fully in the discussions that will take place in the Council with a view to adopting this draft decision in order to see whether further action should and would be needed .
We welcome Parliament 's proposal on a legal basis : as a framework decision it should be based on Article 34 ( 2 ) b of the Treaty .
The Commission will also consider , together with the Member States , how to support the implementation of the decision through other projects funded under the STOP programme .
These could be aimed at promoting further training and exchanges between those responsible in the Member States for fighting against this phenomenon , such as the police authorities , but also the judiciary , and at close cooperation between those authorities , Europol and the future Eurojus network .
Finally , the Commission wishes to indicate to Parliament that it can fully support all the amendments tabled by Mr Kirkhope and the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , as they provide some very useful clarifications on the definitions and description of the activities to be criminalised , on the age limit , on the offence of possession and on the need for the law enforcement authorities , the police and the judiciary to adopt the necessary technological instruments to scan the net and to make the fight against paedo-pornography not just a rhetorical issue but a concrete action of the Union as such and of each and every Member State .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
European Refugee Fund
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0091 / 2000 ) by Mrs Frahm , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a Council decision creating a European Refugee Fund [ COM ( 1999 ) 686 - C5-0120 / 2000 - 1999 / 0274 ( CNS ) ] .
Mr President , because of its wealth , Western Europe is naturally a magnet for everyone seeking protection and fleeing persecution .
Our share in the task arising from a growing influx of refugees must , of course , correspond in scope and importance to our prosperity and to our global and historical role .
But encounters between people from different cultures are not always simple , and they should therefore be helped along , just as refugees should be given support to begin new lives in their new locations .
The Member States each tackle these matters in very different ways , and rightly so , because they each start from perspectives within their different cultures and traditions .
However , all refugees have some basic needs in common , and special groups need professional help and support so that they can again start to live lives appropriate to human beings .
What is more , they need advice and guidance from the authorities in their new countries and in connection with their actual seeking of asylum .
All refugees begin with a dream of returning home .
For some , this becomes a reality but , for others , the period in exile proves to be so long that returning home is unrealistic .
They acquire children and friends and a new life for themselves . The children put down roots in the new country , and these become stronger than their parents ' roots in the old country .
Therefore , a number of them choose in the end perhaps to apply for citizenship in the new country . A number of surveys show , however , that , even for those who achieve their dream of returning home , it is very important that the period in exile should have been meaningful , that they should have had the opportunity to grow as people and that their qualifications should have been used so that they do not cease to develop as people and are not hindered from developing professionally in their own fields by stagnation , passivity , uncertainty and lack of qualifications .
Integration and repatriation are not , therefore , opposed to each other , and integration is not only for people who wish to move country for good .
It is also of significant help to those who subsequently return home .
It may , in fact , prove to be a prerequisite of successful repatriation .
I do not , therefore , understand why some people want to distinguish between displaced persons and refugees .
Responsibilities in Europe are unfairly distributed in relation both to the Member States ' size and prosperity .
The European Refugee Fund is a first and very modest attempt to distribute resources in proportion to the tasks which individual Member States promise to undertake .
It is not a question of the ratio between the number of refugees and the number of existing citizens . It is a question of the actual task which is to be undertaken .
It is not about relative numbers , but actual numbers .
I think that some of the amendments from the Group of the European People ' s Party and the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party must be based upon a misunderstanding in this area .
I hope the discussion may make it a little clearer what the thinking here is .
But because the task is a considerable one and because it has been unfairly distributed , it is naturally sad that the fund in question should be so small .
We are talking about EUR 26 million to cover the fixed expenses of the current work , distributed among 15 Member States .
Not much is , in fact , being given to those Member States which really have taken a considerable degree of responsibility upon themselves .
By German or Italian reckoning , the amount must seem tiny .
In addition , there is , of course , some uncertainty about the fund ' s financial future .
I am very anxious to know whether the Commission has some good news for us and whether it has given the necessary consideration to the issue in question so that the Fund will have a future and not just become a nonsense over the next few years .
All in all , however , the European Refugee Fund is , in fact , to be regarded as a start .
And if it has a good beginning and if we are able to follow up the issue , then it will only be natural for us to increase the amount concerned so that the Fund really can live up to its name as the European Refugee Fund .
Mr President , I would like to warmly congratulate the rapporteur on her report and would also like to thank her for the cooperation I have received in my capacity as draftsperson of the opinion .
I was very excited when I read the Commission ' s proposal .
The Commission is obviously on the right track .
It is important that the financial responsibility for refugees be distributed among Member States .
This is far better than shifting people around and , in this way , it is possible to end the vicious circle of Member States passing the buck , something which they have become familiar with through the international Treaties .
However , the Committee on Budgets is raising two objections .
Firstly , no consideration is given to the Financial Regulation .
Indeed , the programme is multiannual , whilst the financial calculations have only been made for one year .
The second objection is more extensive .
The financial scheme of setting aside 26 million for structural measures whilst keeping ten million in reserve for contingency measures could never lead to the goal which the Commission has in mind , namely an actual spreading of the financial responsibility .
The Member States will , however , need to set up all kinds of structures and procedures in order to share out the money .
In this way , solidarity among Member States and solidarity with those seeking protection threatens to be encumbered by a disproportionately high administrative burden .
The Committee on Budgets therefore suggests that the present proposal with the amounts quoted could be considered as an experiment , a very commendable experiment at that .
But a real European Refugee Fund will cost a great deal more than that .
It will need to be investigated exactly how much more this would cost , and the Committee on Budgets has decided unanimously that we expect the outcome of this investigation before 31 March 2001 .
The Commission is on the right track .
We should not , therefore , get distracted by restrictions upon the financial perspective as long as the net result is to be positive .
Mr President , firstly , I too should like to thank Mrs Frahm for her work and willingness to support a number of amendments , both from the committee and from myself .
This has all too often been a very rushed process which has not allowed those of us involved to collaborate as we would have wished to find the best solutions to certain problems .
I would particularly cite the example of the allocation of the funding which does not even meet the Commission 's intention to give particular consideration to the Cohesion Fund countries .
So the proposed review process becomes essential .
Asylum-seekers are not a burden but a responsibility .
The European Union Member States are the chosen destination of comparatively few , compared with the world 's poor countries such as those in Africa .
A proposed amendment from our committee requires that all measures under this fund should be based on an approach designed to prevent any outbreak of xenophobia , racism , discrimination or inequality .
That is particularly important , especially given recent criticism by the UNHCR of certain parties in my own Member State for their encouragement of such negative views or their failure to challenge them - criticism which is fully justified in my view .
A change to the funding proposed by our committee aims to give a minimum to each state , which could be used to promote public awareness .
My committee feels that the money , inadequate at the moment , should be used to improve the facilities and services offered , which is why we also want to see an overall strategy for the development of services , with a view to refugees and displaced persons being able to play a fully active role in society as equals .
Not to take such an approach would be short-sighted , as others have already pointed out .
The committee also proposed that there should be greater partnership at Member State level in determining and evaluating how the money should be used , including the involvement of refugee organisations themselves .
We also want it to be a duty for the committee assisting the Commission to consult with other organisations .
How we deal with the dispossessed is an issue for society as a whole , not just for governments .
Mr President , my Group is highly delighted with the proposal to set up a European Refugee Fund and also with the way in which Mrs Frahm has tackled this problem in her role as rapporteur .
The asylum policy urgently needs a European approach .
We do not wish to see a downward spiral where Member States compete in making their own country look unattractive , the way the Netherlands did , for example , when it appeared on CNN with leaking tents in which refugees could be received .
As Europeans , we do not want that sort of policy .
We most certainly do not want one country to shift its responsibility to another .
Setting up this fund is therefore a step in the right direction .
It provisionally brings the desired solidarity within the European Union symbolically into focus .
It is only right that the countries which do a great deal per capita of the population should be the first to receive financial support .
This is also the thrust of the amendment tabled by my Group .
Subsequently , the aid figures will need to correlate with the absolute numbers .
I suggest including these two values in an algebraic formula , a task which I pass on to the officials with pleasure .
Needless to say , the values will depend on the influx of asylum seekers in each country , the number of people granted refugee status , obviously in accordance with the Geneva Convention , and the number of displaced persons received .
The tasks supported by the fund are covered in the proposal and by the rapporteur .
We are extremely pleased with the broad support for our concept of tailor-made solutions .
As Mrs Frahm mentioned a moment ago , the tailor-made aspect refers to the difference between those who have attained refugee status as individuals and those who are benefiting from temporary protection as displaced persons who have been driven out on a massive scale .
Individual refugees gain from a dynamic approach to their integration in all kinds of areas within the European Union , such as permanent jobs , housing , the settling of whole families etc .
Displaced persons , on the other hand , have been driven out en masse and against their will and want to return to their home country .
For them , it is important to optimise their chance of repatriation with dignity .
In order to achieve this , they need to maintain their own social networks and they need activities which will strengthen their prospects in their country of origin upon their return and , of course , they need to be able to maintain their self-respect .
In this respect , Amendment No 19 deals with refugees , while Amendment No 21 focuses on displaced persons .
We should really spell this out a little more clearly .
In my opinion - and this is my personal opinion - integration should also include the recognition of the religions of the new minorities .
This is why my Amendment No 20 , which I supported on my own in committee , has mysteriously found its way back into the report , thus affording Members who wish to prove their broad-mindedness in this respect the final opportunity , in one way or another , to include this amendment in the report .
I have been informed that the European Commission is carrying out a comparative study into the asylum policy of the Member States .
I am very curious to see whether this report will be published before long .
It could , in itself , contribute towards the common policy based on best practices .
It is also vital that this report is made available as soon as possible . This week , for example , in the Dutch Lower Chamber - and undoubtedly elsewhere - an asylum policy is again being discussed which is drafted in such a way as to be completely out of tune with everything that is happening in the EU Member States .
This seems very bad policy on the part of the Netherlands .
However , perhaps this is also happening elsewhere . In my opinion , the Commission should keep its finger on the pulse , in a tactful manner , of course , but a finger on the pulse nonetheless .
It makes sense that the fund should mainly focus on improving the procedures , but at least as interesting is the Community ' s approach to the phenomenon of displaced persons .
After all , this is a category which- more than anything - is typified by the need for security , without choosing a particular EU Member State as such .
We are also in favour of EU aid being earmarked for a common follow-up scheme which monitors the experiences of repatriates and which also offers a certain level of guarantee .
It goes without saying that we , as Christian Democrats , welcome the efforts of private organisations and those of refugees and displaced persons themselves with open arms .
On behalf of my Group , I wish this new type of Structural Fund , because this is what it comes down to , every success . I also want to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Frahm , on the handling of this important topic and I hope that she will accept my efforts in the field of tailor-made solutions for what they mean as regards , on the one hand , refugees and , on the other , displaced persons .
Mr President , my Group welcomes this proposal .
It is important that this instrument should remain in force for the entire five-year period and that the core elements of a common asylum system should be codified within this period .
The Fund should help to balance up the differences between Member States in the acceptance and integration of persons in need of protection .
A precondition for this is that the various factors must be given due consideration in allocating the money .
It is necessary that the legal basis for the Fund should be adopted as soon as possible so as to ensure continuous EU financing of refugee projects .
I welcome the fact that , under Article 5 , the money for routine projects is to be separated from emergency aid measures .
Mass refugee situations require special measures and separate budgetary allocations .
Only in this way can routine long-term measures also be maintained .
The effective distribution of responsibilities which the Fund is striving for can only be achieved in the long term if the existing problems of widely divergent capacities are tackled .
This requires additional support for the Member States with a less well established asylum system .
I therefore consider that a fixed sum for the Member States which are experiencing difficulties in establishing their asylum system is advisable .
The description in Article 3 of the tasks and measures which are worthy of promotion could lead to a priori support for measures to improve the acceptance conditions for asylum seekers , but this should not mean that measures necessary for fairer and more effective asylum procedures are neglected .
I am of the opinion that the Fund should finance measures to inform the public concerning the policy and practice of the Member States with regard to refugees , asylum seekers and other temporarily protected persons .
The positive results of such activities in the past speak in favour of the continuation of such financial support , which should be made available to every eligible applicant .
I congratulate Mrs Frahm on her excellent report and gladly support the request of Mrs Frahm and Mrs Buitenweg for the addition of this sum to the Refugee Fund .
Mr President , in Denmark , Pernille Frahm and her party have led the way in the struggle against what they call " more Union " .
They campaigned against Denmark ' s joining the single currency , which we are to vote on in September , and they have been on the " no " side in four out of the five previous Danish referenda .
That is why I am so pleased to read Pernille Frahm ' s report in which she does not merely approve , but also requests , " more Union " in the form of mutual aid in connection with the burden which the influx of refugees imposes upon us .
To cap it all , she wants more money transferred from the national Refugee Councils to their EU equivalent .
I agree .
If a large number of Albanian refugees arrives in Italy or a large number of Baltic refugees in Scandinavia , it is more sensible to spread the cost over the whole Union than compulsorily to distribute the refugees throughout the Union .
The Refugee Fund makes it possible to help more refugees in the vicinity of their own countries where they can maintain links with their families and native cultures and continue to put pressure upon the tyrants who drove them from their homes .
It is , therefore , also a good thing that the EU should be able to come up with aid in support of large influxes of refugees .
We saw the need during the war in Kosovo .
Just imagine if a great many more Kosovars could have been helped in neighbouring Macedonia and Albania .
They would have much preferred this than to have been sent thousands of kilometres away to distant countries .
If there are any who stand united on this issue , they are Pernille Frahm ' s and my own party .
If we could make Pernille Frahm rapporteur for European cooperation , too , then I am sure that we could agree about that issue as well .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is with great relief that we welcomed the proposed Council decision on the creation of a European Refugee Fund .
After Kosovo , Chechnya , Afghanistan , to cite but a few of the tragedies which bathe our planet in blood , creating such a body is an increasingly urgent matter .
The report shows the extent to which parliamentary activity can be beneficial to Europe .
We therefore support these motions .
We shall here mention only three points .
Firstly , if there is one point on which the report is not satisfactory , it is financial resources .
Very few resources are allocated to the Fund , considering the scale of its activities - improving reception conditions , integrating persons benefiting from international protection , encouraging voluntary return by facilitating reintegration in the country of origin .
These are huge tasks requiring amounts far greater than those initially planned .
We must provide ourselves with the resources to realise our shared ambitions , and make Europe a land of solidarity and hospitality , which respects human dignity and the values which are the reasons for thousands of people to seek asylum , particularly freedom of democratic expression and peace .
Secondly , improving reception conditions should also include providing access to health care for all , the provision of education for children , and also training .
Already made rootless by virtue of their exile , families must be able to benefit from education for their children and training programmes for young people in order to regain some stability , to promote their social and economic integration , and to encourage their possible return to their own country .
Thirdly , many of us are calling for NGOs and the associations working on a day-to-day basis with refugees to be consulted , both in defining the necessary programmes and in their implementation .
It would be a serious mistake to exclude the very women and men who often , with their invaluable experience , make good the omissions of the State , from the process .
Finally , in conclusion , I should like once again to stress the ever more insistent need for Member States to arrive quickly at common legislation in matters of asylum .
It is only this advance which will make it possible to allow this European Fund to make a proper impact .
Mr President , allow me first of all to emphasise that , in the referendum on the Edinburgh Agreement in 1993 , the Danish people declined to participate in EU cooperation on legal issues , and Denmark is not , therefore , bound by any legal obligations to allow the EU to decide which refugees are to be received by Denmark .
And one cannot in all decency receive money from the EU if one will not also allow the EU to decide which refugees are to be allocated to which countries .
I think it is the individual countries ' responsibility to finance their refugee policies themselves and , for that reason alone , I have to vote against this report .
On Danish television , representatives of the High Commission for Refugees in Geneva have expressed the view that only one in ten asylum seekers are genuine applicants .
If , as in Denmark , the majority of applicants are given asylum or residence permits , then legitimate refugees are left in the lurch .
Denmark offers the world ' s highest level of financial aid to refugees and therefore attracts many who are merely economic refugees . And that is not what the Convention on Refugees is about .
I nonetheless agree with Mrs Frahm about one thing , namely that EUR 26 million is far , far too low a level .
In Denmark alone , the level of aid is EUR 2 billion per year so that the present little fund is of absolutely no effect .
We therefore think we need to manage the whole issue of apportioning and prioritising our efforts concerning refugees in a far more rational way .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , there are many reasons why , in principle , I welcome what the Commission has submitted : firstly , because the Commission is sending a signal to the Member States that they are not alone in the problems of migration , refugees and displaced persons ; secondly , because it at least regulates in part the distribution of the burden ; and , thirdly , because the Commission is proposing a differentiated package of responsibilities for two different groups , namely recognised refugees and displaced persons , i.e. persons temporarily seeking protection .
I welcome the proposal because it clearly defines the target groups , because the acceptance conditions will be improved and the integration of refugees supported , and because the re-integration of temporary refugees will be promoted .
However , I do not share the view that Mrs Frahm ' s report can be accepted almost without criticism because I consider that measures which go beyond these defined responsibilities are inappropriate .
Firstly , the money is not available and , secondly , there are other totally different groups which have a claim to it if you are talking here about groups which are particularly in need of protection , and we are unquestionably talking about persons within the meaning of the Geneva Convention .
I also do not support your proposals for measures which are incompatible with the particular groups .
When it comes to refugees , the measures should be different to those for displaced persons .
You cannot , in the case of displaced persons whose main concern is to return to their homeland , require that the host country integrate them into the labour market .
That contradicts the basic intention .
However , we must seek to make an amendment when it comes to the allocation of funds , taking the number of refugees or displaced persons per capita of the population of a Member State as the basis .
One final point which I would like to mention , and I do not understand why Mrs Frahm does not want this , is that we must also have the option to make money available for refugee reception centres .
You reject this and I simply cannot see why , because this is the first point of contact where we can provide specific help , accelerate processes and promote refugee integration .
However , in all the proposed measures , we must not fail to recognise that one objective has not been addressed here , namely taking into account the distribution of the refugee burden .
Please do so in implementing the measures which are necessary and positive .
Mr President , firstly , I too would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Frahm , because I believe she has produced a really good piece of work .
Furthermore , her report expresses this Parliament ' s pleasure .
For us , the establishment of this Fund is good news .
Since 1997 , we have been trying to carry out coherent work in this respect , and we have had some successes .
However , in order to be fully successful , we need a legal basis to ensure the continuity of the work on improving the reception , the integration , or , where they wish it , the satisfactory return of the asylum seekers and refugees present in the European Union . Those are three different areas of work .
We have to safeguard all three , and I agree that we must maintain a reserve fund in order to deal with the arrival of displaced persons without endangering the development of better infrastructures and practices within the Union .
With regard to the distribution of resources , we have to take account of the need to show solidarity with countries which are highly committed to the question of refugees , but we also have to bear in mind - as the report says - the need for countries which have less of a tradition of accepting refugees - such as my own - to improve their infrastructures and services so that they may reach the same level as the other countries and take on - because I believe this should be the objective - higher levels of responsibility together with the other countries of the European Union .
The Member States have a major role to play in this respect and must make considerable efforts .
However , I would like to point out that we should also make use of our experience of managing other funds , especially the Structural Funds , in order to involve local and regional administrations and the organisations representing civil society in this management , in addition to the Member States .
This would create added value , because contact with the NGOs and the local administrations could contribute to the fight against racism , to involving society and informing the citizens of the reception countries of the importance of asylum and refugees .
Furthermore , using the practices already developed for the management of those funds could promote interaction between them . We must develop policies which are coherent with both funds .
Lastly , I would like to add my voice to those which have called for a greater financial contribution to the European Refugee Fund .
Mr President , firstly I would also like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Frahm , for this excellent and extensive report .
However , as she herself did , I would like to point out a few problems which , in our opinion , are still important and which need to be remedied .
The allocation criteria , which are based on the average number of asylum applicants and recognised refugees and the nature of the projects , are perhaps not adequate to achieve a fair distribution of the burden .
In practice , the countries which take in the greatest number of refugees will probably receive the most funds .
Insofar as it goes that is okay , but it should not mean that the other EU States go short and , ultimately , that the refugees in these states , who are not particularly numerous , should be the ones to miss out on the benefits .
We must also deal with the actual money to be allocated , which must be in proportion to the stated objectives .
Financing must be ensured up to 2004 .
So far , the balance sheet has not made any clear statement for the period after 2001 .
If we can resolve this issue , then we should do so .
Only in this way can the European Refugee Fund be used sensibly and efficiently .
Mr President , it seems legitimate that the states of Europe should demonstrate solidarity in the event of a sudden , massive , exceptional influx of refugees driven by some external disaster , but what the Commission is proposing today is a different kettle of fish .
The proposal is to establish a permanent European Fund distributing appropriations to assist Member States in managing their countries ' usual flow of refugees , genuine or not .
This proposal raises many questions .
Are Member States themselves no longer capable of managing the refugees they receive in normal circumstances ?
How would their situation be improved by giving money to Brussels , only to have Brussels immediately give it back to them ?
Will some countries be net contributors and others , net recipients , and if so , which ?
The answers to these questions cannot be found anywhere in the reports passed on to us .
We cannot even find a statistical table of the numbers of refugees currently residing in the various countries of Europe .
Once again we are being asked to take an important decision while being kept in the dark .
It is all the more worrying that the planned system is liable in itself to exacerbate abuses since reducing the immediate costs for each State may lead to a reduction in its vigilance , ultimately increasing the overall cost for everyone .
This is a pernicious effect which insurers are familiar with .
This risk is , in turn , all the greater since the proposed text is extremely vague when it comes to defining the type of person that qualifies as a refugee .
There is , of course , the standard definition of refugee given in the 1951 Geneva Convention , but obviously all sorts of categories of displaced person can be added to the list , including persons accepted into the country in accordance not with international commitments but only with national legislation , decisions or practice .
In such conditions , the risk of things spiralling out of control and of financial abuse is very great indeed , Mr President , and the report itself even implies as much when it states that the planned appropriations , even though they still amount to EUR 36 million , are much less than the potential demand .
The Union for a Europe of Nations Group considers that there is just one solution if we want to halt this risk : for each Member State to retain financial responsibility for the reception of refugees , and for European solidarity to be kept only for exceptional tragic circumstances .
- ( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , many of us have repeatedly called for the European Refugee Fund to be established .
The persuasive examples of what happened in Kosovo - and on a smaller scale , in East Timor - proved necessary , in order to support the evidence that this fund was needed .
The entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam has facilitated this new approach to European policy on asylum and migration , which , as Mr Oostlander has already pointed out , requires a degree of solidarity between Member States , and there should therefore be mechanisms designed to contribute to finding a balance between the work undertaken by Member States who receive these refugees and their being able to bear the short- and long-term consequences of welcoming these people .
We feel it is right that the fund should have an emergency component , which would apply to cases of a massive influx of people in a situation where they need international protection , but which , at the same time , guarantees that structural policy measures will be financed . In other words , there must be a component which will enable us , under a multiannual programme , to provide effective support for measures designed , firstly , to improve conditions of reception , secondly to promote integration , thirdly to facilitate voluntary repatriation and fourthly to facilitate reintegration .
The experience of Kosovo has proved that most displaced people , including those who have been granted refugee status , were willing to return to their country of origin as soon as the necessary conditions were met .
I would therefore like to emphasise something that Mr Pirker has already mentioned , and that is the difference between migration and temporary refugees .
What must in one case be met with policies of support for integration must , in others , in the interests of the refugees themselves , be met with policies of support for a return to the country or region which they were forced to flee .
The two situations are quite different and require different responses .
To confuse them would be to give way to populist rhetoric .
I would also like to stress the need to speed up the establishment of legal instruments which will facilitate the mobilisation of funds that have already been earmarked for this purpose .
Specific rules will also have to be laid down covering the criteria and organisational provisions for the allocation of these funds and for activating the respective monitoring mechanisms .
Mr President , on behalf of the Commission , I would like to begin by thanking Mrs Frahm , rapporteur for the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , for her excellent work , the quality of her report , and the support it gives the Commission ' s proposal .
You know better than I do that the proposed Council decision on this Fund was adopted by the Commission on 14 December 1999 .
It is in line with an approach , my own personal approach , which I put forward during my hearing before the European Parliament ' s Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs .
The Fund is a single instrument combining support for Member State actions on the reception , integration and voluntary repatriation of refugees and displaced persons , which were previously dealt with in joint actions and pilot projects on the basis of appropriations allocated annually to the Community budget on the initiative of the European Parliament .
This Fund is not intended to substitute for Member States ' efforts in the field of refugee reception and integration , but it does represent an initial step , highlighting a key political aspect of European strategy : strategy on asylum must be based on shared responsibility at European level .
I think that adopting this Fund contribute to showing that , in this area , the European Union as such can provide added value for the efforts of each individual Member State .
We are setting up a European Refugee Fund for an initial period of five years .
The total appropriation for 2000 is EUR 36 million , which includes EUR 10 million for emergency aid .
I quite understand the rapporteur ' s comments to the effect that this amount is inadequate given the needs and ambitions of the Fund itself .
The Commission has already pointed out to the Parliament ' s Committee on Budgets that it intends to propose , in its preliminary draft budget for 2001 , the financial means to maintain the Fund for the next five years .
In other words , the Commission will propose increasing the EUR 36 million for the year 2000 to EUR 45 million for the following years , thus taking the overall allocation for the five years to EUR 216 million .
This is , I feel , an initial step in the right direction .
The European Refugee Fund is an instrument for solidarity between Member States , intended , as has already been stressed by several speakers , to contribute to balancing the efforts mentioned in Article 63 ( 2b ) of the Treaty .
To this end , a proportional distribution of the resources among the Member States is envisaged : firstly in proportion to the number of asylum requests they receive ( two thirds of the resources ) and secondly in proportion to the number of refugees they accept into their country ( one third of the resources ) .
I can understand why proposals were put forward to consider the number of refugees in relation to the overall population in each Member State .
I must admit that the Commission itself attempted to consider this criterion , but we found it extremely hard to come up with a mathematical formula which did justice to the principle of sharing costs and efforts while including this criterion .
I am perfectly willing to look into any practical solutions but it is not enough to simply state the principle .
A practical solution must be found , and I have to tell you that that is no easy matter .
The European Refugee Fund will be able to cofinance Member State actions up to 50 % , a level which can be increased to 75 % for Member States benefiting from the Cohesion Fund .
The proposed decision also provides for the possibility of financing emergency measures in the event of a massive influx of refugees from a reserve of EUR 10 million .
In this respect , it provides an initial response to the request made by the European Council in Tampere .
Together with my fellow Commissioner , Michaele Schreyer , I have already initiated discussions on the ways of utilising , in the event of an emergency , the maximum possible resources suited to the needs of the situation .
In this area , however , what worries me more than the figures - because , unfortunately or fortunately , the necessary funds cannot be provided to respond to emergencies such as Kosovo - and what we are looking for is some financial and also administrative mechanism sufficiently perfected to fulfil needs efficiently in an emergency situation .
The selection and administration of Fund projects , as regards structural aspects , are delegated to the Member States within the framework of cofinancing requests .
Implementation , monitoring , follow-up and assessment arrangements are based on the existing conditions for Structural Funds .
As regards amendments , the Commission has taken note of all the proposed amendments and can accept , conditional upon some formal reworking , in some cases , the principles behind a number of them which aim to make the objectives of the European Refugee Fund clearer in the introduction , or to make some terms more precise .
One particular case is the mention , in the introduction , of the importance of NGO activities , and there are some useful clarifications , such as transparency in the project selection process , or the need to promote the long-term continuity of projects .
The principle of minimal Fund participation enables each Member State to provide effective support , regardless of the extent of flows of refugees .
The Commission cannot , however , go along with other sets of amendments , particularly those on budgetary methods .
These will , in any case , become irrelevant if the budgetary authority ratifies the Commission ' s proposals to set the allocation for the Fund at EUR 216 million for the five years .
It cannot align itself with the amendments on the Member States ' strategy and on setting up a partnership with the various operators affected by asylum policy .
This is an initial experiment with a decentralised asylum-related programme . The competent national administrations are by no means familiar with these procedures .
In this decision it is important to avoid anything which might add to their workload and slow the process down , without allowing for the fact that the amounts involved are not vast and that if this decision for the year 2000 is adopted this year , that will not leave much time to prepare cofinancing requests .
The Commission proposes to take on board some of the ideas put forward in the amendments in terms of defining the practical arrangements for the implementation of this instrument and for the dialogue to be entered into with the relevant national bodies .
Finally , with regard to the amendments for cooperation with candidate countries , I think we must be quite clear on this .
The Fund is intended to contribute to balancing Member State efforts .
These modest enough resources should not be watered down further by the inclusion of secondary objectives .
Cooperation of this type with the candidate countries would duplicate the action of other programmes , especially the PHARE programme for transposing the legislative acquis and bringing the competent authorities in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe into line .
In conclusion , Mr President , the Commission is delighted to see the European Parliament support this initiative .
I believe that we are now beginning to see the start of a journey dedicated to the values of asylum , a journey which will show that we can all meet the challenge of European solidarity in asylum matters .
Thank you very much , Mr Vitorino .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Electronic money institutions and credit institutions
Mr President , the two directives on supervision of the business of electronic money institutions are of the utmost importance to the development of e-commerce in the European Union .
The aim has been to ensure the financial integrity of electronic money institutions and to help to cultivate an environment which fosters the development of this new means of payment .
Since many of the amendments proposed by the Parliament at first reading have been taken into account , I personally find that the view of the Parliament has been incorporated into the common position to a sufficient extent .
The common position reflects a compromise that has been reached after long negotiations in the Council .
I am very aware of the fact that any amendments to the Council common position are likely to carry a real risk that the directive will be lost in conciliation , since the directive was , and continues to be , a very delicate compromise .
As rapporteur I have tried to avoid pushing the directive to the conciliation procedure .
I made a compromise proposal which , unfortunately , was not accepted in my political group .
I do not think we could reach a conclusion that would serve the interests of all the parties concerned better than this common position does .
So the question for us as Members of the European Parliament is whether the proposed amendments are absolutely necessary compared to the potential risk that we do not get the supervisory framework at all .
That would mean that the situation would remain uncertain from the consumers ' point of view .
I also want to remind colleagues that the amendments now proposed are new and therefore not based on the position Parliament took at first reading .
They are all the amendments proposed by the ECB which were unanimously rejected by the Council .
I am also afraid that by emphasising the position of the European Central Bank in terms of monetary stability control we will cause difficult problems for the Member States which do not belong to the euro-zone .
We have to keep in mind that the ECB has no right of veto when it comes to European Community legislation .
The monetary stability control of the ECB is based on the founding treaties of the EC and it should not be expanded through the provisions of EC directives .
Amendments Nos 1 and 2 add the words " at par value " to the report .
These additional words are not absolutely necessary as Article 3 sets out the terms for redeemability .
In that article it is implicit that redeemability will happen at par value unless there are any reasonable charges which would be deducted from the par value .
In this latter case the additional words would add nothing and be misleading to the consumer .
Adding the words " at par value " to Article 3 ( 1 ) may mislead the consumer since it is always possible to deduct the charges that are strictly necessary to carry out that operation .
According to the common position Member States may allow their competent authorities to waive the application of some or all of the provisions of the proposed directive .
The waiver is possible in cases where the total amount of e-money issued is limited and where the e-money issued is accepted as a means of payments by only a limited number of undertakings .
For example , the waiver could be used for university campus payment cards or for local transport systems .
All these cases are also subject to a maximum storage amount of no more than EUR 150 .
In addition , the waived schemes will not benefit from the Single Market passport provisions .
The business of these limited national schemes cannot , from a financial stability viewpoint , be compared with the business of large e-money schemes or credit institutions .
These limited schemes are not likely to have any spillover effects which could endanger financial market stability .
Furthermore , these national limited schemes will not be unsupervised since the text requires any waiver to be subject to a separate decision by the supervisory authorities .
Waived institutions would therefore always be registered and monitored by the supervisory authorities .
Amendments Nos 3 , 4 and 5 reduce the scope of the waiver .
It was clear in the Council that the price for having a directive was that a waiver would need to be included as an option .
The Council was able to agree its common position only because it felt that a directive , which included a waiver but tightened regulation and permitted competition in a single market , was better than no directive at all .
The Commission took a similar view .
The sooner the directive is adopted and implemented , the sooner the improved regulation will take effect .
If this still raises concerns in practice then the Article 11 review clause is available in reserve .
Mr President , at present there is no requirement for supervision of national e-money schemes .
Therefore I do not believe that the European Parliament should adopt any amendments or there is a risk that the whole directive may be lost .
Mr President , Commissioner , concerning this directive I would basically like to say that it pursues the objectives firstly of responding to the rapid growth in electronic means of payment , secondly of creating a common legal basis for these and , thirdly , of providing a guarantee of liquidity ensuring security and protection for consumers .
We therefore welcome the directive .
We also welcome the fact that the non-banking sector will be subjected in this regard to a degree of banking supervision and that a minimum reserve requirement will be stipulated .
We also welcome the fact that there are no exemptions to the change-back obligation .
The rapporteur has already indicated in her speech that , in spite of this basic affirmation of the direction and necessity of this directive , there were several motions for amendment and also several areas of discussion which went even further .
Although the rapporteur belongs to my Group and I greatly value her commitment , I can nevertheless refute one thing for those delegates who have voiced objections and raised questions , namely the assertion that all the motions for amendment emanate from the European Central Bank .
The European Central Bank cannot put forward amendments here , and it is a slight on all delegates who have submitted amendments to say that they have raised these issues and put forward these amendments ( which , incidentally , were all adopted unanimously in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs ) on behalf of third parties , and not on the basis of their own judgement and responsibility , simply because the report has been adopted unanimously together with the amendments .
What are we talking about here ?
These objections and questions , which do not run counter to the basic affirmation , concern four areas , basically relating to the question of whether the exemption provisions in Article 8 are too extensive and need to be more limited .
They indeed need to be more limited , and the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs has taken up this issue , because the issue is in the area of what consequences these comprehensive exemption provisions will have for monitoring currency holdings .
What effects will these comprehensive exemption provisions have on currency stability ?
Under certain circumstances , could the extensive nature of these exemption provisions not lead to circumventions , thus making the exception the rule ?
This matter of monitoring currency holdings and stability and the matter of whether the exception would not thus become the rule have lead to the motions for amendment .
Should the recommendation be adopted here without any amendments , I would ask that the Commission and the Council make use of what is in the directive and submit to Parliament a brief report on the consequences of the directives with any amendments which might be necessary .
We will monitor this .
Mr President , electronic money does not yet have the same importance in the European Union as e-commerce , e-business , e-Europe .
We must ensure , of course , that we in Europe also increase our competitiveness in this area vis-à-vis the United States .
The introduction of the Euro will undoubtedly have a positive effect and will mean that the time has also come for us to establish uniform regulations to safeguard electronic commerce .
I think that electronic money will gain in importance , not just in commerce but also for consumers , particularly as the safety precautions on the Internet are regarded as inadequate and many are therefore hesitant to choose this option .
It has to be said that electronic money in the European Union today enjoys rarity value rather than common usage .
This must change !
In this regard I must also point out that within the European Union these electronic payment systems also fail to work because interoperability is not guaranteed .
I think that we should do something about this if we want to promote this means of payment in future .
We must also do it in the interests of consumers , because costs will be saved .
However , the issuing of electronic money is not just about the simplification or safeguarding of payment processes , but in practice also concerns financial stability and the functioning of the payment systems .
For this reason we need uniform regulations and we must realise that there will be particular fears if electronic money is issued not just against cash holdings or similar bank account holdings , but if e-money is given on credit .
I think that this is the particular cause of the fear of instability instead of the stability which we want to ensure in the European Union .
I therefore think that Article 8 , which provides for an extension of the conditions for exemption , creates excessive discretionary powers .
This could result in many electronic money institutions not being affected by the regulations applicable to credit institutions .
This cannot and should not be the case and we all know that national issues of e-money can no longer be guaranteed today , if we look at the wording of Article 8c in particular .
The Council ' s amendments , which extend the scope of money , cannot be in the interest of the consumer .
We need electronic money which is valid in a given environment .
For this reason , it must cover the entire European area and not just a national area .
I also think that institutions issuing e-money should be treated as equal .
It is , of course , also important to consider the role of the European Central Bank - controlling the amount of money in circulation , for example .
However , I am thinking primarily of consumers .
Even if e-money can be used without limit on the Internet and for mobile telephones , this does not mean that it might not be counterproductive .
For this reason I cannot support the new wording of Article 8c .
I think that we must do everything possible to increase consumer confidence in the electronic money age and not to build consumer foundations which have no stability .
Mr President , it is very regrettable that this common position , which has been put together with such care by the Council and which paid due respect to the Parliament 's views at first reading , is now in the process of unravelling .
I think we are going to lose a rather useful piece of legislation which would have put in place a necessary supervisory framework for one of the growth areas in financial services , namely the storage of cash on plastic cards and other forms of e-money .
The concerns which have been expressed by the European Central Bank , which have largely , but perhaps not fully , been taken on board , are coming out in a way which is likely to damage the potential for this business to develop .
The concerns , particularly about the waiver , are misguided precisely because it would be very limited : it would be limited to only EUR 150 on any particular card .
Every issuer would be supervised by national authorities and we know that the potential for money-supply growth caused by this sort of issuance would be extremely slight given the sort of schemes which are already operating in a number of Member States : for example , on university campuses a student may be able to use this piece of plastic to buy something in a bar , or in a canteen , or in the university bookshop .
The reality is that other Community central banks - notably the Swedish Riksbank , the Bank of England - do not have these concerns about money creation .
If we look at the reality of the ECB 's concerns over the last few years , we can see that there has not been a stable relationship between the money supply and the growth of nominal income .
There has been a substantial variation in the velocity of circulation because of new developments within the financial services industry and this is merely another one of those .
Therefore , in the years before the ECB took charge of euro-zone monetary policy , the Bundesbank itself was not able to respect the growth of its money supply targets .
What we have here is an attempt , when we see that a particular theory of monetary control is not working and does not accord with reality , to squeeze that reality back into the theory , to the detriment of the innovatory capacity of the Member States and of their financial systems .
That is very regrettable .
There are a lot of safeguards that the Commission has put in here that the Council has carefully discussed and I very much hope that we will fully support the Council common position on this matter .
Mr President , as from January 1999 , the euro has been the new currency for most of the European Union .
Since then there have been no more exchange rate risks and , in theory , the cost to consumers of transferring money across borders and of changing cash from one euro-zone currency to another should have reduced sharply .
There are obligations on financial institutions within the Union to substantially reduce the cost to consumers of transferring money from one euro-zone to the other .
We may recall that the European Consumers ' Association , which represents the consumers of the European Union , carried out an extensive survey of charges for cross-border payments only last year .
The conclusion of that survey clearly demonstrated that costs for consumers of transferring money from one country to another in Europe are still too high .
With the forecast growth in electronic shopping over the next few years , heavy bank fees for money changes will be a serious disincentive for consumers to shop over the Internet .
It is important that consumers are reassured in relation to electronic payments by establishing a legal framework .
This survey also showed that consumers are still charged a lot more for making cross-border transfers than they are for making national transfers .
This does not make sense .
Euro currency has removed exchange rate risks and costs should have reduced substantially .
I welcome the directive on cross-border credit transfers which is now in force within the Union .
In conclusion , I strongly believe that the new directive on cross-border transfers is good news for the consumers of the Union .
It is also good news for financial institutions .
Mr President , like some of the previous speakers this evening , I am very pleased the Council came forward with this proposal .
I do not think that it will be helped by the amendments being proposed inside this Parliament today and indeed in our committee .
Whatever they say about having had to vote for the report as a whole at the end in the committee , it does not persuade me that some committee members did not also have concerns about the effects of some of those amendments .
Some of the opportunities of this nascent market , which we are now seeing emerge in the European Union , will be affected by some of the suggestions being made .
Whereas money supply , of course , is of very direct interest to any central bank , there is in this case no direct inference that it will have the effect that everyone suggests it will have , i.e. that e-money will be anything other than a means of exchange , a redeemable voucher if you like or a mechanism expected to be involved in trade .
Because of the very limits that Mr Huhne talked about , this is , of course , very closely controlled by the Council 's proposed waiver and particularly by some of the sensible compromises suggested earlier .
I personally , and the EPLP Group , could wholeheartedly support something like the compromise Amendment No 5 which Mrs Kauppi put forward in committee ; but I am afraid if Amendments Nos 3 and 4 were adopted here in Parliament this week , we would see this legislation fall .
Be in no doubt about that , this legislation would fall .
I would worry very seriously about the motives of the people who would like to see this legislation fall , because any vacuum which would be created would be a vacuum the European Central Bank would find itself eased into .
As an institution which has kept outside any form of regulation that is decided here or anywhere else , I find that a worrying idea .
Let me ask all comrades and colleagues around this room today to consider the effects of the amendments that could be passed this week , the damage they could cause , the lack of confidence that would surely emerge and the damage it would do to this nascent market .
Mr President , may I begin by expressing the heartfelt thanks of the Commission for the work that has been done by Mrs Kauppi .
We are most appreciative of that work and of her report because it concerns a matter which is of importance , not so much to governments , but in particular to the private citizens of the European Union , as Mrs Randzio-Plath said a little while ago .
May I also express the appreciation of the European Commission for the continuing support from this Parliament for the e-money initiative and , indeed , for all the Commission 's e-commerce initiatives .
The Commission has noticed the high level of cooperation between Parliament , Council and Commission in reaching an early agreement on the e-money proposals .
As evidence thereof perhaps I may cite the high number of amendments put forward by Parliament , amendments which were then accepted by the Council and by the Commission .
We certainly have taken due cognisance of the wishes expressed by this Parliament , and we have done our best to integrate them in the proposals that are now in front of you , as noted by Mr Huhne .
May I , however , express the Commission 's disappointment that Mrs Kauppi 's initial report could not be accepted .
That report recognised the high level of cooperation between Council , Commission and Parliament as well as the delicate nature of the common position .
In relation now to the specific amendments , I should like to say the following .
The first two that deal with redeemability at par value introduce unnecessary legal uncertainty into the text .
The provision on redeemability , which was proposed by this Parliament at the first reading - a first reading which took place almost a year ago - and was accepted by the Council , is clear .
It means that e-money must be redeemed for cash on request minus any deductions for legitimate costs in carrying out the transactions .
It seems to me that is a perfectly reasonable position .
The recognition of allowing the deduction of reasonable costs conflicts with an obligation to redeem at par value .
On this basis , and for this reason , I cannot regrettably accept the first two amendments .
Amendments Nos 3 and 4 propose substantially to limit the circumstances in which Member States may waive the application of some or all of the provisions of the directive to certain limited electronic money schemes ; here I am concerned because of a misunderstanding on the waiver provisions .
These provisions are optional , they are limited in their application to specific identifiable schemes and they are on a case by case basis .
May I add that schemes which benefit from any waiver will not benefit from the European passport .
They will continue to be credit institutions and therefore fall within the monetary control of the European Central Bank in the euro-zone .
Therefore , the justification for their deletion on the basis of monetary policy concerns is unfounded .
They continue to report to the competent authorities on a periodic basis .
While on this point , I should like to say that I am a little intrigued by questions put and remarks made by Members of this Parliament on monetary stability and monetary supply .
As stated by Mr Skinner , under the e-money procedure the customer first pays in his money and then gets the equivalent amount of electronic money .
In other words , in the whole process not an iota of money is created .
Therefore considerations of monetary supply or monetary stability - as one Member put it , e-money as a vector of credit - simply do not apply .
E-money does not mean that money is created .
It means that money is paid into an institution and received in another form , but it is the same amount of money .
Therefore I should like to lay these apprehensions to rest .
There is no possibility that monetary instability will arise from the phenomenon of e-money .
Returning to the waiver provisions , if the directive should fail because of deletion of the waiver provisions - and Parliament originally proposed they should be extended - there is a very real possibility that it will prove very difficult , if not impossible , to harmonise e-money rules in the future .
We want those rules .
We want them to be harmonised , not least because the citizens of the European Union want that .
If these two directives fail it will be detrimental to European consumers , businesses and the whole e-commerce initiative .
If there are legitimate concerns or if issues which have not yet been identified arise in the next few years , they can always be taken into account in the review of the application of the directives .
The Commission is committed to a review , which will take place three years after the coming into force of the directives .
Regrettably , therefore , I cannot accept Amendments Nos 3 or 4 .
As far as the Commission is concerned we would like them to be rejected by Parliament , in the same way as Amendments Nos 1 and 2 will hopefully be rejected .
Turning to Amendment No 5 , which amends the text so as to prohibit Member States from waiving the redeemability requirement but does not limit in any other way the provisions of Article 8 allowing Member States to waive the provisions of the directive in respect of certain limited schemes , the Commission 's view of this amendment is somewhat less unfriendly than it is regarding Amendments Nos 1 to 4 .
Still , we would support the view expressed by Mrs Kauppi , who said that it would be best for all concerned , if all five amendments were rejected .
In the light of these considerations , I ask Parliament most earnestly to reconsider its amendments for fear that the directives will be lost and deformed in the conciliation process .
That concludes the debate .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Animal nutrition inspections
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0084 / 2000 ) on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council directive 95 / 53 / EC fixing the principles governing the organisation of official inspections in the field of animal nutrition 10804 / 1 / 1999 - C5-0273 / 1999 - 1998 / 0301 ( COD ) ( Rapporteur : Mr Staes )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , practice has shown that scandals and crises can have a cleansing effect and can help improve legislation .
This is most certainly the case for all legislation related to food safety , either directly or indirectly .
There are ample examples to prove this .
It is now more than 20 years , for example , since the discovery of the presence of female sex hormones in jars of baby food led directly to the hormone directives being issued in 1981 and 1985 and revised in 1988 .
Another example is the clenbuterol scandal which led to the slaughter of more than 15 000 calves in North Rhine-Westphalia in 1988 and which brought about a change in the original legislation of the hormone directives in 1996 .
In Flanders , where I come from , we now have what I would term , without hesitation , the strictest national hormone legislation in Europe following a whole series of attacks on meat inspectors and the murder of the devoted veterinary surgeon , Karel Van Noppen .
Scandals can have a cleansing effect .
This is also evident today as we scrutinise the amendment to Directive 95 / 53 at second reading .
Once again , this amendment has been prompted by a minor scandal , namely the importing of citrus pulp from Brazil contaminated with dioxin .
Citrus pulp is used as a feed for dairy cows and this is how dioxin ended up in milk for public consumption .
The authorities in Baden-Württemberg discovered this , got the ball rolling and established that between December 1997 and February 1998 , a total of nearly 106 000 tonnes of contaminated pulp entered the European Union .
The scandal taught us that the Commission did not have the means to act forcefully in emergencies .
As a result , the Commission presented , at the request of the Member States , a proposal to amend the present directive on 4 November 1998 .
As early as 16 December of that same year , Parliament assented to this proposal without tabling one single amendment .
After the Treaty of Amsterdam came into effect , the Commission immediately changed the legal basis of 100 A to 152 .
On 15 November last , the Council laid down the present common position .
The Council made a few editorial changes , which were not a problem for us at the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
What does cause a problem for us , however , is the way in which the Council has robbed the Commission of the ability to act immediately in case of an emergency .
I will have to put my technical hat on for a moment and mention the tangle of comitology legislation because , since the Commission proposal has been submitted , comitology legislation has been changed and , from now on , Council Decision 1999 / 468 applies .
This legislation offers us various procedures for transferring the powers of the Council to the Commission .
Today , we should focus on Articles 5 and 6 of the Council Decision .
Article 5 provides for a regulatory procedure , Article 6 for a safeguard procedure .
The original Commission proposal , as it was approved by our Parliament at first reading , was clearly written in the spirit of the existing safeguard procedure .
The Council would now like to do away with it in its common position and replace it by the regulatory procedure .
It should , however , be clear to all MEPs that the Commission cannot act independently according to this latter procedure and must always seek permission from the Council .
After the citrus pulp scandal , the Member States themselves requested that the Commission should act .
I am of the opinion that we should give the Commission the opportunity to act swiftly .
The four amendments which have been tabled aim to ensure that Article 6 of comitology legislation , i.e. the safeguard procedure , can be applied .
The Commission will then be able to act immediately in cases of emergency and can then , for example , suspend the importing of products which would harm public and animal health .
The Council will then have 30 days to change , supplement or even reverse this decision .
If the Council fails to act during these 30 days , the measures enacted by the Commission will then lapse .
I believe that this is good working practice - so far , the Council has never abused this kind of power - and it therefore deserves our support , against the wishes of the Council .
We should all bear in mind that this dossier is only an intermediate step .
On the day my report was approved in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , the European Commission submitted a new proposal to amend Directive 95 / 53 / EC .
It immediately drew lessons from the dioxin crisis .
If Parliament and the Council adopt the same line as the Commission , a whole chapter will be devoted to further developing the safeguard clause and animal feed will come under a rapid system .
In fact , these matters are included in the White Paper and have helped the Commission keep its initial promises on the White Paper with regard to food safety .
Mr President , I am in favour of adopting the four amendments tomorrow and thus giving the Commission our full support .
We should join forces with the Commission against the Council and move towards a conciliation procedure .
Mr President , Commissioner , in recent years the numerous problems and crises in the area of animal nutrition have sadly brought home to us the importance of official animal nutrition inspections .
The rapporteur , Mr Staes , has mentioned some here .
We know that animal feedingstuffs are the first link in the food chain which ends with humans , and animal feedingstuffs must therefore be safe .
BSE and dioxin are only the best known watchwords in this area , which repeatedly make many in the European Union flinch and ask questions to which we , as those with political responsibility , must provide answers .
Such questions as : what advantage is there in the internal market if it can lead to unchecked dangers ?
Who is protecting us and who is providing the safeguards ?
Europe has a responsibility and a duty in this regard : we are obliged to manage the internal market , which we have created and which we all want , so that risks , not least to the life and well-being of our citizens and consumers , are kept to a minimum , with the aim of eventually eliminating them altogether .
The proposed amendment of Directive 95 / 53 / EC fixing the principles governing the organisation of official inspections in the field of animal nutrition is intended to create a legal basis for a harmonised procedure for checking documents and inspecting goods from third countries .
With the consent of these countries , it will also be possible to carry out on-the-spot inspections .
This is justified because anyone who wants to trade with us must meet our conditions and supply safe goods .
In respect of the Commission proposal , which Parliament approved at first reading without amendments , the Council has now made amendments to its common position which we do not wish to support .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy is now submitting four amendments in plenary to Mr Staes ' s report .
This report has been adopted unanimously in committee and will therefore be supported by all groups .
The original Commission proposal has thus been readopted by us .
We consider that it is absolutely imperative that in urgent cases we can act rapidly .
Unfortunately , experience shows that safety is not created by good rules alone , but that it also requires an inspection system with the necessary powers of access which can act rapidly and , if need be , impose effective sanctions .
The Commission must be given the necessary powers here as guardian of the treaties .
This is why , in the Environment Committee , the European People ' s Party supported the amendment of Article 9a of the directive for official animal nutrition inspections , which grants the European Commission the right of initiative in cases of acute danger , empowering them to independently initiate measures in line with the severity of the grievance and within the framework of proportionality .
The Council is then obliged , within 30 days , to process these measures , to validate them and to legitimise or , if necessary , reject them .
I do not think we need a new committee ; we already have the permanent animal nutrition committee .
In Germany we have a saying which runs : " when I don ' t know what to do next , I appoint a committee " .
Too many committees cause delays and , ultimately , confusion .
We must use the existing facilities and use them efficiently .
Europe and the internal market can only exist if they are also accepted by the citizens and the consumers .
For this they need confidence , and confidence only comes through openness and transparency .
The scandals which we have all discussed show that transparency and openness are becoming more and more important .
The Member States , the Council and the European Commission must look upon one another as natural partners which support one another and work together constructively to protect citizens and consumers in a manner which engenders confidence .
Finally , I must sincerely thank the rapporteur for his excellent work and balanced report .
Mr President , the rapporteur said in his introduction that crises have a cleansing effect .
I listened to him and hope that what he said is right .
He is evidently more optimistic than I am .
I do not really think that crises have a purifying effect .
If crises were to have a purifying effect , then Agriculture Ministers would have rather more understanding than they evidently do .
Once again we are sitting and standing in this Parliament at a time when we are , for the most part , agreed among ourselves and with the Commission , whilst the person with whom we do not agree , namely the Council representative , is absent .
Such is life !
It would be nice if he could be made aware of this , but that is probably unlikely .
The rapporteur , and also Mrs Klaß , who has just spoken , have pointed out that Parliament allowed the Commission proposal to pass through first reading unamended .
This means that the institutions who are not always in agreement were , on this occasion , agreed .
And what has the Council learnt from this ?
It was the Council ( and I say this again in all clarity , drawing in part on my own experiences of recent years ) which basically got us into the BSE scandal .
It was not this Parliament , and only to a very minor extent the Commission . It was the Council of Ministers who tried repeatedly to keep things under wraps .
So what has it learnt from the BSE crisis ?
Has it learnt that it is better to be transparent ?
Has it learnt that it is better to permit safeguard options and safeguard clauses ?
Has it learnt that rapid action is needed ?
It has learnt none of these things !
It has submitted to us a common position in which the option to have a safeguard clause will actually be taken away from the Commission .
It will not have the option to get involved quickly and unbureaucratically on the basis of safeguard clauses .
It will also not have the option to make unannounced on-the-spot inspections .
It will not be in a position to act quickly .
And it will also not need to inform the European Parliament , nor will it need to publish any inspection reports lest , heaven forbid , the public finds out something which worries it .
It is better to leave things in the hands of the Agriculture Ministers .
I can see the Council representative writing busily and I hope that this will also be passed on to the Presidency and the other members of the Council of Agriculture Ministers .
I am sorry if I am not being very amiable at the moment , and particularly with my cold I would much rather be mellow , but the fact is I am not .
I consider this common position to be scandalous !
It is we who have worked for untainted animal feedingstuffs in recent years , we who established that we got BSE because animal feedingstuffs were mixed in a way in which they should never have been mixed , we who established that there just happens to be dioxin in the peel of oranges and other fruits and that we have it in our animal feed , we who established that sewage sludge has no place in animal feedingstuffs , we who established that hormones should not accelerate growth and do not belong in animal feedingstuffs , we who established that there is no place for antibiotics , nor cough medicines for calves - we have established all these things ; my goodness , I am making more agricultural policy , and I come from the constituency of Berlin , which is a purely urban constituency , than my voters can imagine , because it is consumer protection policy - and if we know all of this , then what is the Council learning from it ?
Yet again we are providing an example here right across all the groups , the rapporteur , Mrs Klaß , who has just spoken for her group , and me for my group , of how the institutions work closely together .
We support , Mr Byrne , the fact that you will have the opportunities which you need in the Commission in Brussels , for example via the Food and Veterinary Office in Dublin , that will enable you to carry out rapid inspections and take safeguard measures , so that we are actually able to say to consumers that we genuinely care about safe food , and safe feedingstuffs and animal nutrition inspections are the first step in all this .
I thank you for the fact that you will obviously now be able to table a motion for the primary inspection of European Union products , not just , as in this instance , products from third countries .
It only makes sense if we prevent this in unison and only then , Commissioner , does the White Paper on food safety , which you have presented , also make sense .
I therefore hope that , tomorrow , we will actually slap the Council of Ministers in the face by unanimously affirming the rapporteur ' s four amendments .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I do not have time to philosophise in just one minute .
The important thing , then , is to thank the Commission , and our rapporteur , Mr Staes , for having finally made sense of the White Paper presented by Romano Prodi , which included a chapter on the food chain and animal feedingstuffs .
Animals are just the first link in the chain which leads ultimately to human beings .
But our impression is that the Council does not see this .
The Council does not appear to see that , after the dioxin crisis , every day since the start of the year there have been cases of mad cows just about everywhere in Europe .
The Council does not therefore see what we have seen , which is that as a follow-up to European legislation it is necessary to have structures to monitor and take fast action in the event of a problem .
In the context of the forthcoming establishment of the European health authority , it would therefore be advisable to allocate this body real resources in order to enable fast detection and thus prevent contagion .
It would also be advisable that all animal feed industry operators should sign proper specifications with the competent health authorities that aim to reduce accidents as much as possible and that accept certain thresholds , making it possible to take any additive raw material or animal feedingstuff components out of circulation , and thus helping to restore consumer confidence .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Staes for his report on the organisation of inspections in the field of animal nutrition and for the broad support that was also given to the Commission position by Mr Olsson , Mrs Klaß and Mrs Roth-Behrendt .
I particularly appreciate the good collaboration with Parliament in this case .
Already at first reading , Parliament fully supported the Commission 's proposal .
The proposal aims at improving control measures in the field of animal nutrition .
It intends to harmonise inspection procedures for all products imported from third countries .
In 1998 , the detection of dioxin in some raw materials imported into the Community showed the need for a legal basis to permit the Commission when confronted by a serious risk to public health to adopt safeguard measures on products from third countries .
The proposal also extends the legal basis to carry out on-the-spot inspections , both in Member States and in third countries .
I have to say that I was surprised by the Council 's rejection of the Commission proposal for the safeguard clause and by the introduction of a committee procedure that will not guarantee that a prompt decision is taken in the event of a serious risk to human or animal health .
As a matter of fact , the dioxin contamination has clearly shown how important rapid action is , in particular when a danger spreads from the feed to the food chain .
I should also highlight the fact that similar provisions already exist in food and veterinary legislation and there is no evidence of misuse of this instrument .
The Commission , although not opposed to most of the amendments made by the Council , strongly rejected the Council amendment concerning the safeguard procedure .
Council has denied the possibility for the Commission to take immediate action in emergency cases without consulting Member States beforehand .
The possibility for the Commission situations to react quickly in emergency cases even before consulting Member States is a landmark question .
The discussion in the present case constitutes an important precedent for the future .
Following the dioxin crisis of May 1999 , the Commission announced legislative acts to improve the legal provisions regulating feed safety .
In the recent proposal to the European Parliament and to the Council adopted on 21 March , the Commission introduced the same safeguard clause concerning feedingstuffs produced within the European Union .
Consequently , this question will also be relevant for several measures on feedingstuffs which are of vital importance and which are announced in the White Paper on food safety .
For all these reasons , I can fully accept Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , and 4 by which Parliament reintroduces the original provision on safeguard procedures .
Although it is not so important as the other amendments , I can also accept Amendment No 3 regarding the carrying out of on-the-spot inspections .
In the light of the plenary 's support for the amendments put forward by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , I will press once more on the Council the strong case for supporting the proposal 's original provisions .
That concludes the debate .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 12 noon .
Food additives other than colours and sweeteners
The next item is the report by Mr Lannoye ( A5-0072 / 2000 ) , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Directive 95 / 2 on food additives other than colours and sweeteners COM ( 1999 ) 329 - C5-0068 / 1999 - 1999 / 0158 ( COD ) .
- ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are now going to discuss a second aspect of the food safety issue .
The fact is , over the years , more and more additives have been used in foodstuffs , in connection , in particular , with the industrialisation of food production .
When I say ' more and more ' , you only have to look at the figures .
A survey of the current situation shows that 307 additives are authorised within the European Union .
We are effectively working with a positive list .
All the additives given on this list are authorised ; any not included are , by the same token , prohibited .
That makes 307 authorised additives , only 163 of which may be considered as totally harmless , indicating that many others are either suspect or actually cause food safety-related problems .
I am thinking in particular of the problem of allergies .
What is being proposed today ?
Not reducing the list , but extending it a little further since the Commission has made nine proposals , either to add certain additives to the list or to extend the uses of some already authorised additives .
In principle , there are three criteria governing the acceptance of a new additive : technological need , usefulness for the consumer and harmlessness .
It must be acknowledged that , in the course of time , technological need has always been the predominant criterion .
It is not that the criterion of harmlessness has been ignored , just that it has been modified slightly over time .
It is common knowledge today that the precautionary principle was practically unheard of seven or eight years ago , whereas today it has come to the fore .
The situation must therefore be reviewed from a different perspective to the one we took a few years ago .
I therefore find it quite astounding - as indeed does the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy - that a number of additives are being proposed for inclusion , for which we do not have assurances .
Of the Commission ' s nine proposals , we think that five are suspect for one reason or another .
I shall mention them quickly .
Firstly , an additive called sodium alginate is proposed for use on grated carrots .
The usefulness for the consumer is that the grated carrots will appear to be ' fresh ' even though they are actually not .
This is quite clear , just from reading the relevant literature .
As for the risks to the consumer , apparently these are not very significant , but the Scientific Committees which have looked into the matter do consider that the laxative effect of this additive is likely to combine with other problems of the same type .
It is not , therefore , necessarily to be recommended .
In consideration of the fact that this involves deception of the consumer rather than improving the situation for the consumer , our opinion is that this additive must not be accepted .
There is another additive which presents a huge problem , E467 .
I will refrain from giving its official name because it is far too long and complex , and I think it would be even harder to translate .
E467 is problematic in terms of assessing its harmlessness , because it contains extremely dangerous impurities .
One such impurity is ethylene oxide , which the relevant scientific authorities recognise is a proven carcinogen .
We must consequently reject this one too .
Finally , three other additives are proposed as propellants .
These are inflammable gases - butane , isobutane and propane .
In view of the fact that there are alternative solutions - the technological need is therefore a real one , but it can be fulfilled by other additives - and that , in addition , after cooking , after the use of these products , the residues in the form of organic products are not , a priori , harmless , we consider that these additives cannot be approved either .
That is a brief overview of the problem .
As far as we are concerned there are five additives which should not be authorised , and the four others do not seem to present any problem , based on a reading of the scientific literature about them .
As we are not absolutist , we consider that they may be accepted .
I think it is important , Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , to reverse the trend in the current legislation on additives .
The Commission has announced a radical revision of the directive .
I think we would be sending out a positive message if we indicated that we do not wish to maintain the attitude which has dominated for years , allowing the number of additives to grow and grow , even though we know nothing about their synergistic effects in combination .
Quite the contrary , we think we should move towards a much more limited list , and remove the most suspect additives from the list .
I have counted around fifty of these myself .
Others should be used far less widely .
I am thinking , for example , of nitrites , nitrates and sulphites which are known to present proven health problems .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to thank the rapporteur for his thorough work but , in my opinion , the preparatory work has been carried out far too meticulously , with too much weight given to the precautionary principle .
I would like to draw your attention to some of the issues that have been raised in this opinion of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy .
The Committee found that the proposal for a directive does not follow the procedure specified for the basic directive on additives .
The amendments in the Commission ' s proposal are based on the needs expressed by a Member State , and the Scientific Committee for Food has delivered a favourable opinion on the amendments in question .
Now we are talking about allowing the use of a few new additives .
The rapporteur and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy have , however , treated the proposal heavy-handedly and are proposing that the use of most of the new additives mentioned in the Commission ' s proposal be rejected .
This raises a few questions .
The Scientific Committee for Food has delivered a favourable report on proposals by Member States concerning additives .
Has it not shown itself capable of the task in question or has the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy indeed gone too far in its interpretation of the precautionary principle ?
To what extent has the point of view of industry been taken into account in the report ?
Should not the question of innovations and the use of better additives , as well as competitiveness of the European food industry , be given greater consideration ?
We might also ask how Parliament in future will manage its enormous task if it tackles issues so meticulously .
Should Parliament not decide on goals and procedures whereby matters such as the safe introduction of new additives can be assured ?
If the report is adopted in the form in which it has been presented , could not the adoption procedure regarding new additives be reformed once and for all and the whole additives list revised ?
I would ask the rapporteur in question , and the representative of the Commission also , to reply to these questions .
Mr President , the way in which we feed ourselves is an expression of how we live .
Some people criticise what I would call the modern western lifestyle , rightly or wrongly .
The answer to this question is often determined by the choices we make .
What matters to the European People ' s Party is that the consumer has choices .
This presupposes both the availability of information and the guarantee that what is on offer on the market does not present any health risks and that all products are manufactured in accordance with current rules and procedures .
As far as additives are concerned , the basic rules are enshrined in the 1989 Framework Directive .
This directive stipulates that an additive shall only be admitted if there is sufficient technological need , if there is no risk to the health of the consumer and if the consumer is not misled in the process .
In our view , the latter condition has not been met regarding the admission of sodium alginate in peeled and sliced carrots .
If consumers buy fresh carrots , they must be able to assume that these are untreated and not processed and they do not expect them to be dipped in a preservative .
To assess whether the use of additives is necessary , the Framework Directive lists various accepted objectives .
One of these is the supply of ingredients or components of foodstuffs to patients with dietary needs .
The use of E 467 - I will not attempt to pronounce the full word - as proposed by the Commission , seems to meet this requirement .
Finally , the Framework Directive also stipulates that facilitating the manufacture and preparation of foodstuffs is an acceptable criterion of usefulness .
In the light of this , our Group is not really opposed to permitting three additives in baking sprays , unlike the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
All other amendments tabled by this committee receive our support , including the amendment tabled by the PSE Group .
I would like to add the following if you will allow me . Firstly : the rapporteur who , incidentally , has worked extremely hard - I have rarely seen a rapporteur put so much effort into one report and I would like to congratulate him on this - has every right to complain about the Commission providing Parliament with insufficient information in the COM document .
Something was added at the end , but I do not think that this is the way forward and I would like to find out from the Commissioner whether he intends to do anything about this in the future .
Secondly , the effects on public health must obviously be assessed on a scientific basis .
For this purpose , we call on the Scientific Committee for Food for scientific opinions .
After the BSE crisis , the Scientific Committees were reformed at our request and , as we have said before , they have been reformed to our satisfaction .
We now have to make a decision : either we accept the opinions of the Scientific Committees in principle , or we do not ; but then these Scientific Committees will need to be reformed once again . We cannot do a bit of both .
I fear that if we do not , out of principle almost , accept the conclusions reached by the Scientific Committees , this will cost us and the legislation we draft dearly in terms of credibility , and we will then end up replacing the expertise of the scientists in the Scientific Committees by our own convictions . This is something I find difficult to come to terms with .
Thirdly , I would like to know from the Commission if it intends to screen the permitted additives at set times and examine these according to state-of-the-art technology , as the rapporteur has asked in his explanatory note , and quite rightly so .
Fourthly , and on a final note , I would like to say a few words on the hierarchy of standards .
We have asked for a hierarchy of standards in the IGC report and we have also mentioned this elsewhere .
Could the Commissioner tell me whether he thinks that lists of additives should be drafted or completed within the European Parliament and the Council , preferably according to a codecision procedure , or is this a task which , in his opinion , should be carried out by an authorised executive body ?
Mr President , our foodstuffs - and this also applies to entirely fresh produce , for example the peeled carrots we heard mentioned today - are nowadays doctored in all kinds of ways with colouring agents , sweeteners , flavour enhancers and preservatives , in fact with every possible type of substance .
And all in order to disguise the products ' natural characteristics .
It is , of course , not just a few substances we are talking about . Nowadays , we use several thousands of additives and , where the majority of these are concerned , the fact is that we are not even aware of their consequences for health .
To top it all , we are in fact aware that a large number of them are harmful , and yet we still allow them to be used .
I think that Community policy in relation to the use of additives has developed in a quite irresponsible way .
I should therefore like to support Mr Lannoye ' s report .
I think a splendid piece of work has been carried out .
New additives ought to be refused and any increase in the quantity of accepted and permitted substances should be rejected .
Instead , I think the Commission needs seriously to rationalise the number of additives .
In the general remarks in his report , Mr Lannoye points to many substances which ought to be investigated , including antibiotics added directly to foodstuffs .
I should like to point out a further problem .
It is a problem which Mr Lannoye also mentioned in his intervention , namely the question of adding nitrates and nitrites to meat products .
In my opinion , the quantities of these compounds that are permitted are way too excessive .
A major investigation by five consumer organisations in Europe has recently shown that a large proportion of meat products contains quite large quantities of nitrosamines .
Nitrosamine is a carcinogenic substance which is derived from , and produced by , nitrates and nitrites .
I think the situation is unacceptable in this area , but I do not see the investigation having made any impression upon the Commission .
I think that the quantity of nitrates and nitrites added to meat products ought to be considerably reduced and that there should be compulsory monitoring of the quantity of nitrosamine which , as I said , is of course a powerfully carcinogenic substance , the presence of which in our foodstuffs is not presently measured at all .
I hope that Commissioner Byrne , who has assumed responsibility for this area , will examine the question of added amounts of nitrates and nitrites .
I think we have a serious problem in this regard and I hope he will confirm that this will be done .
Finally , I would say that , in my view , we need quite a thorough rationalisation of the quantity of additives in our foodstuffs .
Mr President , the report is concerned with supplementing a list of permitted additives with additional foodstuff additives , other than colouring agents and flavourings .
This means that the Commission suggests supplementing the list with additives which have not yet been used .
It does not , however , mean deleting any additives from the list .
In terms of food and food safety , the needs and wishes of the consumer need to be given more consideration than has been the case in the past .
That does not mean , of course , that we can ignore the interests of the foodstuff manufacturers or that we should turn our back on modern food production methods , as Mr Pojarno mentioned a moment ago .
It does mean , however , that food safety must be at the top of the agenda .
Whilst many additives are harmless , this does not mean that they all are .
And if harmlessness has not been established 100 % , there is no doubt that the only correct way forward is to ban the use of the product .
In addition , it is useful to get manufacturers to spell out the benefit of adding substances for the consumer .
The example of E401 or sodium alginate - a word which I can pronounce - has been mentioned . This makes stale carrots look fresh .
What consumer interest is served by doing this ?
What is in the interests of the consumer differs from one consumer to another and from one consumer group to the next .
But what is clear is that all consumers benefit from sound consumer information so that they are not misled .
This report literally takes a refreshing look at the problem , and not before time .
The rapporteur is to be congratulated on this and the report can count on the support of the liberal group .
Mr President , naturally we too wish to congratulate our colleagues .
Mr Lannoye has done an excellent job ; indeed , he has achieved what the Commission failed to .
The Commission only offers talk of the precautionary principle , whereas Mr Lannoye has shown in his report that it is also about implementing it in practice and actually making the precautionary principle a keynote .
I also fail to see what the Commission promised , i.e. transparency .
It is nothing less than consumer deception if we are giving the illusion of freshness which does not in reality exist .
Commissioner , you must finally come clean as to why you are not envisaging that unpacked foodstuffs , in particular fruit and vegetables , should also be compulsorily labelled .
I would also like to once again stress what Mr Lannoye has said .
This report makes clear that we need a reform of additives .
We cannot place hundreds of additives on the market simply because industry wants it .
It has nothing to do with competition that we reject what the Commission is proposing .
We actually need , as in Japan , a limited list of 70-100 additives and I would have liked to know what the Commissioner thinks of this .
Industry will then have to decide the ones it wants .
That would at least be an innovative viewpoint which makes competition the basis .
Mr Lannoye is right that we must lay our cards on the table in this regard and do justice to the precautionary principle .
Mr President , I should like to start by saying that , with Paul Lannoye as rapporteur , the report concerned has been placed in very competent hands , and I am able fully to support all his conclusions .
As is well known , there are three prior conditions which must be fulfilled if additives are to be included on the positive list .
There should be a technological need , the product should be useful to the consumer and there should be documentary proof of its being harmless .
Paul Lannoye rightly points out that none of the prerequisites are present in the case of sodium alginate .
The substance is not useful to the consumer . On the contrary , it directly misleads the consumer by making sliced carrots look fresh , even if they are not .
It is also very unfortunate that the synergy effect has not been investigated .
It is , on principle , very alarming that the Commission should be able to extend the list of additives just because the substances are permitted in parts of the EU .
This rule ought to be changed so that an additive can only be put on the positive list if there is a clearly documented technological need for it which is also , mind you , of benefit to consumers .
It is ironic to be having to deal with this proposal such a short time after the publication of the Commission ' s White Paper on Foodstuffs .
In the white paper , the Commission itself attaches importance to limiting the consumption of additives in order - as the Commission puts it - to thereby avoid negative effects on health .
The Commission also states that it wishes to guide consumers as best it can so that they themselves can make a choice .
On examining this proposed directive , the conclusion has to be drawn that there is very little connection between words and deeds in the EU ' s handling of additives .
I seem to remember that the original intention in drafting a positive list was partly that it should be possible to decide to remove additives from the list .
Current liberalisation of the quantity of permitted additives is worrying .
Let us , therefore , have the list shortened as soon as possible rather than extended .
In addition to what Mr Lund has said about nitrites and nitrates , I would mention that , in the course of the last part-session , I asked the Commission if the newly discovered scientific facts about these two substances ' effects on health had caused the Commission to review its position .
The answer was unfortunately ' no ' and , in common with Mr Lund , I should like to see that ' no ' justified here today .
Mr President , I share in principle the opinion of the rapporteur that new additives in foodstuffs should not be approved if there is no actual need for them .
However , I would like to point out that we ought to consider the fact that there might be a regional or national tradition that justifies the approval of an additive .
The additive I am thinking of in this regard is ethylhydroxyethylcellulose .
This substance is no luxury and it is not addictive .
Ethylhydroxyethylcellulose has , however , been used for more than 20 years in Sweden and Finland , and I think also in Norway , as a binding agent in gluten-free bread and pastries .
It is used in order to prevent gluten-free bread and pastries from crumbling apart and in order that the relatively small group of people with an intolerance for gluten are able to eat bread and pastries in the same form as other healthy people .
Ethylhydroxyethylcellulose is particularly suitable for the kind of bread traditionally made in the northern region of the EU .
The substance is , therefore , not completely exchangeable for other , already approved types of cellulose .
The rapporteur claims that there is a risk of contaminants in ethylhydroxyethylcellulose that could have a carcinogenic effect and also suggests that high doses could have a laxative effect .
However , I maintain that in reality the opposite may be true .
The fact that the bread sticks together and does not have to be eaten with a spoon because it has broken into a mass of crumbs is particularly important for children with gluten intolerance .
These children have difficulty understanding why they should have to eat breadcrumbs when other children eat whole bread that does not crumble into pieces .
If children are careless about their diet , there is an increased risk of malnutrition .
If children with gluten intolerance abandon the breadcrumbs and eat normal bread , they will suffer from stomach pain and they can then develop diarrhoea .
In the long term , there is probably also an increased risk of contracting cancer of the stomach or intestine .
For many families with gluten intolerant children , life is very difficult and the extra work involved in managing their diet is tremendous .
These families cannot buy their bread , but have to make it themselves and add the binding agent themselves .
Why should we make life even more difficult for these families ?
Why should they not be allowed to continue to use the binding agent that they are used to using ?
Not approving ethylhydroxyethylcellulose makes life more difficult for people with gluten intolerance and for families with gluten intolerant children .
In this case it is not possible to invoke the precautionary principle in order to ban the substance .
On the contrary , the precautionary principle favours the approval of ethylhydroxyethylcellulose .
Mr President , like everyone else in this debate I should like to congratulate Mr Lannoye .
He and I sometimes cross swords on the issue of other nutritious additives , but in this case we are looking very much at the essence of the burden of proof before this list is yet further extended .
He has done a service to the committee and also to this House by pointing out that this procedure appears to be almost always one-way .

We need to hear from the Commission on two points of principle : the first is whether the procedures themselves need review as the Commission spokesman suggested in the debate in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy ; secondly , whether there is a more efficacious way of removing additives as well as bringing them into effect .
It seems to us that the list is getting larger and that the burden of proof must remain with those , be they in Member States , in the Commission or in the Scientific Committees , who want us to adapt these things .
I am prepared to accept that some of these are harmless .
Indeed , the committee and even Mr Lannoye were prepared to accept E949 and E650 .
However , whilst I would not claim to be an expert - as no other member of the committee would - on the issue of which of the various propellant sprays can safely be used , enough doubts were raised in committee , not least when we heard from the representative of the Commission , about the propellant sprays themselves .
These are apparently needed by manufacturers because they produce an equal spray of fat on the utensil concerned .
One of them is there only for professional use .
The other two are regarded as safe for all .
We all want to look again at this issue and see why they have been chosen and whether we might now hold back any clearance of them , at least until the review which is suggested has been carried through .
With regard to the two amendments , my Group , whilst it supports the spirit of what Mr Lannoye proposes in Amendment No 1 , would not go as far as this to write the precautionary principle itself into this particular directive .
It does not seem to us to be the right place for it .
We would prefer to strike out recital 5 and we shall so vote .
This is the place to discuss the burden of proof rather than the overall principle of precaution .
Finally , as regards Amendment No 2 in the name of my Group , this is purely a drafting amendment to remove references to the codecision procedure .
But its meaning remains crystal clear .
We do not think these additions should be made unless it can be demonstrated that the consumer benefits .
At the end of the line it is for the consumer that this is being done .
It is being done in the consumer 's name .
For that reason we commend Amendment No 2 .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the recent dioxin and mad cow scandals have amply demonstrated , if indeed there was any need , that consumers now want to have every possible guarantee as to the quality of their food .
In this respect , the Lannoye report provides one more classic example .
The rapporteur rightly wonders if the additives added to our foodstuffs are really necessary and , more especially , if they are really harmless .
What are we discussing here ?
The total of 307 additives authorised by the European Union , only 163 of which are completely harmless , as Paul Lannoye has just pointed out .
Who stands to gain from the inclusion of additives , of chemicals , in our meals ?
Certainly not the consumers , who are now increasingly looking to find 100 % healthy food for themselves and for their children .
In this respect , without going into the technical details , I should like to go back over the three criteria highlighted in the report .
On the one hand , do the additives meet a technological need ?
The least that can be said is that consumer interests are not always in line with the interests of manufacturing firms .
On the other hand , are the additives useful to the consumer ?
On this subject , the rapporteur highlights at least one case where this mistaken conclusion may be drawn ; is stopping an ageing grated carrot going soft and losing colour - as it ought to - not , in the final analysis , a form of deception ?
The question answers itself .
Finally , is it certain that the additive is harmless ?
Once again our thinking must be guided by the precautionary principle , since selecting a carrot which has had the E401 face-lift treatment also involves - and this is something the customer is not aware of , or not generally at least - running the risk of potentially unpleasant side-effects which cannot be ignored or played down .
In conclusion , the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party will support the Lannoye report because it makes a practical contribution to improving consumers ' quality of life and , moreover , guaranteeing honesty with regard to what is on our plates .
That is the prime consideration .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Lannoye for his report on the Commission proposal to amend European Parliament and Council Directive 95 / 2 on food additives other than colours and sweeteners .
The Commission considers that Directive 95 / 2 needs to be adapted in the light of recent technical and scientific developments .
Our proposal is based on three main principles .
Approved additives are safe and present no risk to public health .
Safety issues are evaluated by the Scientific Committee for Food .
Food additives are only permitted if it is demonstrated that there is a technological need for them and consumers are not misled and will benefit from having a choice of new products with better quality .
Several of the additives now proposed for use have been temporarily authorised by some Member States .
Provided that the opinions of the Scientific Committee are respected , technological need is demonstrated and consumers are not misled , Community legislation should recognise the experience of the Member States in the use of these additives .
For these reasons the Commission is not in a position to accept Amendments Nos 3 , 4 and 5 .
The amendments proposed do not sufficiently take into account the opinions of the Scientific Committee for Food and the technological need that exists in some Member States .
If these amendments were adopted , some perfectly safe foodstuffs would disappear from the shelves of food stores in certain Member States .
As to the first amendment , the application of the precautionary principle is not appropriate as has been mentioned by a number of speakers this evening .
The safety of the food additives we are discussing has been evaluated by the Scientific Committee for Food .
This is the basis on which the Community legislators have approved the use of additives in the past and it is the basis on which the Commission now proposes the authorisation of new food additives .
Therefore , the Commission is not in favour of the first amendment .
The Commission does not believe that Amendments Nos 2 and 6 are necessary or appropriate in respect of this directive .
The Commission is sponsoring this directive on the basis of the well-established criteria that the additives in question are safe , as evaluated by the Scientific Committee for Food , that there is a technological need and that consumers are not misled and will benefit from having a choice of more products with better quality .
However , it is my own belief that such an amendment could be appropriate in Framework Directive 89 / 107 of 21 December 1998 , and that document is referred to in the annex to the White Paper at entry No 42 .
It is Mr Whitehead 's amendment in relation to No 2 that has given me the opportunity to consider this particular aspect and whether there is a need for raising the standard in this area in a particular manner .
I have come to the conclusion that he is correct and that some effort should be made to deal with this .
But I think that it is probably best to do so in the framework directive rather than in this particular directive .
That would have more universal application and would achieve the ends that all of us want to achieve for consumers .
So when we come to the point of amending that particular directive , i.e. 89 / 107 , I will be giving serious consideration to that suggestion and to that amendment put forward by Mr Whitehead .
There are a number of individual points that have been mentioned that I would like to draw attention to and see if I can respond to the questions raised .
First of all , in relation to sodium alginate , a number of speakers mentioned the fact that this particular proposal would have the effect of misleading consumers because it was designed for the purpose of keeping the carrots fresh .
That is not strictly speaking a correct analysis of the purpose of this particular additive .
The carrots are pre-packed , so they are labelled and therefore the consumer knows that an additive is being used .
The purpose of the additive is as a firming agent rather than making the food look , or suggesting that it is , in fact fresher than it is .
Therefore , in those circumstances , it is justifiable .
Mr Lannoye mentioned the application of the precautionary principle .
I have dealt with that very briefly but let me just say , I respectfully agree with a number of the contributors this evening on the proper place for the precautionary principle .
I believe that the precautionary principle is inappropriate in the circumstances that we are considering this evening , whereas it is appropriate in circumstances where there is an absence of science .
But in this particular case , the Scientific Committee has examined the situation , it has given its opinion that these additives are safe .
I agree with another contributor earlier , that I have some anxieties about putting forward our views in place of the scientific opinions expressed by scientists .
I would have strong reserves about approaching a particular problem in that way and therefore we should give full regard to the opinions of Scientific Committees .
Our decisions ought to be science-based .
To supplant the opinions of scientists with our own opinions is a dangerous precedent in my view and certainly this is not the appropriate place for the precautionary principle .
I was also asked why does the Commission propose the use of the additive E467 that is alleged to contain dangerous impurities such as ethylene oxide .
I should say that the impurity of ethylene oxide did not prevent the Scientific Committee from concluding that this cellulose is safe for use .
Limits for impurities will be set in the specifications that are drawn up as a Commission directive after the additive is permitted for use .
I was also asked why the Commission does not propose the deletion of food additives instead of always adding new ones to the positive list .
When the Commission has the information that an additive is no longer used , it proposes the withdrawal of the substance from the positive list .
For instance , in the next revision of this directive , the Commission services will propose the deletion of calcium hydrogen carbonate and magnesium carbonate .
Mrs Thyssen made reference to the fact that there was insufficient information in the Commission document , and I take account of that .
There is something to be said for what you say in relation to this .
I propose to take steps when further Commission proposals are made in this regard .
Perhaps some greater clarity might be contained in the document , giving a broader justification for such inclusion from a consumer benefit point of view .
Perhaps some more technical information might justifiably be included also .
Mr Lund suggested that the colouring agents are added to unprocessed food .
That is a factually incorrect statement .
No colouring agents are added to unprocessed food at all .
He also asked if some consideration should not be given to the consumer survey that took place in December on nitrates .
I have been informed that this is under active consideration and discussions are taking place with Member States in relation to that particular survey .
Mr Whitehead asked me if we should give some consideration to a more effective way of removing additives .
I refer you to the earlier part of my answer when I said that two particular additives will be removed from the list , but I will seek some further information from my service as to what procedure is followed and what information is available to Members of Parliament so there can be doubt as to what procedures are involved .
Not only Mr Whitehead but also some other speakers made reference to this .
Obviously there is some concern that there is not enough information about this .
I will certainly make further inquiries so as to be in a position to give further information to Members in due course .
I promise , Mr President , to be extremely brief .
I do not think we have time or that it is in fact possible to have an in-depth debate on such a complex problem , but I should like to be able to discuss the matter with the Commissioner outside this Chamber .
Firstly , I have an initial comment to make on the Scientific Committees .
It is not sufficient , Commissioner , simply to read the conclusions of the Scientific Committees . You must read the report , as I have done .
Occasionally , reading the reports gives rise to more doubts than certainties .
I would ask you , therefore , to be a little more circumspect before rejecting all the amendments out of hand , since I can also claim to have made a scientific study of the situation .
I have gathered a number of opinions , I have read the texts , and I can tell you that you are going too far in sweeping aside the amendments we are proposing .
Next , there is one other aspect which has not been taken into account , to wit , the potential interaction between the many additives found in food .
They have never been studied together , they are studied in isolation ; and that is an aspect that you must take into consideration .
That concludes the debate .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting closed at 9.20 p.m. )
Adoption of the Minutes of the previous sitting
The Minutes of yesterday ' s sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , item 6 of the Minutes where we modify the agenda for the week is accurate but probably rightly does not mention that voting time on Thursday has been brought forward to 11.30 a.m. because of the large number of amendments tabled to certain reports .
I rise , therefore , to question whether Rule 139 ( 1 ) of our Rules of Procedure is being applied correctly .
As you know , we spend an enormous amount of time voting on Tuesday , Wednesday and Thursday lunchtimes .
We adopted a set of changes to the Rules of Procedure last year to try to rationalise our work .
In these changes we gave every Member the right to table an amendment as an individual at committee stage , but we limited the right to table amendments in plenary to 32 Members or a political group .
However , if you look at the amendments that have been tabled on Thursday , for instance to the Dimitrakopoulos-Leinen report , you will see that there are over 100 amendments which are tabled by individuals , supposedly in the name of their political group , but this may well not be the case .
I notice , for instance , that the EPP Group has over 100 amendments in its name but signed by 18 different Members , none of them the coordinator or leader of the group .
Over 20 of these amendments are contradictory , so they cannot possibly all be the position of the EPP Group .
Some are identical , tabled by different Members ; and there is even a case of two identical amendments being tabled by the same Member .
Could the EPP Group please get its act together !
So much time is spent and wasted on voting as it is and this is a way to get around the rationalisation of the Rules of Procedure we adopted as a Parliament last year .
Amendments must either be tabled in the name of 32 Members or in the name of a political group and actually represent the position of that political group , not of the individual who happens to table them in the name of the group so as to circumvent the limitation on tabling rules in plenary .
I would ask the sessional services to verify in future that such amendments really are in the name of a group .
( Applause from the left )
Mr President , I should just like to let Mr Corbett know that within the EPP Group an amendment cannot be put before Parliament unless it has been voted in the Group and has the support of the Group .
He should be quite clear about that procedure within our Group .
Secondly , as he is aware , there is a process going on at the moment for reforming Parliament .
If he has any suggestions to put to the Bureau about the voting procedures , that would be the correct way to go about it .
Mr Corbett , I will pass on your comments to the President , and the Bureau will look into all our working procedures in May .
Mr President , I was present yesterday and I signed the register but my name does not appear in the Minutes .
I should like that to be corrected .
It shall be done , Mrs McNally .
Mr President , in the capacity of draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Development and Cooperation on the granting of discharge for 1998 , I would briefly like to mention that , last night , a partly joint committee meeting was held , involving the Committee on Budgetary Control and the Committee on Development and Cooperation , about the Rühle report . During that meeting , agreement was reached , in principle , to adopt a compromise approach which was subsequently refined .
In practice , this means that the existing text will be replaced by a new joint compromise proposal , which will , in effect , lead to a delay in the proceedings and a reconsideration in June .
The political groups will undoubtedly submit this text some time this morning and the debate will be able to take place as normal , but it is useful for the Members to know that this debate actually took place last night and that , in actual fact , a new political situation has arisen in which the Members of the Committee on Budgetary Control and the Members of the Committee on Development and Cooperation once again agreed on what we consider to be a more positive approach .
Mr President , I should just like to say in reply to Mr van den Berg that the report on postponing discharge for the Structural Funds is ready and the vote will be taken on the premise that this is indeed merely a postponement and does not grant or refuse discharge and that everything which we worked on together yesterday will be taken into account in the final version , i.e. that we shall nonetheless debate and vote on Mrs Rühle ' s report .
Mr President , I have a request ; every member has a very precise timetable .
We agree on a great number of deadlines in the citizens ' interest .
Today , yet again , the sitting has been brought forward , this time to 8.30 a.m.
I think it would be conducive to greater overall efficiency if we stuck to a basic programme and stopped changing arrangements at short notice .
Thank you for your understanding .
Mr Rübig , look upon it as an exceptional decision taken in response to specific requests from the Portuguese Presidency .
( The Minutes were approved )
Mr President , on a point of order .
It concerns a reference made yesterday by the President on the change of business which is taking place this week .
I am very concerned indeed about the reference that the President made as to who would be present from the Council when the President of Austria attends this Parliament tomorrow .
There was , and still is , concern among a lot of people that the change of business means that the Council will be absent on that important occasion .
I should like to have some assurances that the Council will be represented at a sufficiently senior level to offer the respect which this Parliament traditionally offers when these sorts of visits occur .
( Applause from the right )
I will pass on your comments to the President , Mr Kirkhope .
Vote on request for urgent procedure
. Mr President , whilst the Council has made this request and we are quite happy to do what we can to ensure that things are speeded up , there is no need to vote on this urgency today .
It is planned for our agenda in May .
The way the finances are at present , there will be no problem in financing the High Representative in Bosnia-Herzegovina , whose money is guaranteed until the end of this year , as are also the substantial funds available for the UNMIK operation there .
We can leave this until next month .
( Parliament rejected the request for urgent procedure )
1998 discharge , budgetary control
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
( A5-0087 / 2000 ) by Mr Stauner , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on postponement of discharge to the Commission in respect of implementation of the general budget of the European Union for the 1998 financial year [ SEC ( 1999 ) 412 - C5-0006 / 1999 - 1999 / 2050 ( DEC ) ] ;
( A5-0089 / 2000 ) by Mrs Rühle , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control ,
. on postponement of the decision concerning discharge to the Commission in respect of the financial management of the sixth , seventh and eighth European Development Funds for the 1998 financial year [ COM ( 1999 ) 227 - C5-0003 / 1999 - 1999 / 2004 ( DEC ) ]
. on granting discharge to the European Foundation for Improvement of Living and Working Conditions ( Dublin ) for the 1998 financial year [ C5-0150 / 2000 - 2000 / 2094 ( DEC ) ]
. on granting discharge to the European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training ( Thessaloniki ) for the 1998 financial year [ C5-0149 / 2000 - 2000 / 2093 ( DEC ) ]
. on the granting of discharge for the implementation of the general budget of the European Union for the 1998 financial year
Section IV - Court of Justice
Section V - Court of Auditors
Section VI , Part B - Committee of the Regions
[ SEC ( 1999 ) 414 - C5-0008 / 1999 - 1999 / 2166 ( DEC ) ]
. on postponement of the decision concerning discharge in respect of the implementation of the general budget of the European Union for the 1998 financial year
Section VI , Part A - Economic and Social Committee
[ SEC ( 1999 ) 414 - C5-0008 / 1999 ] ;
( A5-0092 / 2000 ) by Mr Khanbhai , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on granting discharge to the Commission in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Coal and Steel Community ( ECSC ) for the 1998 financial year [ C5-0153 / 2000 - 2000 / 2077 ( DEC ) ] ;
( A5-0097 / 2000 ) by Mr Kuhne , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on giving discharge in respect of implementation of the general budget for the 1998 financial year
Section I - European Parliament / Ombudsman Annex [ SEC ( 1999 ) 414 - C5-0008 / 1999 - 1999 / 2051 ( DEC ) ] ;
( A5-0095 / 2000 ) by Mr Mulder , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on granting discharge to the Commission in respect of the decisions on clearance of accounts of the Guarantee Section of the EAGGF for the 1993 , 1994 and 1995 financial years [ C4-0128 / 1998 - C4-0372 / 1998 - C5-0167 / 2000 - 1997 / 2167 ( DEC ) ] ;
( A5-0079 / 2000 ) by Mr Casaca , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 723 / 1997 on the implementation of Member States ' action programmes on control of EAGGF Guarantee Section expenditure [ COM ( 1999 ) 169 - C4-0225 / 1999 - 1999 / 0091 ( CNS ) ] .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , " zero tolerance towards fraud and other forms of incorrect conduct is a precondition for regaining confidence in the European civil service " . These are the words of Mr Kinnock , the vice-president of the Commission in charge of reform , in the Commission ' s consultation paper dated 18 January 2000 .
It was on this premise and with the noble claim that it would not repeat past mistakes - the last Commission having been brought down just under a year ago as the result of fraud and irregularities - that the Prodi Commission took office in September .
The Commission must be measured against this claim and its self-evident obligation , as guardian of the Treaties vis-à-vis third parties , to guarantee that their application begins at home .
It was against this yardstick that the Committee on Budgetary Control came to the conclusion , as the leading committee , that it would recommend that discharge be postponed until 15 May 2000 and would call on the Commission to adopt 17 measures .
These measures relate mainly to four areas which still require clarification or the oft-quoted fresh start .
Firstly , the error rate of over five per cent calculated by the Court of Auditors over several years must be cut considerably by 2001 and a positive declaration of assurance must be achieved by 2003 .
Secondly , the particularly blatant cases of fraud and irregularity in connection with the Fléchard case , ECHO , MED and contracts awarded to visiting scientists must be fully clarified and dealt with in disciplinary terms .
Thirdly , Parliament must be given unrestricted access to information and documents for its control activities , as called for in the 1997 discharge resolution .
Fourthly : reports must be filed on the relevant disciplinary hearings and fundamental reforms implemented .
The Committee did not pass this resolution lightly and finally adopted the proposal submitted by a large majority of 19 votes to 1 .
The fact that this motion was tabled in the form of a compromise between the four main groups demonstrates clearly that Parliament is pulling in the same direction on this extremely important issue and wishes to signal its unity over and above party political divisions and any national interests or chauvinism .
The Commission should agree to it if it wishes to retain its credibility in its handling of the taxes paid by European citizens and its democratic dealings with the elected representatives of the people of Europe .
I feel particularly strongly about the integrity and the ability of the European executive to act , especially in view of the imminent enlargement of the EU , because the Commission needs to have its hands free for political policy-making and must not be hampered by time-consuming and irritating justification campaigns .
Parliament takes the control function assigned to it in the European Treaties seriously .
All the cases of fraud and irregularity addressed in the resolution relate directly to the 1998 financial year , even though some originated much earlier .
All the measures called for must be carried out by the deadline set .
All the cases are awaiting a decision .
Clearly , the new Commission cannot be held directly responsible for the cases I have referred to , even if not all the members of the Commission are new .
But it is responsible for dealing with this legacy and it will only distinguish itself positively from its predecessors if it takes a ruthless approach and clears up every last one of these cases .
The Commission should also take a close look at how it treats officials who deserve the highest respect for their courageous sense of civic duty in dealing with irregularities .
Despite countless lofty announcements , there is as yet no real evidence of a fresh start .
Commissioner ' s Kinnock ' s reform paper , which is broad in scope if nothing else , sets off every single alarm bell in the area of financial control .
Decentralisation must not result in the total de facto abolition of internal financial control .
On the contrary , care must be taken to ensure that reforms concentrate on basics and that the principle of quality before quantity still applies .
My conclusion is this : " Words enough have been exchanged , let me at last see some action .
While you fashion compliments , something useful may happen . "
You see , good old Goethe had the right words even in this situation .
In this sense , I see the motion for a resolution as a chance for the Commission to justify the trust which Parliament demonstrated in it and its President when I was nominated last September and which it reiterated in its discharge for the 1997 budgetary year .
The motion should also send out nothing more and nothing less than a clear signal of Parliament ' s support to the President of the Commission , who unfortunately is not with us here today .
I should like to call on the President to grab this chance and to make use , where necessary , of the powers to issue directives granted to him .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have a number of difficult decisions to take this week .
Controlling the Executive is one of Parliament ' s main rights and that right centres on budgetary control .
However , it is difficult to grant discharge for a budget which is two years old and this problem is exacerbated by the fact that it was not the responsibility of the present Commission but of its predecessor , a Commission which resigned because it failed to take its responsibilities seriously enough .
Our yardstick must therefore be the central issue of what the new Commission ' s attitude is towards responsibility .
A good example of this , in my view , is the discharge for the Development Funds .
Our Committee had confidential information on mismanagement and irregularities which amounted to suspicion of corruption .
In response to our questions , we received only inadequate information , for which we had to wait a long time .
The majority of the Committee therefore decided to suspend discharge in order to obtain more information .
In the meantime , however , we have good news to impart .
Together with representatives from the Commission and the parliamentary Committee on Development we have drawn up an action plan , which can be implemented by 15 May .
I am therefore able to correct my report in this respect , i.e. we shall replace my report with this specific action plan and propose that we suspend discharge until 15 May and we shall then grant discharge on 15 May on the basis of the Commission report on the action plan .
I think that this development clearly demonstrates the direction that we need to take .
The Commission and Parliament must work together and must create greater transparency in relation to the budget and its implementation .
Unfortunately , I was forced to include another postponement in my report , this time in relation to the Economic and Social Committee .
There are again problems with the Economic and Social Committee in relation to travel costs and mission expenses .
It took the Committee over 15 months to refer justified cases of suspicion of fraud to OLAF .
Discharge therefore had to be suspended pending the results of the OLAF investigation .
There is another problem with the Economic and Social Committee , the problem of buildings .
We are still paying rent for the Ardenne and Ravenstein buildings .
We are also paying rent for the Belliard building and Parliament must pay for its new building . This means that European taxpayers are currently paying rent for three buildings .
We want to exert pressure here to ensure that the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions move into the Belliard building as quickly as possible .
However , we have not moved for a postponement in this area because we hope that a satisfactory solution can be found and that we can grant discharge for the buildings in the 1999 budget with no further pressure needed .
However , I should just like to say on the subject of buildings that better management is needed at European level .
There are similar problems with the European Court of Justice .
The Court of Auditors has drafted a special report on this subject , which will be reflected in the 1999 discharge procedure .
As rapporteur , I should like to suggest that we need better cooperation between the various institutions at European level as far as the management of buildings and rents is concerned and that we should learn from each other ' s mistakes so that , here too , we use the European taxpayers ' money in a responsible manner .
As a new Member , allow me to point out that there are serious shortcomings in this area .
As I have little time left , I should like to give a very succinct and concentrated presentation of the rest of my report .
We are able to propose that the European Court of Justice and the European Court of Auditors be granted discharge .
Both institutions gave highly satisfactory answers to the criticisms in my report and we have had prompt and comprehensive replies to our questions and comments .
We are also able to propose that the Dublin agency and the Thessaloniki agency be granted discharge .
However , we would like to see the contradictory procedure shortened for the agencies .
We welcome the fact that the agencies have decided to carry out an evaluation and we expect this evaluation to be submitted by December 2000 .
Overall , as a new member , I should like to reiterate my belief that the procedure for the 1998 discharge represented an important step forward in reinforcing the taxpayers ' confidence in the European institutions .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , over recent days , just before the debate on this report , certain areas of the media created the impression that we needed outsiders to open our eyes to shortcomings in our own institution , as if Parliament would operate double standards , by being intensely critical of the Commission , but turning a blind eye to its own shortcomings .
I should like to report quite unequivocally that neither applies .
My draft report was presented to the Committee in all language versions on 10 February this year and all the shortcomings reported in the press , such as the article in the European Voice about 10 days ago , have already been addressed in an open and critical manner in the report .
There has been no whitewash .
The report before Parliament today both contains a description of the shortcomings and lays down clear conditions for the attention of Parliament ' s administration , including deadline commitments , which clearly show what needs to be done in order to rectify these shortcomings .
In addition , contrary to the Commission discharge procedure , we have no cause to complain that we did not receive certain documents .
Some were perhaps a little late in arriving , but they did all arrive .
That is another difference in the discharge procedures .
We here in Parliament certainly have cases of mismanagement in certain areas which need to be criticised and cleared up , but we have no legacy such as cases of fraud .
I say that in order to highlight an important difference , because interested parties have " let it drop " that , if Parliament is using the same yardstick , then it should come to the same conclusion and cannot postpone discharge for the Commission on the one hand and be prepared to discharge itself on the other .
I am all in favour of the same yardstick , but the same yardstick does not necessarily give the same results .
We should not sit down with the strategic far-sightedness of garden gnomes and say , now we must kow-tow to those who have given the impression that we should go around in sackcloth and ashes just so that our decision to postpone discharge of the Commission seems more credible .
Were we to do so , I can assure you that , within half an hour of the vote on Thursday , you would hear the sound , from Brussels to Strasbourg , of the champagne corks popping in many a Brussels office in which many people would be delighted if Parliament were to make the content of its own discharge the variable upon which the Commission discharge depended .
If we did that , there would not be a single Commission over the next 20 years which needed to fear Parliament ' s discharge or , at most , its merciless opportunism !
I should like to come now to the question of where the shortcomings which we must clear up lie .
We must , for example , reverse the trend whereby the number of direct contracts has increased dramatically in comparison with the number of open competitions .
This refers mainly to the fixtures and fittings in this building .
It is not a procedure which is illegal per se and it would be wrong to assume that it were .
However , we must insist that this trend be reversed in order to reinstate a sound administrative culture .
This direct contract procedure must not catch on and become the predominant procedure .
In the long term , it would mean accepting cost increases on orders without being able to check if they could be obtained more cheaply elsewhere , which is why this trend must be reversed .
The second point is this : Parliament has lost several cases on personnel issues before the European Court of Justice over recent years and the verdict of the European Court of Justice has been harsh and clear .
It has been clearly stated that our own , previously public , competition criteria have been broken for certain positions in order to lever certain persons into those positions .
Parliament and its members must ensure that there is no place for this sort of thing in our House and that we keep our employees motivated by ensuring that they can be certain that promotions and recruitments are made on the basis of merit and qualification , not cronyism .
Another important point addressed relates to the question of buildings .
We have come to the conclusion that Parliament is in an extremely difficult position , for which the Council is mainly to blame . The Council finances its own building out of compulsory costs in the budget but has denied Parliament the facility of direct financing .
I am not in favour - and I say so quite clearly , despite all the difficulties which we have to overcome - of sending yet another box of chocolates over to the Council in its building and tying yet another ribbon around it and saying , all right , we profess our faith in the fact that the whole procedure is beset with legal problems .
We have already discussed them at length .
We have received every document written on the subject .
What I say is , whoever still has a problem should please go to the European Court of Justice and get it cleared up there , rather than turning plenary into an extrajudicial seminar . They should also consider what it means , from a political point of view , if we go ahead and give these sweets to the Council .
The inventory has been addressed .
Mr Seppänen addressed it yesterday .
The report itself lists the difficulties which have arisen , the huge number of items which have disappeared or , to put it bluntly , been stolen .
In the meantime , thank God , we have introduced an electronic inventory system in Parliament .
We are now waiting for an explanation as to how this electronic system functions .
I should like to come back to the question of yardsticks and results .
If the majority in Parliament decides , not for reasons which have something to do with this report , but for reasons which have to do with the fact that certain groups have more skeletons in their cupboard than others when it comes to what they have done with their group money and what they have done with party financing ; if a majority plays pass the parcel with this report , then we here in Parliament will end up in the position over the next few weeks of having to ask ourselves what future the Commission and Parliament discharge procedure has , now that it is no more than an excuse for party political manipulation and manoeuvring .
I hope I do not have to sit in such a Parliament .
Mr President , the discharge which we are discussing today , as far as agriculture is concerned , pertains to 1993 , 1994 and 1995 and you may well wonder why we are so late .
The reason for this is that we delayed the discharge for 1992 for a long time , because we had made certain requirements of the Commission which up to last year it had failed to meet .
We are pleased to note that this has meanwhile been rectified .
So what exactly were Parliament ' s requirements ?
Firstly , we asked for 15 extra jobs to be created in the inspection department within agriculture and for the financial corrections to be increased from 10 % to 25 % maximum , in case something went wrong with agricultural expenditure .
This has since been done and we are grateful for this .
It still causes Parliament some concern that the jobs have not yet been filled and that it is extremely difficult to do so .
In general terms , the error rate for agriculture is below the general error rate for the budget .
Where the general rate is 5 % , as already mentioned , that for agriculture is 3 % . This is moving in the right direction .
This may also partly be due to the fact that agricultural policy has changed over the years .
I believe it is easier to keep income policy in check than it is price policy .
There has since been an increase in expenditure for development within rural areas but I will come back to this .
Special attention should also be paid to the European revenue .
Although the own resources are falling , they are still an important source of income and it has now been decided that certain Member States are allowed to retain 25 % .
This is all the more reason why the Commission should keep tabs on all the money coming in to which the European Union is entitled .
What does the Committee on Budgets mainly want ?
First , the Commission should work towards driving back the current error rate within the short term .
In my opinion , we should be able to have a 1 % error rate within a number of years .
One way of achieving this is to establish an estimated reliability level for each sector .
This is something which the Commission could undertake itself .
What is the error rate in the milk sector , the dairy sector , the cereal sector , etc ?
In this way , the various offices will benefit from a healthy rivalry .
Everyone wants to outstrip the others and agriculture would be able to take the wind out of the sails of the other budget components .
For many years , we have also talked about an integrated management and inspection system for agriculture and lamented the fact that many countries are still unable to meet this requirement .
I think it is about time this stopped .
We have stipulated in the resolution that the Commission will have two years to solve this and I have been given assurances that this should be possible .
Although the agricultural budget components are scrutinised , they cannot be scrutinised in the same way as guaranteed expenditure , which is down to the Guidance Section for agriculture .
We think the Commission should come up with proposals to actually apply the financial corrections system to structural expenditure for agriculture .
In common with the Court of Auditors , the Commission is also concerned that huge mistakes are still being made in the export refunds system .
The Committee on Budgets , therefore , recommends discharge .
There are , however , a few problems remaining , one of which I have already mentioned , namely export refunds .
We are expecting a report on this .
We are also waiting for a report from OLAF on fraud involving the aid provided to flax in certain countries , notably Spain .
Finally , and I may come back to this at a later stage , we are waiting for a report from the Court of Auditors on the Fléchard affair .
We can grant discharge to the Commission without these three elements .
There is something else .
Since 1995 , there has been a conciliation committee for agricultural expenditure .
If there is a difference of opinion between the Member States and the Commission on the financial correction to be imposed , we can call upon a conciliation body to mediate .
We have as yet to be convinced of the usefulness of this conciliation body .
The Commission has promised to assess this .
We look forward to the findings because we would like to considerably reduce the number of court cases at the Court of Justice in Luxembourg .
Mr President , my report is about the European Coal and Steel Community and how that fits in with Mrs Stauner 's report and the discharge .
We have decided to give the discharge on three conditions , and the conditions are clearly spelt out .
We hope that by 15 August those concerned will give us the information that is requested .
What I find extraordinary is that EUR 2 billion are being managed by this vestige - the last remainder of the European Coal and Steel Community , which , of course , was very important historically but is not important any more .
It is being wound up and it is remarkable that such an instrument should continue with that budget and 145 staff .
I believe such an instrument should be wound up as quickly as possible so that it is incorporated in perhaps a reformed European Investment Bank : a European Investment Bank that is transparent and accountable .
Such investments can and should be made by professional banks rather than the little outfit that we have at the moment .
The number of people employed for the amount of money being invested is again quite disproportionate .
I am hoping that this can be wound up speedily and incorporated in either the EIB or the European Investment Fund , because that would be a better way of using the money and resources .
This is for the social and research fund , but again these objectives could be better addressed by a bank that would ask other banks to manage investments so that we have the highest return .
I hope that the three conditions , the conditional discharge and the obligations on those concerned to address these conditions will be taken seriously .
Far too often in the past we have found that promises have been made and not kept .
So I hope that the answers will be given to Parliament and to the Committee on Budgetary Control .
I think that is about all I need to say .
On that basis I recommend to this House a discharge .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as rapporteur for the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , it is with some satisfaction that I would like to point out that , in our own area of competence , the Court of Auditors had no criticism to make of the way the appropriations for the financial year 1998 were implemented .
I have , what is more , received no complaints from any officials at all .
I am not aware of any vengeful articles by investigative journalists , or any OLAF inquiries , and personally I have not managed to discover any proven cases of mismanagement , fraud or misappropriation of funds in our sector .
In a word , as far as our committee ' s area of competence is concerned , there is nothing to prevent the discharge being granted to the Commission .
And now , to express my own personal opinion , I would like to say more generally that I support the conclusions of Mrs Stauner ' s report with a view to postponing discharge to the Commission for the year 1998 .
The citizens ' primary right is to see that their money is managed and spent properly and as long is this is not clearly established discharge must not be granted .
I should , however , like to make two observations .
Settling political scores or making personal attacks must not be mistaken for combating poor management , irregularities and fraud .
In this context , it is essential to prevent a climate of political vendetta arising between the main institutions of the Union .
My second observation is that , in my opinion , it is essential to be as implacable in criticising oneself as in criticising others , and I therefore wonder about the effects , which I expect to be disastrous , of postponing discharge to the Commission on the one hand , even though Parliament is prepared to grant its own discharge , despite the administrative problems it acknowledges , and although the political groups gloss over their own administration .
My personal preference would be for adopting a more self-critical attitude .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , expenditure for research accounts for nearly two thirds of the budget for internal policy .
Consequently , the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy has requested the Court of Auditors to carry out a thorough investigation into the legality and lawfulness of payments in research as a matter of high priority .
The Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy regrets the inaccuracies in one third of payments .
The European Commission has paid over the odds most of the time because the beneficiaries had failed to declare non-eligible costs .
Inadequate inspection by the offices of the Commission and the lack of contractually determined penalties for excessive declarations have also led to deliberate over-invoicing in nearly two-thirds of the payments .
What does the Commissioner intend to do about this ?
Has the Commission ever taken legal action ?
Or does it intend to ?
I would like to have these questions answered .
The success and usefulness of the research programmes are beyond dispute .
But effective implementation requires better management and coordination , as well as inspections carried out by various Directorates-General .
According to the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , it is essential that the tasks pertaining to financial management be carried out by officials who are required to render full account of their tasks to the institution .
If money from Brussels is spent , then the responsibility should lie with Brussels and not with external service providers .
We are prepared to grant discharge under these conditions .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen . Alas , I sit here between a rock and a hard place .
On the one hand , I would and should recommend , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism too , that the Commission be discharged due to the satisfactory take-up rate of the budget lines which affect us , despite numerous critical comments .
On the other hand , I cannot in fact recommend discharge due to unclarified incidents at the Commission which are beginning to threaten the very existence of regional project agencies and which , as the representative of my home region , I have been fighting to have clarified for months .
It is not enough for the present Commission to acknowledge the errors of the old Commission without finding a solution .
However , this is not the place for such personal experiences .
Allow me rather to highlight the causes for criticism as the representative and draftsman of the RETT Committee .
Firstly , certain measures dating back to before 1989 have still not been completed .
Secondly , the irregularities identified by the Court of Auditors refer mainly to errors in relation to proof of expenditure which are signed by Member States , and for which they are responsible .
The Commission is indirectly and to some extent jointly responsible here insofar as it should have issued clear rules for grants and aid .
Thirdly , delayed payments by the Commission which unsettle and , sometimes , ruin our citizens , as the result either of transgressions or inefficient bureaucratic structures and cover-ups or liquidity problems following cuts in payment appropriations by the Council .
The conditional postponement of the discharge suggested by Mrs Stauner is to be welcomed .
I personally would like to have better facilities for quality control , in situ , of how EU funds are used .
Mr President , the Committee on Cooperation and Development has been extremely critical in its appraisal of what became of the development and cooperation expenditure in 1998 .
We have translated this criticism into a number of very concrete questions , answers and proposals in order to make drastic changes to the policy as it is being adopted now and will be adopted this coming year .
To our great delight , we are also at the dawn of a drastic reform of development policy .
Policy as it was adopted in 1998 by Europe as one of the world ' s key players did not really have a clear poverty focus or clear-cut , result-orientated objectives and , as such , it was difficult to judge whether we had achieved our goal .
We have now agreed to re-arrange the entire budget in a number of clearly defined sectors according to international agreements in the field of poverty control and , following on from this , to submit annual reports on the results within the various sectors to our Parliament .
It has also been agreed that in these sectors , clear objectives will be formulated and that , in these objectives , basic health care and primary education will be considerably reinforced as components of social development .
This is not just restricted to either the European Parliament budget or the EDF budget , but refers to the total .
This brings us to the desire and agreement that the EDF , even if it is just in terms of figures , will at least be absorbed into the 2001 budget , so that we in Parliament can actually see where the money is being spent .
After all , we are talking about a huge amount which the European tax payer expects to be used to combat poverty .
If we look at what really happens , however , it is often not about a child who goes to school or food which is grown locally in a more productive way . Very often , economic interests of the various Member States in Europe take priority over poverty issues in the relevant countries .
In terms of inspection , this is all undoubtedly neatly justified in accounts , but is incorrect in terms of content .
This poverty focus is essential in order to actually get value for money .
We hope that , with the inclusion of the EDF in the 2001 budget , even if we do not have any formal budgetary authority there , we will be able to pursue a more result-orientated policy by breaking it down into clear sectors .
Then there is still the staffing problem .
Many shortcomings , the lack of spending and the fact that 80 % of the commitment appropriations are sometimes not spent , are due to an organisational structure which is inadequate , not sufficiently decentralised in the various relevant countries and guided by a form of regulation which does too little examining after the event and is too bureaucratic before the event .
In the light of this , there is a great need for reform on this score .
We at the Committee on Development and Cooperation have every confidence that we can bring about this reform thanks to the agreements we have reached with the Commission .
Further to the agreement we concluded with the Committee on Budgetary Control , I also expect that the action plan on 15 May will help us at the Parliament to turn a corner , in tandem with the Commission .
I would like to underline the confidence we have in the Commission and all its Commissioners .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today , for the second time this year , we are debating the discharge of the Commission for the budget of a previous financial year .
Two and a half months ago , you granted the Commission discharge for the 1997 budget . That discharge was accompanied by numerous , far-reaching calls to the Commission which provided strong momentum and incentive for the reform of the Commission and which are incorporated in the Commission ' s White Paper .
I should like once again to extend my thanks on behalf of the Commission , especially to the rapporteur at the time , Mrs van der Laan and , in this context , to the rapporteur for the reforms , Mr van Hulten .
Today we are debating the discharge for the 1998 financial year .
Under the European Treaty , Parliament has a duty to audit the accounts , the statements of assets and the annual report of the Court of Auditors , together with the replies from the bodies being audited .
In its report on the 1998 financial year , submitted in November last year , the Court of Auditors granted the Commission a declaration of assurance with regard to receipts and the handling of commitment appropriations .
The Court of Auditors did not grant the Commission an auditor ' s certificate establishing that payments had been implemented in a lawful and proper manner .
The error rate was considered to be too high by the Court of Auditors .
As the Commissioner for the Budget , I subscribe fully to the opinion that , in some areas , the shortcomings in the implementation of the budget are simply unacceptable .
That is why I immediately took the initiative , in my official capacity , of drafting an action plan listing specific measures sector by sector on the basis of a specific timetable , in order to reduce the number of errors identified .
Nearly 90 % of all errors identified or highlighted by the Court of Auditors concern the Member States .
The majority of payments out of the EU budget are paid not directly by the Brussels administration , but by administrative units in the Member States .
This decentralised implementation of the budget has numerous advantages , but , of course , it also calls for efficient and close cooperation .
As rapporteur for the SEM 2000 programmes and decentralised management measures , Mr Kuhne has dealt with these questions in detail and I should like to thank him for his work in this area .
The Council , which recommended discharge for the Commission , included the question of shared management in its debate on the 1998 budget discharge and the proposal was mooted that the Member States should perhaps set their own objective for reducing shortcomings in the implementation of EU funds , an interesting proposal .
For its part , the Commission will step up its efforts to formulate more manageable financial rules for the administrations in the Member States and to provide advice and information , especially on the control systems . Alternatively , should it prove necessary , the Commission will use financial corrections to refunds paid to Member States as a monetary lever , as is the case in agriculture .
The fact that the error rate for agricultural expenditure is well below the error rate for the Structural Funds is perhaps due to this financial correction instrument .
My colleague Franz Fischler will go into this in greater detail in a moment but I should like at this point to thank Mr Casaca for his report and to congratulate Mr Mulder on his report .

The Court of Auditors made no critical remarks on the budget for the European Coal and Steel Community and I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Khanbhai , for the report which he has just presented .
The European Court of Auditors also issued a declaration of assurance for the budget of the European Development Fund , although it did find cause for complaint .
Overall , there was a clear drop in the error rate for the Funds in comparison with previous years .
However , this gives the Commission no cause whatsoever for complacency .
On the contrary , the Commission also wants to achieve more satisfactory results for this financing instrument , which is so important to development policy , and this applies in particular to the question of the speed of aid .
You addressed this point , Mr van den Berg .
This is also one of the concerns of the rapporteur for this area and I should like to thank you , Mrs Rühle , for your willingness to include the arguments of the Committee on Development and Cooperation and the Commission in your report and to propose an action plan and also , at this point , to thank Mr Blak for his preparatory work in this area .
The legislative , budgetary and control powers of the individual institutions overlap even more in the European Union than they do in the Member States .
It is therefore essential that we act in unity if European policy is to work .
This presupposes a clear and reliable division of tasks , which is why current talks and negotiations between Parliament and the Commission on the agreement , which also includes the question of access to and dealing with confidential information , are extremely important .
The chairman of the Committee on Budgetary Control , Mrs Theato , also has a very responsible role in this respect .
It is in all our interests for these negotiations to come to a swift conclusion , hopefully with results which enable there to be a good policy and collaboration on such important matters as discharge .
The Commission has made a commitment to transparency and openness .
These are not just empty words as far as the Commission is concerned , which is why I have transferred all the confidential audit reports needed to the Committee on Budgetary Control , or rather to the rapporteur , during the course of the discharge procedure and which is why the Commission has also replied in detail to questionnaires , even though this differed from past reporting practice .
The Commission has nothing to hide and this Commission sees it as its duty to support Parliament fully in the performance of its duties .
But we need a procedure which safeguards the confidentiality of information and , more importantly , the principle of the rule of law whereby people cannot be pre-judged .
That must also apply to the Commission staff , just as it applies to people who belong to the other European institutions and to all our citizens .
The Commission is called on in the report adopted by the Committee on Budgetary Control to answer various questions or take direct action by 15 May .
I should like to thank the Committee on Budgetary Control for this resolution and also for the deadline attached to it .
Some of the points refer to dealing with so-called old cases , i.e. cases of irregularities or suspicion of fraud from previous years .
I should like to say quite clearly at this point that the Commission will do everything within its powers to fight fraud and that applies not only to the future , but to clearing up past cases .
This Commission has no fear of any findings .
The Commission has proven this in the so-called Cresson / Barthelot case by passing documents to the courts , introducing disciplinary proceedings , lifting the immunity of a former member of the Commission , giving the investigating magistrate access to the Commission premises and demanding repayment of missing EU funds .
But I repeat : for the Commission , the rule of law applies . This means that it cannot of course influence judicial proceedings , even if they are unsatisfactory , as for example in the ECHO case , on which the competent courts , which received the file a long time ago , have still taken no action .
It also means that proportionality is required when meting out punishment and demanding refunds and this applies both to demands by the Commission and to refunds demanded by the Member States .
The European Court of Justice again made that clear in its most recent judgement a few weeks ago , when it halved or even cancelled fines in the case of the cement cartel .
My colleague Franz Fischler will shortly be going into the question of the agricultural budget in connection with discharge in greater detail .
But I too should like to say at this point that I do not see the letters drawing the Commission ' s attention to the fact that companies may fold or jobs be destroyed following certain Commission measures as an illegal attempt at intervention , irrespective of whether the letters originate in Parliament or in a Member State and regardless of whether they come from France , Ireland or Bavaria .
Naturally , decisions must be taken where there is room for discretion and they must be taken according to clear rules and in a transparent manner .
I shall fight for clear rules within the framework of the financial regulation .
Of course the Commission will take very careful notice of the Court of Auditors ' recommendations and findings in the so-called Fléchard case and all I can say is that I , for my part , am very grateful to the Court of Auditors for taking on this task .
I am not in a position at this point to go into the individual points of the resolution in detail .
However , the Commission will immediately notify OLAF of your demands and , as far as the administrative investigation is concerned , I have set the procedure of clarification in motion .
Your resolution insists first and foremost on a reduction in the error rate .
I can assure you that the Commission is doing everything it can to achieve this , which is why we submitted the action plan , containing specific measures with specific deadlines and which is why we are completing revising the financial regulation and I shall shortly be reporting on this to Parliament .
This is why the European Anti-Fraud Office is being reinforced .
This is why the Commission has started reforming financial management as a whole by increasing the responsibility of everyone who handles the money of the European taxpayers , by improving efficiency and by setting the clear objective of restoring trust in the European institutions .
The Commission will do everything to ensure that the reform is a success and it would be a good thing if all the European institutions were to expose themselves to such reform .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to restrict my comments to the so-called Mulder and Casaca reports .
Mr Mulder , I should like to start by thanking you on behalf of the Commission for your report on granting discharge in respect of the decisions on clearance of accounts of the Guarantee Section of the EAGGF for the 1993 , 1994 and 1995 financial years .
The main thrust of the report is that clearance of accounts for the expenditure financed by the Guarantee Section of the EAGGF was a job well done .
This can also be seen from the financial corrections quoted under number 1 .
I consider this to represent a certain degree of acknowledgement and , at the same time , to be an order to do even more in the future .
I expressly state that I agree with number 4 .
The date of April 2002 is needed in order at last to guarantee the proper operation of the integrated administration and control system in all the Member States .
It is also a prerequisite to our being able to reduce the error rate still further .
As regards the question of building up a central database containing data on all payments to final beneficiaries , I should like to draw your attention to the following . The interaction between the common agricultural policy and the final beneficiaries currently passes via approved paying agencies in the Member States .
These agencies have all the data on the final beneficiaries and the Commission services naturally have unrestricted access to them .
However , I should like to stress that the Commission does not need a central database per se in order to exercise its control function and I would therefore suggest that a cost-benefit analysis should be considered here .
A study is currently examining if it is technically feasible to set up a central database for recording all payments and hence all final beneficiaries .
Even if it is not prescribed under law , it could of course simplify a number of operations , not only for the Commission , but also for the Court of Auditors or OLAF .
The Commission is aware of the fact that the European Parliament considers it important to know the names of the recipients of the largest sums .
However , I should point out here that , because of data protection at Union and Member State level , it would be impossible to publish such information , even if it were technically feasible .
As far as staffing the clearance of accounts unit is concerned , I can confirm , Mr Mulder , that only the three posts of the new unit leaders have yet to be published .
The recruitment procedure for the remaining six posts has already been completed , or will be shortly .
The Conciliation Body referred to in number 16 of the report is one of the measures which should ensure that efforts to speed up the procedure do not compromise the quality of document audits .
However , this is only a consultation process and it is the Commission itself which takes the decision in all cases .
I can also assure you that refunds and the aid regime for flax and hemp will be examined very conscientiously .
Corrections totalling EUR 249.8 million were made to refunds for the financial years from 1994 to 1998 .
However , before we can make any further corrections for subsequent financial years , we must first carry out the scheduled control visits .
Allow me to conclude with a few comments on the declaration of assurance .
It is proposed in the resolution that there should be a separate declaration of assurance for the EAGGF and the individual sectors .
This question is , of course , addressed first and foremost to the Court of Auditors .
The Commission notes this proposal with interest .
A first step in this direction should of course be a declaration of assurance for individual policy areas , i.e. separate declarations for the agricultural fund , the Structural Fund and so on .
This alone would considerably improve this instrument .
And finally , my thanks in this respect to the Committee on Budgetary Control for their excellent cooperation in drafting the report .
A few words now on Mr Casaca ' s report .
I should also like to thank you , Mr Casaca , for your report .
According to Council Regulation No 723 / 97 , the Community contributes towards the costs " incurred by Member States in implementing new action programmes , arising out of new Community obligations , approved by the Commission and aimed at improving the structures or effectiveness of EAGGF Guarantee Section expenditure controls " .
The purpose of the proposed amendment tabled here is to improve controls .
In addition , provision is made for the Community to make a contribution in cases in which the Commission calls on the Member States to carry out additional controls over and above the minimum rate laid down in the regulations .
I should like to make the following comments on the proposed amendments . The Commission cannot , unfortunately , accept proposed Amendment No 1 insofar as the rapporteur proposes changing the legal basis for the regulation from Article 37 to Article 280 .
The Commission takes the view that Article 37 of the Treaty is the correct legal basis because the most important objective of the proposal is to prevent irregularities in EAGGF Guarantee Section expenditure .
As far as proposed Amendment No 2 is concerned , the Commission cannot accept the part which refers to the second paragraph of Article 5a , in which mention is made of administrative and staffing costs incurred by the Commission in administering this scheme .
I agree with the idea behind the proposal , i.e. to ensure that the Commission has sufficient means at its disposal to perform its tasks , but the proposal confuses the administrative and staffing costs incurred by the Commission which are covered solely from Part A of the budget with the operational costs in Part B of the budget and I am unable to agree to this .
Mr President , fellow Members , Mrs Schreyer , Mr Fischler , I should like to make one thing clear from the outset : postponing a discharge is not tantamount to refusing a discharge , irrespective of what is always wrongly assumed .
On the other hand , granting discharge is a serious procedure with serious consequences in that the controlling body answers for the fact that the activities and financial conduct of the body being controlled have been correct from a legal , economic and political point of view .
This responsibility on the part of Parliament vis-à-vis European citizens and taxpayers is a heavy burden , which is why discharge for the Commission ' s management of the budget cannot be reduced to a compulsory , but somewhat tiresome annual exercise and I am sorry that the President of the Commission could not be here today .
On the contrary , what is needed is a thorough examination on the basis of pertinent sources of information and a conscientious appraisal of the results .
And that is what we have done in the Committee on Budgetary Control over recent weeks .
The rapporteur , Mrs Stauner , and the draftsmen of the opinions of the other discharge reports and working documents , whom I should like to congratulate on their work , have based their work first and foremost on the annual and special reports of the Court of Auditors and on the Commission ' s replies .
The sources for the information and documents needed from the Commission , on the other hand , gushed little , if anything at all , despite a great deal of paper and , unfortunately , no clear answers were given to the questions asked .
When the Commission then writes to complain about the questionnaires and working papers of the members of the Committee on Budgetary Control , that shows that something has gone wrong with the flow of information between the controlling and the controlled parties and this must be rectified as quickly as possible .
We are working on that .
Mrs Schreyer also mentioned it .
However , I am warning you that the Commission is heading straight for the same fate as its predecessor .
According to Article 276 of the Treaty , Parliament , and hence the Committee appointed by it , is entitled to any information or documents which it needs or demands in order to prepare its discharge .
This includes reappraising old cases .
The rapporteur quotes four cases by way of example .
Other cases should be on the list , but the Commission has unfortunately not yet passed them on , despite the date of March 2000 set in the 1997 discharge .
Here too the Commission misunderstands our basic cause for concern .
The rapporteur and the Committee on Budgetary Control are not holding the present Commission per se responsible for the deplorable state of affairs in previous years .
The resignation of the previous Commission did not put an end to it .
On the contrary , the new Commission was completely aware of all the outstanding accusations before it entered office and it undertook to assume responsibility and establish transparency .
I take this to mean that it must clear up all the old cases without exception and - where necessary - must pass them to the courts .
Cover-ups or even sweeping issues under the carpet are not the answer .
On the contrary , the answer means being prepared to draw conclusions from the unhappy events of the past , so that the same thing does not happen again in the future .
This ranges from precise filing rules , so that documents cannot simply disappear , to a fundamental reform of disciplinary proceedings and much else besides .
This approach also informs the White Paper on the reform of the Commission tabled by Mr Kinnock .
Mrs Stauner ' s report lists our short-term demands with respect to these conclusions and we all consider that they can be met by the stated deadline .
The Committee debated them at several meetings and finally adopted them with one vote against .
Here we must thank the rapporteur for her honesty , on the one hand , and for her perfect readiness to compromise , on the other .
One of the most important objectives that we consider the Commission should achieve is to reduce the error rate in payments to well below the persistent figure of 5 % .
I know , Mrs Schreyer , that you have tabled an action plan .
Nonetheless , the error rate has remained at the same high level for the last five years .
We shall have to debate this .
However , we also know that most errors occur in the Member States and we are prepared , as a committee , to discuss this with you .
Nonetheless , we take the view and the Treaty states that the Commission is responsible for implementing the overall budget .
Excuses and promises are no use .
We need clear proof of improvement .
On balance , my conclusion is that we need a strong Commission , which is able to act , which works openly together with Parliament and which supplies Parliament with all the information needed or requested .
Using the pressure of postponement to advance discharge is constructive pressure because it gives the Commission the chance to clear up shortcomings caused by slowness , pettifogging or unwillingness so that Parliament will be able to grant discharge for 1998 as quickly as possible , hopefully before the summer recess .
I think that the President of the Commission , Mr Prodi , should direct his team forcefully here in order to take transparency in Europe a stage further .
Mr President , the Committee on Budgetary Control has considered several reports recently , mostly relating to the 1998 discharge procedure .
It is a strange time for us to be considering how the Commission is faring after its forced resignation last year due to many of the issues highlighted in the 1996 discharge .
The discharge procedure is , of course , an opportunity for the European Parliament to exercise its responsibility in terms of monitoring the Commission and the other institutions ' behaviour .
We check their accounts .
We ensure that policies have been well managed .
The Commission spent the last year preparing for a radical reform , outlined in the White Paper presented on 1 March , and we appreciate that it will take more than a few months to turn this massive tanker around .
Parliament and the Budgetary Control Committee are , however , keen to ensure that the reform occurs at a speedy pace , which is why we have decided to postpone discharge in the expectation that the Commission will hit the targets that we have set them within the next two months .
The report as it stands at the moment is very different from the initial report that was submitted by Mrs Stauner on behalf of the EPP Group .
That was clearly used as a political battering ram .
Mrs Stauner quoted Goethe .
I will quote Shakespeare .
The report was full of sound and fury signifying nothing .
That is why the explanatory statement attached to this report has not been agreed by the Budgetary Control Committee .
It makes no sense in the context of the postponement report , and it is totally nonsensical and hysterical in tone .
We are delighted that there was an almost unanimous consensus , however , on the new practical approach to the general discharge .
We would like to thank the rapporteur for her cooperation on that .
We expect and hope that the Commission will deliver and the rapporteur will perhaps take a more considered approach in her final report .
But one thing which has become manifestly clear to me during this process is that we need an overhaul of the discharge procedure to avoid this kind of confrontation again .
This discharge procedure should be an opportunity to study systems failures within the Commission .
In an ideal world , it should be based on the Court of Auditors ' Report , but that does mean that both the Budgetary Control Committee and the Court of Auditors must develop a much closer relationship .
There is a massive amount of expertise in the Court of Auditors , expertise that Parliament should draw on in order to reach its own political conclusions .
The discharge procedure should not be a time to score political points nor to hound individuals but , where systems fail and lead to inefficiency or - worse - to fraud , it is the duty of Parliament to correct them .
We must also make sure that we find a mechanism within this system to make sure that we take account not only of the reports that are submitted by members of the Budgetary Control Committee , but also those by members of other parliamentary committees .
In postponing the discharge , we have set out clear points that we expect the Commission to act upon .
Never again will we accept the situation where we cannot get to the bottom of a case , because documents have gone missing .
Clear lines of responsibility must be established so that if problems occur , disciplinary action will follow .
Never again will we accept a situation where misconduct or a bad administrator will be judged by his or her peers .
We expect an external element to be included , as advised by the Committee of Independent Experts .
These are just two examples of how the Commission can improve its act in the short term without waiting to implement all the recommendations of the White Paper .
There is a question to answer as to whether the current Commission should or can take responsibility for the mistakes and problems of the past Commission .
Let us not forget that here we are considering the discharge for 1998 .
If we took this to its logical conclusion , it would mean that Parliament could only judge a sitting Commission during three years of its tenure .
That is why it is clear that we must address systems failures rather than attack individuals or individual Commissioners who may no longer be involved .
We do not want witch-hunts .
We want answers as to how best we spend European taxpayers ' money .
I would like to turn very briefly to the other reports that we have considered in committee , and first of all to the Kuhne report on the European Parliament .
Mr Kuhne has done an excellent job as rapporteur for the Parliament discharge .
There is no doubt that there have been vast improvements in Parliament 's performance .
Our financial control system does not have the quantity of payments that the Commission has and therefore things are more manageable .
We have had everlasting problems , of course , with the buildings , often through no fault of our own but because decisions have been imposed on us by the Council .
If the Council had any concern about budget control , we certainly would not be sitting in this building right now .
There has been a great deal of talk about a report on political group expenditure .
The fact is that our committee has not seen this report .
It has still not been published officially , and therefore it is difficult for us to comment on it .
But transparency is a principle that we must hold dear in this context .
I am delighted that Mrs Rühle has done such a great job on the EDF report .
Mr Mulder has done a great job as well , displaying his usual wizardry with the EAGGF accounts .
We support Mr Casaca in his approach , although we did not expect the Commission to support us on that of course .
We certainly do not expect the Council to support our position on the Casaca Report .
We are voting for postponement on many accounts .
The important reports , of course , will come next .
We hope that we will be able to develop a better approach in the next part of this discharge procedure .
It is important that we find a new way of doing it .
Thank you , Mr President , for all your kind support over the years for the Budgetary Control Committee .
It is always greatly appreciated .
Mr President , I would like to echo what some speakers have already expressed before me : after last year ' s events , this Commission will need to have all its wits about it if it intends to ignore what this Parliament has to say in resolutions .
All I can say at the beginning of this first debate is that the Commission would do well to go through the resolutions with a fine tooth comb , because this time Parliament is serious .
As far as the Stauner report is concerned , the liberal group is able to support the compromise resolution .
We are in favour of the Commission publishing an extensive report before 15 May which covers all the points we have raised .
In common with Mrs Theato , we hope that everything will be signed , sealed and delivered before the summer .
I should add that we , as a group , have less appreciation for the explanatory note which the rapporteur has added to her own resolution .
This was already mentioned last night .
In our opinion , an explanation should reflect the resolution itself and should not include any new elements .
I would like to make a brief comment on the report by Mr Kuhne .
We too have a great deal of appreciation and admiration for the way in which Mr Kuhne has drafted his report .
If we are to criticise the Commission , we should perhaps make sure that we have put our own house in order first .
It is difficult to scrutinise somebody else if we as Parliament do not ensure that we are completely beyond reproach ourselves .
I also think that Parliament ' s administration would do well to stick to the many dates and deadlines included in the Kuhne report .
I would now like to come back to the Stauner report and a number of points made in it .
The Court of Auditors will shortly be publishing a report on the so-called Fléchard affair .
There have been many speculations in the press , in Parliament , and so forth .
We must not get ahead of ourselves . A few things are already clear , however , irrespective of the fraud affair itself .
Firstly , how is it possible for documents intentionally to go missing from the four Directorates-General or directors dealing with these ?
The documents disappeared everywhere simultaneously .
The big question to the Commission is : what has it since done on this score ?
Secondly , we would like proportionality explained .
Should large businesses pay larger fines than small businesses ?
Thirdly , where does the Commissioners ' responsibility lie ?
To what extent can officials decide some things for themselves ?
This is an extremely political issue .
The following general rule will need to apply to this Commission : the error rate is too high .
It is not enough to say that it should come down .
We need a plan of action : by such and such a year , the Commission should bring the error rate down to such and such a level .
Then Parliament would know where it stood .
The Commission would then have a goal to work towards and we could market ourselves better to the general public .
This is what it is all about at the end of the day .
Europe ' s ideal needs to be preserved .
Mr President , Commissioners , I too should again like to confirm that postponement must not be construed as a refusal of discharge .
On the contrary , we had no party political axes to grind in our committee and we obtained a broadly-carried compromise across all groups with just one vote against .
We can see that the new Commission is making an effort , but the 1998 discharge is at issue here and we must take it very seriously .
We must restore the public ' s lost confidence in the European institutions .
We must re-establish confidence and that means that , as a committee , we must make a critical examination of the 1998 budget .
We want neither to play down nor sensationalise the problem .
On the contrary , we need to exert constructive pressure and we see the decision as a chance , not a punishment .
Our yardstick was how responsibility and transparency were dealt with and requires an open approach to shortcomings and an open approach to mistakes .
We hope that the action plan will help the administration to achieve better management .
We also take the view that the same yardstick must then be applied to Parliament and in this we completely disagree with Mr Kuhne , although we welcome his critical report .
Criticism is just one side of the equation ; consistency is the other and we hope that a majority in Parliament will vote to postpone the decision , subject to the clear condition that the administration of Parliament must also table an action plan to improve management .
The questions of the award of contracts , buildings and staff are at issue .
We know all about the pressure of time up to the point of discharge .
The report by the financial controller , for example , was submitted relatively late .
Obviously it was not possible to submit this action plan in time for today ' s decision .
However , we call on Parliament for precisely this reason to vote for a postponement here , so that an action plan can be drawn up jointly by 15 May .
This too we see as an important chance for Parliament to restore confidence and make it clear that it takes its own administration and the shortcomings in its own administration seriously .
I must also highlight something else , since Mr Kuhne appeared to be hinting that a hush-up would be in the groups ' interest .
I can only say , as the new treasurer of the Greens , that I went to the administration and to the Court of Auditors back in November or December and pointed out that I had discovered a number of errors in the management of the finances on entering office , that there was mismanagement and that I would fight to get this mismanagement dealt with over the next three months . I also pointed out that I was in favour of maximum transparency and openness in this area and that we urgently needed to address the financing of European parties in order to be able to refute the accusation of indirect party financing which was rightly being levelled at Parliament .
We need clear-cut criteria and clear-cut guidelines .
We must do away with grey areas at European level because , as we all know , grey areas can and will always be abused , which is why we want transparency and openness .
Transparency and openness mean - and this is my clear call - that we must apply the same yardstick to all the institutions .
We should vote for a postponement whenever we are of the opinion that an action plan can be drawn up within a month which will show the public that we take our errors seriously and are trying to correct them and I would stress once again that it has nothing to do with dismantling institutions ; on the contrary , we want to strengthen them and we want to restore trust in the eyes of the public in Europe .
Mr President , it says " BUDG 1998 discharge " on the notice board , but it should say CONT .
Perhaps this could be corrected because Budgets and Budgetary Control are always getting confused .
It is the question of control which is at issue here .
It would be difficult to confuse them , Mrs Theato , but , in any event , we will try to correct it on the screen .
They tell me that it has to be written with a limited number of digits .
We will try to find a formula which will make it clear that we are talking about the COCOBU .
Perhaps CCB would be useful since this is the formula used in other bodies .
Mr President , the European Union lacks moral authority . That is particularly problematic in matters of finances .
Parliament could achieve it , and it does wish to , which is clear from the reports now under discussion , but it lacks credibility in this area .
To maintain its own self-respect Parliament must accept the rules and regulations for the Members forthwith .
Parliament must investigate the misappropriation of funds by its political groups .
Our group will not agree that the practice of party aid should be introduced at the taxpayer ' s expense to cover up such malpractice .
Parliament must investigate why it was so lax in its vigilance when it came to millions of euros ' worth of Parliament property disappearing .
I do not really understand why it should discharge itself just now , when the report by the Court of Auditors of the European Communities on monetary and economic issues for 1998 is being prepared and is about to be published .
I would remind you how difficult it was in Parliament to raise the issue of malpractice on the basis of the accounts of the Commission for 1996 .
I would remind you how the Social Democrats in particular defended Mr Santer ' s Commission , and how we were obliged to compile a list of Members ' names when passing a motion of censure .
Those parliamentary members that compiled the list were obviously right .
The 1998 accounts and data give weight to earlier conclusions : Mr Santer ' s Commission appears to have approved a framework of budgetary discipline in which it was possible for malpractice to exist .
The members of the Commission in many cases are not themselves guilty of furthering their own interests , but the officials continue to act as before , and this Commission must take them to task .
To support them will be the fifty or so trade union officials employed by the EU , defending people who are guilty of malpractice .
They are the home guard for the officials that have behaved dishonourably .
Most of the officials in the EU are diligent and decent people .
In this case there is a need for increased vigilance , and that is something Mr Santer ' s Commission was unable to achieve .
It would appear that Romano Prodi ' s Commission has not got off to a very good start in this respect either , and the President of the Commission , in particular , has delivered opinions that show that the notions of public accessibility and transparency are not being honoured in this Commission .
However , postponing the discharge is justified and is the correct course of action in this situation .
We want to give the Commission the opportunity to improve the way it does things and show that it is able to do the job it inherited from the previous Commission .
Postponement of the granting of discharge is in itself the result of a quite incredible situation .
Even though it is not a question of discharge being refused at the present time , the postponement is a consequence of the Committee on Budgetary Control ' s not having been able to obtain adequate information on time , of documents ' having disappeared and of the fact that there is so much that can be criticised in the financial and administrative spheres that the impression is one of dealing with a South American banana republic rather than with a supranational European organisation .
These extraordinary results from a seedy administrative culture go back to 1998 and are not this Commission ' s direct responsibility , but it is the present Commission ' s responsibility to show that the misconduct , fraud and betrayal of mandates which have taken place really do belong to the past .
We have still not obtained proofs of this in all areas . We have heard excuses , often in a dismissive tone , from the Commission , as if it were the Commission which was to be giving us discharge , rather than the other way round .
We have seen an express reluctance to hold those officials to account who are responsible for the circumstances open to criticism .
It is not that there are no rules . Rather , it is a case of rules having been quite deliberately set aside in many areas .
As Mr Kuhne rightly pointed out , it is important that we should also direct criticism against Parliament ' s own economic administration .
I would especially point out the quite unacceptable buildings administration and the way in which the rules for using the competitive tendering procedures were circumvented .
The impression cannot be avoided of systematic nepotism of precisely the kind which the competitive tendering procedure should prevent .
We shall therefore vote against the discharge for Parliament ' s 1998 accounts .
If there are no dramatic improvements in the financial administration , European taxpayers will know how to react against this irresponsible misuse of their money .
The Commission must understand that they are not Europe ' s overlords but the servants of European citizens .
I should like to emphasise that there is broad agreement within the Committee on Budgetary Control about postponing the discharge for the most important accounts , and I would thank the rapporteurs for the splendid and painstaking work they have carried out .
I would also especially draw attention to Mrs Stauner ' s and Mrs Rühle ' s very efficient work , just as I should like to thank Mrs Theato for her very conscientious and effective leadership of the Committee on Budgetary Control .
Mrs Theato should know that we value her desire to call a spade a spade .
Mr President , before I comment on Mrs Stauner ' s report , I would like to endorse what has been said before , namely that the European Parliament is quite right to rap the European Commission over the knuckles and to at least postpone the discharge on the 1998 budget .
It is quite ironic that this should happen at a time when a draft report by the European Court of Auditors is being circulated which shows that our Parliament has not exactly spent the taxpayers ' hard-earned money wisely either .
In the light of this , it might be expedient to establish in all honesty at this stage that the reproaches which we are quite rightly hurling at the European Commission today might well be heading in our own direction tomorrow , again quite rightly .
Indeed , if we are to believe the draft report , the groups deal with the many millions which are made available to them for God knows what reason in a very careless , even fraudulent manner , and the administrative department of this Parliament gets off anything but scot-free , to put it mildly .
This is just to add to the issues which have been dragging on for many years , such as the nonchalant way in which we deal with the expenses we are paid as MEPs , in principle with a view to recruiting personnel , or the way in which we handle the building policy of this Parliament , which is so strange as easily to prompt thoughts of large-scale fraud .
In short , today we are quite rightly acting as the plaintiff , but we need to be very aware of the fact that , tomorrow , we will be in the dock ourselves .
The fact that this is a case of the pot calling the kettle black should not , however , be any reason for tolerating deceit , fraud and further theft of taxpayers ' money and should not , especially , give certain people any excuse for tolerating these things . Nor should it be any reason or excuse for allowing those who have lined their pockets and taken advantage all these years to go unpunished .
I only wanted to make the remark because I am quite convinced that fraud and mismanagement are inherent and are causally linked to systems where there is no obvious connection between revenue and expenditure , between the levying of taxes , on the one hand , and the policies being financed with these taxes on the other .
In my own country , for example , I know of projects which have been launched with so-called European money which would never have been accepted or requested by the people , if it they had known that their own tax money would be used for them .
European money is always spent with less thought than tax money which has not made a detour through Europe .
This is done under the motto : if we do not spend this European money , somebody else will .
This may sound harsh or even simplistic , but that is how it is .
I have not even mentioned the overlap which exists in a large number of these European credits .
National states provide development aid , so does Europe .
National states combat racism , so does Europe .
National states support the women ' s movement , so does Europe .
National states support the trade unions and parties , so does Europe .
National states support all kinds of Third Way movements , so does Europe .
And so on and so forth .
Manna falls from heaven and nobody knows whether it is all spent wisely , or worse , we know for a fact that a great deal of that money is not spent wisely , but there are no complaints because , in the case of European money , a kind of pro-European goodwill is systematically bought from all kinds of pressure groups .
Returning to today ' s topic , I would especially like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Stauner , on her report .
It is true that the explanatory note to the resolution reads much like a piece of crime fiction . It contains scandals which are now out in the open about waste , nepotism , theft , the Fléchard affair , the ECHO affair and such like , not to mention the direct involvement of Commissioner Cresson .
There is no need to keep on about what is stated quite clearly in black and white in this report .
I would only like to add that I , as representative of hundreds of thousands of tax payers , am shocked to find that the present Commission too is manoeuvring in all kinds of directions and making all kinds of attempts to protect a number of people responsible for this mismanagement .
I think that we need to do some straight talking to the Commission and that we may have to penalise their persistent bad conduct with a new crisis of confidence after 15 May , if necessary by means of a motion of no confidence , because desperate situations call for desperate measures .
Mr President , the Committee on Budgetary Control is doing sterling work under Mrs Theato ' s , Mrs Van der Laan ' s , Mr Bösch ' s and Mr Blak ' s expert leadership .
I should also like to complement Mrs Stauner on a good report .
My group will not grant discharge in connection with an account which conceals more than it reveals and has been submitted by a Commission which despises openness , subsidiarity and democracy .
How is it different from the Commission which was overturned ?
Are our rapporteurs now getting complete information and full answers in response to their questions ?
No .
Have administrative procedures been instigated against those who had their hands in the till or covered up for those who had their hands in the till ?
No .
Has Mr Paul van Buitenen been rewarded for his courageous efforts to turn the Commission into a responsible organisation ? No .
He has moved to Luxembourg and has had to agree to keep quiet . Moreover , any future van Buitens know that they will be fired if they behave as any person of integrity would expect of officials of the Commission .
Mr Prodi ' s Commission is not responsible for the sins of the past , but all 20 Commissioners are now responsible for the fact that procedures have not been cleaned up and put in order and a fresh start made .
It is you 20 who are responsible for the fact that the Commission ' s draft regulation on transparency will cause documents which are at present readily available to be locked away .
It is you 20 who are responsible for the fact that we , as Members of Parliament , are still not receiving the information we request .
You operate on the principles of absolute monarchy .
Come out into the open and acknowledge that it is no longer possible to govern with old-fashioned secrecy .
Admit that you will be replaced if you continue to sweep the dirt under the carpet .
You will soon have been in office for a year , so we have to observe that you too will be accountable if you fail to meet your responsibilities .
And we must apply the same critical standard against ourselves .
We ought not to approve Parliament ' s accounts for as long as we have assistants who do not pay tax and yet obtain social security and for as long as travel expenses not connected to actual costs are refunded .
Mr President , a few years ago discharges in this House used to be perfunctory debates , certainly not held on Tuesday mornings .
But we now have a wider remit to discuss this subject. and over the last few years it has been realised that discharge is a very important part of the life of the European Union .
Under Article 276 ( 2 ) , the EC Treaty requires the Commission to submit to Parliament any necessary information on the execution of expenditure and operation of the financial control systems .
Article 276 ( 3 ) of the Treaty requires the Commission to take all appropriate steps to act on Parliament ' s observations concerning execution of expenditure .
It should not be any surprise to outside observers , or those in the system , that as Parliament has become more authoritative in ensuring the democratic accountability of the institutions , it will not be simply fobbed off with a lack of reply to questions which have been asked , however far they go back into the past .
I congratulate all the rapporteurs on the discharges before the House this morning .
I have a few comments on Mr Kuhne ' s and Mrs Stauner ' s reports .
Firstly , on the question of the Parliament discharge .
There has been significant progress on a number of issues outstanding but it is clear from Mr Kuhne ' s report today that there are still a number of issues to be clarified : the question of the calls for tender ; the issue of the financing plan for buildings ; the question of the security service for this House here , and not least the question which is raised under paragraph 15 of the Kuhne report , concerning personnel policy .
Here it states and I quote : " deplores most strongly the residual impression left by these cases , whereby it would appear that favouritism plays a significant role in the granting of appointments to high-grade posts within the administration of Parliament " .
If we take the context of this report we will see that it has to stand on its own merits .
If we add to that the Court of Auditors ' report on the operation of the political groups , we have come to the conclusion in our political group that we need to postpone discharge on its own merits .
It is not a question of the popping of champagne corks between Brussels and Strasbourg , that is an irrelevance if I might put it politely .
It is not a question of parallelism , it is a question of substance .
As for the admissibility of the amendment , I draw to the attention of the services of Parliament and to your attention , Mr President , the fact that Annex V of our Rules of Procedure does not apply to the Parliament discharge but applies to the Commission discharge and therefore our amendments should be considered to be admissible .
Secondly , I turn to Mrs Stauner ' s excellent report and the explanatory statement .
It is a pity Mrs Morgan is not still here in the Chamber , because I understood her to say that you cannot just leave a discharge to systems alone ; it is the question of access to information , so that we as a Parliament can grant discharge .
You can ask for access to information , but if you do not get it then you have to start applying a certain rigidity and postpone discharge .
The explanatory statement very clearly sets out the reasons for so doing .
I come to two points here .
The first is access to information .
We do not have at this time a framework agreement between Commission and Parliament - that is still outstanding in the context of Annex III .
Why ?
Because Parliament and the Commission cannot agree about what access we have to information .
The impression is left that we are foot-dragging , but in fact we are not getting complete answers to the questions put by Mr Bösch and Mr Blak .
Parliament is not getting the answers it requires .
Secondly , the question of the disciplinary procedure .
It is an arbitrary procedure .
It seems that high officials get off and ex-parliamentarians , who are in the Commission services get downgraded for no apparent reason and against the information available .
I am thinking of the case of Mr Zavvos in particular .
Therefore we , as a Parliament , should look at each of these cases as it stands .
My group will be in favour of postponing discharges both for the Commission and for Parliament until all the information is available to us .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this debate is probably one of the most important matters which this Commission has to negotiate with Parliament at the present time and not just for the reasons which have already been addressed .
The fact has been overlooked today that , if memory serves me well , this is the first time the finance ministers of this Union have not unanimously recommended that the Commission be granted discharge .
So things are not improving , Commissioner Schreyer ; they are obviously going in the opposite direction , which is why we must follow the recommendations proposed by Mrs Stauner in the Committee on Budgetary Control as closely as possible .
As far as the information policy is concerned , I am in full agreement with Mr Elles .
We are not holding you responsible for past errors , but I believe that , pragmatically speaking , we are entitled to expect two things of you .
Firstly , you must ensure that monies paid in error or , as in the Fléchard case , sums waived in error are recovered .
In other words , you must repair the damage to the taxpayer , insofar as it can still be repaired .
Secondly , you must ensure that the people responsible for mismanagement and erroneous developments are punished consistently , if necessary by making them compensate for part of the damage caused out of their own pocket .
That would represent two innovations at the Commission because , as far as I am aware , officials implicated have never yet had to pay money back into the EU budget .
The provisions of the financial regulation on this point do not need to be revised .
We need no reforms for the purpose , we merely need to apply these provisions , otherwise they will remain dead letter .
Having said this , you will understand , I think , that we have serious doubts about some of the proposals which you have put before the European public in the much-publicised Commission reform .
I need only refer to your plan to do away with independent - I repeat - independent financial control or your plan to delete provisions on the financial liability of authorising officers from the financial regulation .
It is obvious that some people have been living in glass houses in Brussels for a very long time .
If any of us goes to our constituency and tells our voters , now that one Commission has had to resign because of fraud and misconduct , that independent financial control and the liability of officials are to be deleted from the relevant provisions , then , by God , we shall have done Europe a bad turn .
Mrs Schreyer , Members of the Commission , use the postponement of discharge for the 1998 budget as an opportunity to show that the new team is strong on management and able to act .
Mr President , the key task of this European Parliament is , and remains , that of restoring European citizens ' confidence in the European project .
Our most powerful weapon in this regard is the discharge .
This is why the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party is in favour of postponing discharge , as suggested , until such time as the Commission has fulfilled our specific condition .
In this way , we can keep the pressure on and bring about real reform .
Unfortunately , the Council failed once again this year to follow the good example of Parliament , and discharge for 1998 has been granted as if the matter were quite insignificant .
This is particularly regrettable because the national governments are responsible for 80 % of European spending and are , as such , responsible for a proportionate share of the irregularities .
It is now high time that the Council followed our example and searched its own heart .
There is no doubt that our discharge resolutions are effective . This is borne out by the far-reaching reforms which the Commission has now undertaken .
I would like to illustrate this with a recent example .
Our pressure has prompted the European Commission to undertake drastic reform in foreign policy .
I am keen , therefore , to share with you my initial reaction .
The plans for changing the project cycle and transforming the SCR into a European bureau are a positive step forward .
But the real political prioritising we need for the purpose of employing our very limited resources is still lacking .
The attention paid to the discharge granted to the European Commission is overwhelming , but I am of the opinion that the discharge granted to the European Parliament deserves just as much , if not more , attention .
Within the European Commission , a drastic reform programme has been launched at our insistence .
Unfortunately , it has proved impossible so far to take the same drastic steps in this House .
The Kuhne report is Parliament ' s first report which takes discharge seriously .
Not only did Mr Kuhne manage to identify the sensitive areas where all the key points were concerned , he also managed to set fixed deadlines .
This is what Parliament will be judged on and he deserves our true appreciation for this work .
Some claim that the European Parliament should be judged by the same stringent measures as the European Commission .
I do not share this view .
In my opinion , we should raise the standard for ourselves .
We are the controlling body .
We have the direct link with the citizen .
We are primarily responsible for restoring their confidence in the European project .
This is why it is not enough to measure up against the non-elected officials within the Commission .
We should outstrip them by far . Unfortunately , nothing is further from the truth .
I would like to emphatically lay the blame for Parliament ' s bad image with those who have always had a majority .
The two large parties are responsible for the ethos of nepotism and underhand dealing which permeates this House .
But the small parties too which have mismanaged the party funding have once again put our name in a bad light .
The Kuhne report will be an important weapon which can be used by those in favour of reform in this House .
But whether it will be adopted at this stage remains to be seen .
There is in fact a risk that , if we grant discharge to ourselves whilst not having done so for the Commission , we will then take the edge of this report and this is exactly what we do not want to do .
We must think very hard about this so that we can actually restore the citizen ' s confidence .
Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , do not try to argue that what is wrong is right .
That is the attitude we must adopt in this difficult exercise constituted by the annual discharge .
Mrs Theato was right in stating that granting discharge is a serious matter .
To grant discharge is , when all is said and done , to grant a certificate of good management .
I would like to thank all rapporteurs , but also the Committee on Budgetary Control , for all their hard work .
The Stauner report , including the explanatory note - which I fully support , by the way - is very critical of the European Commission .
The four largest groups have reached a compromise in which it is recommended that discharge be delayed and that the European Commission be given a list of 17 specific questions .
I am in favour of this approach and as such , would like to ask you to adopt Mrs Stauner ' s report without any further ado .
Secondly , I would like to comment on the Kuhne report .
I am not trying to argue that what is wrong is right .
I wish to make it absolutely clear here that the Kuhne report does not follow this theme .
Mr Kuhne has completed an excellent piece of work .
His report incisively denounces what is going wrong in our institutions .
Mrs Morgan told us a moment ago that we do not want witch-hunts .
But Mrs Morgan , this is not happening .
What we denounce is stated quite clearly in the courageous report of our financial controller , Mr O 'Hannrachain .
The complaints are staggering and include a faulty inventory and many thefts .
I was a victim of this myself in a previous life when my computer and printer were stolen .
Secondly , there are far too many restricted and private allocations .
These should be the exception , but we have noticed that in 1998 , 50 % of the cases were awarded privately .
This is no longer the exception .


Thirdly , I would like to mention buildings policy , a policy in which decisions are taken step-by-step , rather like slicing a salami , and which is made up of faits accomplis .
Ladies and gentlemen , we need a long-term building policy , to ensure that policy is not only carried out correctly , but that unnecessary expenditure is also avoided , a case in point being the underground tunnel being built here in Strasbourg which links the printing department in the IPE-I building to the distribution department in our building .
The price tag is FFR 27.4 million .
This is ludicrous !
Mr Kuhne has hit out in the press and also here today at the stance taken by my Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance .
He is blaming us for playing a party-political game .
Well , Mr Kuhne , I can assure you that this is not the case .
What we are doing is being consistent in our approach , however .
Surely , asking for our offices to be treated in the same way as the Commission is not a political game .
Hence our amendment which recommends postponement of discharge for Parliament ' s budget and which has given the Secretary-General a list of queries which we expect to be answered by 15 May .
I am delighted to state that Mr Deprez has adopted the same stance a moment ago .
I am delighted to state that Mr Elles has tabled a similar amendment on behalf of the Group of the European People ' s Party and European Democrats .
I therefore hope to receive more support for our amendment which was completely voted down in the Committee on Budgetary Control .
I am now counting on a majority in the plenary meeting .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Stauner ' s report , which we are discussing today , is important in more than one respect .
Indeed , it is of direct concern to the citizens of our respective countries , since it discusses European Union finances , and the citizens of Europe are entitled to ask for explanations regarding the use made of their money .
This report is also important because it deals with serious inefficiencies in the European Commission ' s implementation of the budget , inefficiencies involving considerable amounts of money .
Our Group is in favour of any action which may be taken to combat fraud , by definition , and therefore shares the rapporteur ' s opinion regarding the overwhelming need to make the management of the European Commission more efficient and effective .
We are extremely concerned at both the irregularities committed within the scope of the MED and ECHO programmes and at some of the details of the Fléchard case .
The Union for a Europe of Nations Group is convinced that such practices can only seriously impair the credibility and , hence , the image of the European Union as a whole .
We should also remember , ladies and gentlemen , that we have been forced to note shortcomings in the procedure for dialogue with the Commission , which seems not to have been able , or not to have wished , to respond to the expectations and questions of the members of the parliamentary supervisory body .
In view of the many contentious issues still pending , whether they involve irregularities or budget funds , our Group considers that , at the moment , it is essential to refuse discharge for the year 1998 .
All we can do is urge the European Commission to pass on , within the necessary time limits , all the information requested by the Committee on Budgetary Control regarding the measures adopted , in order to overcome the obstacles to the granting of discharge .
For us to grant discharge without asking the European Commission for further details would , of course , be evidence of weakness on the part of the European Parliament .
This House would lose face and would discredit itself in the eyes of public opinion in our countries , and that is something we do not want .
Regarding the European Commission ' s proposal , there could be no question of the Union for a Europe of Nations Group ' s accepting sharing responsibility for the decision on discharge .
The Treaties clearly establish the exclusive competence of Parliament in matters of budgetary control .
Mr President , the 1998 discharge procedure illustrates once again that the European Union ' s bad image is not totally unfounded but is actually based on facts .
In its 1998 annual report , the Court of Auditors mentioned an unacceptably high error rate and felt compelled , would you believe , to issue a negative Statement of Assurance .
As long as the Commission does not commit itself to drastically reducing that error rate from the beginning of next year , we cannot grant discharge to the Commission .
The Stauner report deserves every support on this score .
We in Parliament set high standards for the Commission , but do we set them for ourselves too ?
We are right in insisting that the Commission base its budget on accurate estimates , but how accurate are the estimates for our own budget ?
Year in year out , many EP budget lines show up enormous surpluses which are subsequently used to purchase buildings by means of a collective transfer .
I cannot help thinking that many administrative expenses are intentionally estimated on the generous side in order to have the extra funding for buildings in reserve .
These shady tricks must stop at once .
We also need to search our own hearts regarding public tenders .
It is unacceptable that the number of privately awarded contracts in 1998 increased to half of all contracts .
Why such a steep rise ?
The Secretary-General has mentioned a few procedural reasons , but is this the full story ?
A clarification regarding this drastic rise is urgently required .
Rapporteur Kuhne also puts his finger on the problems regarding the financing of the Spinelli building .
This is the umpteenth affair involving new buildings .
Is it not about time we commissioned an independent inquiry into the decision-making process for building projects ?
We can no longer afford to cover the above issues with the cloak of charity .
We need to exert parliamentary pressure to bring about the necessary reforms .
We will therefore support the amendments to postpone discharge until such time as the Secretary-General has produced concrete plans .
Mr President , I welcome the two Commissioners who are most involved in the development of the budget , and I have no doubt that President Prodi will be present at the debate that will take place in two months time .
Beginning with the most important discharge , the discharge of the Commission ' s accounts - in political terms , the most relevant and , in terms of quantity , the most significant - we are aware that your responsibility in terms of expenses is limited and that a majority of the responsibility in the field of expenses lies with the Member States .
It is important that you try to become , firstly , an example for the Member States to follow and that , therefore , you understand that we demand more of you , if possible ; and one day we will have to start to talk very seriously about these cases which are always detected in the Council rather than in the Commission .
Furthermore I would like you to look at Mrs Stauner ' s report from the most positive point of view possible .
All the groups have reached an agreement to raise 17 questions in relation to certain cases .
They are not the only ones .
We could have mentioned other problems arising from the TACIS or PHARE programmes .
After the crisis of the previous Commission , which you have begun to deal with , what we want - because we believe in your intentions and we want a strong and independent Commission and we are therefore giving you time - is for you to give us a positive response to certain very specific cases .
I can assure you that you will be able to reply in the affirmative to each of the cases which we are putting to you .
Therefore , between now and the summer , we could hold a sitting for the purposes of discharging the accounts .
Not only are we as interested as you in the discharge of the accounts , but in fact we are more so .
I would therefore like you to study the report which has been presented by Mrs Stauner with the broad consensus of the Groups .
This is a political debate , and you must understand that we need you to act .
Documents must not disappear .
You must do something , irrespective of the fact that I want us to reach an agreement soon on the way we will have to deal with the documents you call confidential .
As rapporteur for the 1999 Commission budget , I would love to be able to do my work in the clear knowledge of which documents we have access to and which we do not and why .
I will give you an additional piece of information .
This debate must not concentrate excessively on the accounting issues .
As you can see in this budget , this is a political debate which goes beyond a strict examination of what you have done with regard to the 1998 budget .
It is a general debate .
We will also have to reach a framework agreement on how we can include in this debate - which is becoming increasingly important - not only accounting issues but also issues from other years relating to expenditure or management .
You know that an unknown amount of money is lost through fraud or misappropriation .
You are facing a great challenge , because even more resources are lost through a lack of motivation , that virus which has infected the entire administration of the Commission and which you must eradicate .
More resources are lost through lack of motivation than through misappropriation .
This is a quality issue which will also have to be increasingly discussed in the context of this debate .
I will refer finally to the European Parliament ' s budget , and I would like to reply to those people who say that , since we are supposedly tough and demanding with you , we must also be so with regard to our own institution .
Of course we must .
However we must not compare separate issues .
For example , the auditor has not detected any irregularity in Parliament ' s budget .
We must therefore be prudent and fair and try to treat everyone as they deserve .
The same must be demanded of Parliament as of all the others , but this is our House , we have more information and we can therefore take a different approach when it comes to proposing , as the Kuhne report does , a conditional discharge and not a postponement of the discharge .
I will end by saying that you can reply to the 17 questions we have raised .
We want you to do so , and we understand that in that way we can support you so that you , who have just joined this Commission , can really control your house . ' Take the bull by the horns ' - as we say in Spain - and we will be able to achieve a discharge for this year on the part of the majority of the Groups in this House before the summer .
Mr President , the new Commission is not responsible for matters from the past , but it is to be judged on the basis of its willingness to straighten out its affairs .
So far , it has not shown much desire to do so .
The Commission has put the lid on the issue , and it has been impossible to obtain the necessary information .
The Commission maintains that the matters in question do not fall under the 1998 discharge .
That is not the case .
All these matters surfaced in 1998 and they should therefore , of course , also be dealt with under the 1998 discharge .
The Commission has , on the whole , employed many dodges to avoid responding to our questions , and that is completely unacceptable .
The Treaty is clear : in accordance with Article 276 , Parliament is entitled to obtain all necessary information in connection with the discharge procedure .
I should like to give an example .
In accordance with general practice , I , as the rapporteur responsible for the subject of development aid , sent the Commission a questionnaire concerning ECHO .
It was sent to the Commission in November .
Only in March did I receive an answer in which , moreover , I was told to take a running jump .
In the meantime , Mrs Fontaine received a letter from Mr Prodi , stating that the Commission was tired of answering all the stupid questions from the Committee on Budgetary Control .
Excuse me but , either the man has been out in the sun too long or he must have some incredibly bad advisers .
The Commission is obliged to answer our questions , irrespective of whether or not it likes the content of these .
Until they understand this , I think we should postpone granting discharge .
I hope the Commission will take our demands seriously .
If they do not , we shall be ready to send them on a very long holiday in May .
I should like to explain what the ECHO case is about .
First and foremost , I should like to emphasise that this is not a smear campaign directed against individuals , but a question of putting matters in order .
What signal is being sent out to present and future leaders of the Commission when the people responsible escape indictment ?
The ECHO scandal has still not led to any repercussions .
The case is at present before the Court of Justice in Luxembourg which admits that nothing will probably come of the case and that it will no doubt refer it to the Belgian authorities in a couple of years ' time .
The problem is that the ECHO case is not about property crime .
It is about gross negligence and about an official who has taken decisions without regard to the finance regulation .
The decision to exonerate the previous director was taken by the previous Commission , and this was a political decision pure and simple .
Now , the Commission has until 15 May to solve the problem .
If they do not come up with satisfactory solutions , I shall campaign for our obtaining a parliamentary committee of inquiry which can examine the matter in depth .
I also think it is a good idea to look a little more closely at the discharge for the development fund .
There are still unresolved demands but , if we postpone granting the discharge , this will be accompanied by clear demands upon the Commission .
The Commission ' s delegations have failed .
There are several examples of cases where they could have prevented fraud if they had been just a little observant .
Unfortunately , there are too many delegations which are just there for the ride .
I have therefore asked permission to prepare an own-initiative report so that we can have these issues clarified .
The final thing I want to say is that the Commission should undertake to refer the fraud cases to OLAF .
I obtained 11 reports under Pentagon-like conditions , but OLAF still does not know anything about these .
I therefore think it is time that these matters were tidied up , and I am pleased that Mr Nielson has now shown that he wants to get this process under way .
I look forward to seeing the results .
Mr President , the issue of discharge is an immense one for the institutions of the EU .
Its importance is evident in the fact that in many cases it is now being proposed that the discharge should be postponed .
As far as the Commission is concerned , this is the fifth year in succession that the Court of Auditors has not delivered an unambiguously favourable verdict .
As the Member States , that is to say the Council , has advocated discharge , this is almost a matter of structural conflict .
Apparently , the Court of Auditors should specify the shortcomings and incidences of malpractice in more detail and place less trust in mathematics .
Although I say this , in no way does this diminish the Commission ' s responsibility , which is a great one .
The reports concerning discharge show just how badly administrative reforms are needed .
Commissioner Kinnock ' s package of reforms must be pushed through without delay .
The main focus is the reform of internal auditing in each of the institutions .
Administration and auditing must go hand in hand to preserve a sense of personal responsibility and help it grow .
The present system , in which it takes various signatures to authorise payments , does away with the notion of personal responsibility .
It is totally impossible to find anyone who will take responsibility .
Improving the quality of administration is a basic requirement for a greater sense of responsibility and better efficiency .
Increased control is only a reflection of the fact that the organisation has failed .
The main financial difficulties focus on the largest budgetary category , agriculture .
This is because agricultural aid is largely based either on land area or the number of livestock , and the Member State in question pays it .
This development is largely due to the WTO agreement , which determines the various forms of agricultural aid , their classification and the desired trend it should adopt .
The system has led to a tremendous amount of bureaucracy , an enormous increase in monitoring , and , in the long term , we can assume it will also lead to inefficiency and the entrepreneurial spirit of agriculture will vanish forever .
At the same time , the European farmers have become the most closely observed section of the population on the Continent , and , for that reason , I am hoping for a lucid clarification of the agricultural aid system at the forthcoming WTO talks .
Mr President , over the last few days we have read in the press that the European Parliament is a haven for thieves .
This is both embarrassing and distasteful .
We must act in such a way that EU property is treated with the same respect as other property .
In this connection , we must check up on the matter of parliamentary administration .
In the EU budget this year there is an appropriation of EUR 300 000 set aside for an investigation into parliamentary administration .
According to the budget , this investigation will be given to an independent expert .
What has happened to this investigation , why has it not got under way , and what is going to be done about it ?
- ( PT ) Mr President , because of problems stemming from large-scale fraud in the production of wine and other types of fraud , we are more aware that EAGGF Guarantee Section appropriations are frequently used to promote the products of large-scale farming operations whose only real aim is to obtain subsidies , without even considering whether there is a market for these products .
This applies when small family-run farms , such as those dedicated to producing milk , find themselves outside the subsidy arrangements and find their very survival is threatened .
We therefore feel that the Commission ' s proposal to amend Regulation No 723 / 97 and to change the legal basis of the Regulation on preventing fraud and other irregularities from Article 37 to Article 280 of the Treaty , as the rapporteur Mr Casaca proposes , is extremely timely .
This will ensure that agricultural expenditure is treated like any other expenditure involving EU resources , and this will strengthen Parliament ' s power of intervention .
Mr President , Commissioner , I was responsible for the research section of the part of the report by my fellow member , Gabriele Stauner , relating to internal policy .
I was perfectly aware of its importance .
However , what we could not foresee was that , with the vote on the overall report , outbursts very similar to those at the time of the refusal of discharge for 1996 would occur once again .
To refer to the corresponding passages on research , I also make a statement on what have deliberately and disparagingly been referred to on occasions as old cases .
Old cases are not the same as obsolete cases ; they are an outstanding burden which the Commission must finally remove from our shoulders .
The Court of Auditors highlighted a series of shortcomings in the research area in 1998 .
It complained about the pre-dating of contracts and a high overall error rate in payment audits due to incorrect proof of or information on costs , an error rate for which the Commission is perhaps not 100 % responsible , but is at least 90 % responsible .
There is the old case of visiting scientist B and how his contract came into being .
They also include the internal audit report drafted in 1997 on the area of jurisdiction of the former Commissioner for Research , Mrs Cresson .
This report disappeared from the filing cabinet at the end of 1999 / beginning of 2000 .
At the same time , there was the so-called European nuclear affair .
Who then is going to be surprised that a link between the financial controller ' s filing cabinet and the roaming plutonium was established at the end of 1999 ?
We might be satisfied with some of the explanations that the Commission offers for these incidents .
Having spoken on many occasions , I am pleased to say , with trustworthy Commission officials , I have the impression that they are ready and willing to make corrections .
As are we .
But mistakes have been made and the audit was organised as politely as when an auditor visits a company .
However , it was the Court of Auditors that carried out the audit , an institution that has no form of personal interest in the matter and it is no good playing down the mistakes .
If , nonetheless , the rapporteur takes the view today that these cases have not been solved properly , then I would like to side with her fully and unreservedly , as did the Committee on Budgetary Control with just one vote against .
I call on the Commission to immediately give us satisfactory answers , which stand up in public .
Then everyone will have a true picture .
Questions can hurt .
We asked them because mistrust and criticism have been spreading since the refusal of the 1996 discharge .
But what matter are the results which will be presented on 15 May .
Mr President , representatives of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , the discharge procedure is a complicated exercise .
We have to assess a budget two years after it has been implemented by the Commission , while taking into consideration the budget which is currently being framed , the improvements needed for the implementation of the budget and the practical realisation of the political goals of the European Union .
This already complex situation is further complicated by the peculiar situation we have found ourselves in for almost a year now , to wit , the discrediting of the European Union to a certain extent following the resignation of the Santer Commission last year ; a new Commission , in which most of the Commissioners were not members of the Commission which was led to resign ; a new Parliament , with many Members facing this discharge procedure for the first time ; and reforms or proposed reforms directly concerning European Union finances .
I am thinking of the Structural Funds for the things already achieved , and the Financial Regulation for the things already achieved .
This is the context in which we received Mrs Stauner ' s report , a report which , unfortunately , makes only a limited assessment of the Commission ' s implementation of the budget for the financial year 1998 against the yardstick of the political goals which the European Union set itself .
If it is unthinkable and intolerable for public money to be used for irregularities and fraud , and if we must both dismantle the mechanisms enabling such abuses to take place and denounce the people involved , then we can also question the methods used to draw up this report .
This report was unacceptable in its initial form because it did not give us the material to form an opinion as to whether or not the budget for 1998 was correctly implemented by the Commission .
It has been possible to adopt a compromise , but the fact remains that we find the explanatory statement unsatisfactory , as it does not reflect the new direction of the report , and portrays relations between our institutions as frozen in an attitude of defiance , at a time when we and our fellow citizens are hoping that productive cooperation in the interests of improved cohesion between our States will develop .
The content and the arguments presented in other more specific reports provide no more justification for postponement of discharge .
Let me refer , by way of example , to Mr Khanbhai ' s report , which revealed some problems in the ECSC accounts , including , among other things , the solvency ratio and the transfer of property , although the Commission and the High Authority are currently reducing these problems with a view to the expiry of the ECSC Treaty in 2002 .
In this specific situation , it would seem that the current discharge procedure would be a perilous exercise .
Should this not require giving a more precise framework to the work of Members of Parliament within the Committee on Budgetary Control ?
I shall conclude by mentioning the internal reform of the Commission .
Among other objectives , the Commission has set itself the task of improving financial control by various means : new structures , responsibilities of authorising officers , and financial controllers within each directorate-general .
We must be attentive to ensuring that this reform makes it possible to achieve the set objective and that it requires the various financial operators within the directorates-general to assume real responsibility .
It also seems essential that , in combination with the determination to reduce irregularity and fraud effectively , the reform should be able to look into the implementation of our policies within Member States , where one of the problems arising concerns payment deadlines and the inadequacy of some payment appropriations .
Mr President , this is a useful and very necessary procedure .
One problem that I have about it is that there is a natural tendency to concentrate much more on the 4 % of the budget that might have been lost , or the 2 % that probably was lost , than the 98 % of the budget that was properly spent .
It is necessary to acknowledge that 98 % was properly spent .
It is also important to try to correct the situation where things have gone wrong , but in so doing not to exaggerate it in such a way as to create in the European public 's mind an image of a European Union that is out of control , that is a sea of corruption and cannot be trusted with taxpayers ' money .
There is fraud at every level of government at which I have served - local , national and European and regional .
It is always there , but local and national bodies can stand up to criticism better perhaps than this younger institution of the European Union , which is less accepted .
While it is important to put things right and to give people confidence , nevertheless it does not help their confidence if we exaggerate the extent to which abuses occur and money is lost .
I thank Mrs Stauner for her report .
Some people have criticised it for being a bit too severe .
Mrs Stauner is new to the Budget Control Committee , but her statement is a real reflection of the mood and the debate that went on .
I do not agree with all of it , of course , but nevertheless it was agreed by a majority .
I would not entirely accept the explanatory statement .
It is Mrs Stauner 's own explanation but it is the motion for resolution that we the Parliament have to decide on .
Another point that I would like to make is that in seeking to bring everybody into accountability , whether they be officials or Members of the Commission , we ought , like Mr Deprez said , to avoid this vendetta between institutions .
We ought avoid particularly vendettas between an institution and individual commissioners .
We should see this Commission as a college and while the individual commissioners must be held accountable , nevertheless we must take an objective view of what is going on and beware of either European party politics or international politics colouring our judgement .
The last point I will make is that we have not only an obligation to ensure that accounts are better kept and money is better accounted for .
We also have an obligation to ensure that when we make regulations they are regulations which can be put into effect .
Over the years , I witnessed the making of all the regulations that are creating the problems and my experience in this Parliament was that we wanted to pander to public sentiment .
We never sought to ensure that our regulations were enforceable .
Mr President , Parliament ' s refusal last year to grant discharge on the 1996 budgetary year heralded the fall of the Santer Commission .
Parliament employed its powers in a sound manner under special circumstances .
A college of Commissioners , which has since been appointed , has presented an ambitious reform programme .
Last year ' s opposition from the Commission to Parliament has now developed into good working relations .
Needless to say , Parliament needs to keep a critical eye on the Commission .
It is unseemly , however , to deploy the discharge procedure as a weapon in a party-politically motivated battle and , what is more , it undermines Parliament ' s influence in the long run .
Mrs Stauner ' s motion for a resolution , which was before us initially was , in this respect , unbalanced . It over-simplified the issue and its sole aim appeared to be to malign the new Commission .
Her motion for a resolution contained damning accusations regarding the Commission which , as it happens , did not even relate to the 1998 budget year .
Meanwhile , the motion for a resolution has been amended drastically and the suggestion was made to postpone the discharge decision .
The Commission is being given the opportunity of responding to a number of urgent questions raised and requests made by Parliament before 15 May .
I would like to single out one point from among these questions and requests .
Over the past year , it has become clear that the Commission ' s disciplinary procedure does not function properly .
In countless cases , no action was taken or if it was , it did not lead to any result .
The procedure needs to be completely overhauled .
The Commission has made suggestions to this effect in its White Paper .
However , these suggestions do not go far enough .
The Committee of Independent Experts has recommended the appointment of an independent outsider , preferably in the role of chairman of the Disciplinary Committee .
Parliament supported this proposal in January and does so once again by means of this motion for a resolution .
I would ask the Commission to reconsider its position .
The European Parliament ' s financial situation has been the subject of extensive media coverage over the past few weeks .
Mr Kuhne has drawn up a report on this subject , on which I would like to warmly congratulate him .
He did not let himself be talked into adjusting his well-balanced approach in the face of sometimes heated publications .
The Kuhne report proposes granting Parliament discharge , provided a number of well-defined requirements are met .
For example , the offices of Parliament are expected , from now on , to offer , in the majority of cases , contracts for tender which are public in nature .
In addition , Parliament needs to indicate when the reform process which is being launched within the Commission will start taking effect in Parliament .
One of the key proposals is to separate the audit and financial control functions .
The Commission has already indicated that it will submit proposals to this effect before the summer .
I am of the opinion that such separation should also take place within Parliament .
An independent parliamentary audit office needs to be set up as soon as possible whose task is to ensure the effectiveness of public spending by Parliament .
Such an office should make annual - and if necessary , more frequent - recommendations regarding the working method of Parliament ' s offices .
Only when Parliament has its own financial housekeeping in order will it gain credibility when it comes to assessing and sometimes condemning the Commission and Member States .
Mr President , as the Commission is well aware , I am not accustomed to being an easy-going , meek or lenient speaker when it comes to the Commission in its role as executive . I am therefore all the more at home today in expressing the concerns I have due to the discharge procedure which is being carried out .
I do not wish to challenge the compromise which appears in the resolution negotiated between the political groups and the rapporteur .
This compromise has three distinct advantages over the rapporteur ' s initial draft .
Firstly , it no longer uses the vehement and aggressive tone of the initial draft report , a tone which I do not find , as I might say in the style of Kenneth Starr , worthy of this House , being rather more suited to the tabloid press , and one which should not in any case be used to characterise relations between a responsible institution , such as our own , and a Commission in which we expressed our confidence but a few months ago .
In this respect , the report has been improved .
Secondly , this report ceases to indulge in the unjustified implication of officials who may have taken more or less appropriate decisions but who do not in any way deserve to be exposed to public condemnation and pilloried in a procedure which is not subject to judicial process .
Thirdly , this report asks the Commission questions which it can answer within reasonable time limits , enabling us to vote upon discharge within the time limits stipulated by the Treaty .
These are the three positive features .
There are , however , three forms of sidelong shift which give me pause .
The first is that we are forgetting what the discharge procedure consists of .
We must remember that discharge involves , and must only involve , accepting the financial statements for the year and ensuring that expenditure is in order , and does not involve digging out again and again the skeletons which have been hidden away for years in the cupboards of the various institutions .
It is paradoxical , and even unfair , that the report in question makes so little mention of the financial year 1998 .
The second shift in emphasis involves the failure to make it clear that the explanatory statement is distinct from the report .
On the one hand , we have a dispassionate and objective report , undoubtedly insistent , but legitimately so , and on the other hand , we have an explanatory statement which , even though it represents only the opinion of the rapporteur , nonetheless is a godsend to the press .
How many journalists are aware that the resolution represents the opinion of the House but that the explanatory statement represents only the opinion of the rapporteur ?
This gives us grounds for concern .
The third and final anomaly is the gap between Parliament ' s handling of its own problems and Parliament ' s handling of other people ' s problems .
We cannot adopt a sliding scale for measuring correct behaviour , and we are taking a major political risk if we are more indulgent towards ourselves than towards others .
Mr President , thank you for letting me conclude . I should just like to mention the maxim that the police always catch serial killers as soon as they step up the rate of their killing .
We brought the Commission down a year ago , and we had better not give in to our homicidal impulses again .
Mr Bourlanges , you have spoken rather longer than the time allocated to you , but you are such a committed fighter , there is no stopping you !
Mr President , I shall focus on only one point : access to information .
Many of my colleagues have raised this issue this morning .
We need better access in order to move forward .
In my committee , the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , we are determined to take our responsibilities as MEPs very seriously indeed .
We have asked Members of Parliament to volunteer to follow budget lines .
These Members of Parliament are now approaching Commission services to talk to the officials responsible for those budget lines .
We are having problems and we are having problems in finding out who is the right person ; the people we talk to are not clear what their responsibility is , what information they should be giving us .
Some services cooperate very well ; some are setting up briefing meetings for Members of Parliament - but others are not .
What we need from the Commission is a new system .
We need a better reporting mechanism to parliamentary committees , to the spending committees , so that we know what information it is going to give us .
A start would be a list of who is responsible for what in which budget lines of each committee .
Only in this way can we do what we are supposed to do , and restore the public confidence that Mrs Schreyer spoke about this morning .
We need to know that money is being spent properly .
If we have that confidence we can pass that message on to the public in Europe .
My colleague , Mrs Morgan , spoke earlier about the need to overhaul the whole discharge procedure .
That is right .
For too long discharge was seen as something bureaucratic and rather unnecessary - something to get out of the way very quickly .
Now we have to move away from that , we have to overhaul it , and I hope proper reporting mechanisms to committees will be part of that overhaul .
Mr President , I am speaking here especially in the capacity of rapporteur of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
First of all , I would like to extend warm thanks to the rapporteur for her report .
I am delighted that we now have a broad-based compromise on the issue of discharge which enables the Commission to make progress and to solve a number of problems which have cropped up recently .
I would also like to comment on a few points which are included in the report of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
Firstly , we share the Court of Auditors ' criticism regarding the inadequate measurability of the effects upon employment of the structural fund measures .
I would ask the Commission to pay more attention to this aspect .
We have , slowly but surely , made tremendous progress in this field , but this does not seem to be evident from the way we are dealing with the funds .
Secondly , I would like to mention the issue of financing .
There have been problems recently regarding the payment credits of the Social Fund , in particular .
Unfortunately , these problems have not been solved .
This merits further attention too .
Finally , I would like to mention the problem surrounding the Leonardo programme .
You will be aware that the Leonardo programme has played an extremely important role in the events which have led to the previous Commission resigning from office .
Nevertheless , we wish to underline that this association needs to be brought to a definite close , and it is also important that sufficient consideration be given to the lessons we have learnt in the field of BAT .
These are the key points which I would like to highlight here .
The Committee on Budgetary Control has naturally been unable to adopt all these points in their entirety .
This would not have been appropriate either , but I would like to take this opportunity to add these specific points to the list which is , in fact , already before you .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we discussed Mrs Stauner ' s report in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy on the basis of an opinion by Mr Thielemans and reached a number of unanimous conclusions containing a different political evaluation of the 1998 discharge on which I have three comments to make :
First , we take the view that we must learn lessons from past cases and , of course , clear up every single case for which we have new , additional proof . Nonetheless , we want to give the Commission instructions which look to the future , not instructions to deal with a past for which it is not even responsible .
Secondly , we passed punishable offences to the courts in a one-off show of strength during the last parliamentary term .
We ensured that OLAF had the structure and facilities needed to pursue any suspicions or irregularities .
We want , in the final analysis , to place our trust in the courts , OLAF and the disciplinary measures and decisions taken and to work together with President Prodi ' s new Commission on a basis of trust and on the basis precisely of the relevant new rules and obligations introduced .
Thirdly , this includes , as Mr Bourlanges explained earlier , acknowledging and accepting results such as the disciplinary proceedings carried out in the ECHO case , even if Mr Blak wants to fight this tooth and nail , as he said earlier .
But every Member must , in the end , understand that , as Members of the European Parliament , we have to carry out our control duties as accurately as possible , but that we are neither detectives nor public prosecutors , let alone black angels of vengeance .
Demanding a new audit , without submitting any proof or evidence , is hardly going to enhance the credibility of our Parliament .
Mr President , I welcome all the reports on the discharge procedures , especially Mrs Stauner 's report .
Before I make my initial comments , I just wish to welcome what Mrs McAvan said about access to information from the Commission .
I have found it remarkably difficult to get important documents and information from it on a number of occasions , especially for various budget lines relating to culture .
It would be very useful if the Commission were to release more information to us and give us the reports we ask for .
I welcome Mrs Stauner 's report for a number of reasons .
One because , as we are dealing with 1998 , we should be looking at the past and trying to find answers to the questions we have raised about Fléchard , ECHO and the MED problems .
These are all relevant nowadays because we must learn the lessons from them .
Any new proof that arises from these cases must be investigated .
These investigations must be very rigorous and must be reported back to us .
OLAF must use its teeth .
The three cases I have mentioned are also quite important because they reflect remarkably on four current Commissioners .
All four of them must look carefully at their past , come clean and show this new Commission where reform is needed .
I hope that Commissioner Kinnock listens to this debate and will reflect upon .
There are lessons to be learned and many questions to be answered and he is the man in charge of getting these questions answered for us now .
I also wish to make a couple of points on the Kuhne report on Parliament 's own budget discharge .
We regularly cast stones at the Commission , but when it comes to looking at our own finances sometimes we are a bit slow on the uptake .
Although we have recommended discharge for our own budget this time , there are a number of points in the discharge report we should look at , especially the inventory services and the new system .
I welcome the fact that the Kuhne report has called for a report on the new inventory system for Parliament .
I hope the Commission takes the time to look at this debate seriously .
This Parliament is very serious in the way it discharges various budgets .
I agree with Mrs Morgan that maybe we need to reflect on how we discharge budgets in the future .
However , for now , the Commission has a number of questions to answer and I hope it will start right now .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this is the second time I have spoken today and I should like to thank you for the highly constructive atmosphere in which this extremely detailed debate is being conducted .
Because of the time available , I cannot , of course , comment on every intervention ; however , I shall try to summarise the various points .
The question of access to information in order to be able to carry out the discharge procedure with the required degree of seriousness and with the documents which you need for the discharge process was central to various interventions .
I should like to point out once again in this context that the Commission has passed all the confidential reports requested to the rapporteur , or rather to the Committee on Budgetary Control .
I must simply therefore ask , if we are being accused of withholding something , that you specify what has been withheld , because it is only on this basis that we can clear up misunderstandings or give you more information and this should not fail because of the Commission .
There is in fact a contentious issue , which also needs to be regulated for the procedure for the future , and that is the question of the minutes of disciplinary proceedings or administrative investigations .
This question has again been left out of the agreement on the grounds of valuable personal interests and I should like to point out that specific regulations also apply to Parliament in disciplinary proceedings .
I should also like to comment on Mr Blak ' s question on the questionnaires .
There has been a specific procedure for questionnaires in the past .
The committee has now changed this , albeit informally .
This resulted in the Commission ' s confusion as to whether or not the questionnaire drafted by Mr Blak , but not confirmed by the committee , was an official questionnaire .
The Commission then said that it would , of course , reply to the questionnaire , despite the fact that this point was not clarified .
That again shows that it really does make sense here to lay down clear procedural rules .
The Commission is really not interested in such misunderstandings or discussions ; let us lay down clear procedures here so that our cooperation is complete and satisfies all concerned .
I should like to pick up on a point made by the chairman of the Committee on Budgetary Control because the question of why the list of old cases was not passed on was asked .
I can only say in this context that the procedure changed with the legal basis for OLAF .
The legal basis for OLAF clearly states that the director of OLAF is responsible for information on investigations or the results of investigations .
I think we need to discuss this at some point together with the Committee on Budgetary Control and the director of OLAF because the Commission no longer has jurisdiction here .
It has no more information than you do , on which investigations are at what stage .
We have to discuss this with the director of OLAF .
I shall , of course , pass on any requests but I cannot give you any information in lieu of the director of OLAF in this respect .
Another important point is the question of disciplinary procedure and I should like to comment on this .
The Commission explained to Mr Van Hulten in its White Paper that it would reform this disciplinary procedure as it now stands .
Nonetheless , our reform must remain within the bounds of the European Treaty .
But what we can do is become involved in disciplinary procedures externally in order to make it clear that this is not some sort of closed shop but a regulated procedure conducted objectively in order to examine accusations .
A multitude of points were made but I should like to comment on the question of the discharge procedure .
Mrs Morgan , I should like to thank you for your proposals concerning clarification of the discharge procedure , together with Mr Bourlanges , who referred to it in his point on the question of the interpretation of the current Treaty .
Mr Bösch , you made the comment that the Council did not unanimously recommend discharge for the Commission this year .
In fact , it was the Netherlands which failed to carry the decision on the grounds that the Commission should draw up a clear timetable .
Mr Mulder , you also returned to this point .
I think we should discuss this at some point - including in the Committee on Budgetary Control - because although the procedure in the Netherlands is of course different , there are valuable points which we could perhaps adopt for the procedure in relation to the European budget .
Now to the question of reform and financial control , which was also raised in several comments , criticisms and demands .
The Commission made it perfectly clear in its White Paper that one of the most important points was to reform financial control .
Even if one of the suggestions made in it was that previously centralised , ex-ante financial control would be changed , abolished and decentralised , Mr Bösch , it also includes a suggestion which is stressed time and again by the independent experts and the Court of Auditors .
It is not a question of reducing control but of making it more efficient .
I firmly believe that this can only be done by making every official who handles European money responsible for ensuring that money is disbursed efficiently and correctly .
No one must be able to hide behind centralised financial control .
The Commission has also decided to set up a separate , internal ex-post audit service and I think that this will again demonstrate that the Commission takes the subject of improved financial control extremely seriously .
It has been clearly stated that the objective must be to reduce the error rate and I can only agree with this .
But obviously I cannot reduce the error rates for the 1998 or 1999 budgets in retrospect .
On the contrary , the objective is to take clear steps to achieve a better result in the future .
That is the purpose of the action plan submitted by the Commission .
I should like in this respect to come back to what you said , Mr Pomés Ruiz , i.e. that the Commission should perhaps tell the committee which confidential reports it has submitted for the discharge procedure .
I would be glad to comply with this request because I think it too helps clarify matters .
Mrs Langenhagen used her intervention to criticise the independent financial controller of the Union in connection with a report on the research centre in Geel .
However , I should like to point out that to say that the financial controller is responsible for the plutonium incident in Geel is unfounded because she exercises no atomic supervision or any other type of supervision in Geel .
But I have of course taken note of this accusation and have already started an administrative investigation in order to ascertain if there was a duty to provide information about the discussion of the report with the research centre and to pass the report on to the European Court of Auditors .
Mrs Ferreira , allow me to congratulate you on your first speech in Parliament and to thank you for your call for cooperation for the benefit of European politics .
I should like to end by saying that I do not see any confrontation in the postponement of the discharge ; what I do see is that the European Parliament has exercised its right to demand information , set conditions and call on the Commission to take action , as it is entitled to do .
I also see in the demands in the resolution support on the road towards a renewal of European politics and , in this respect , I really can promise you that we shall examine every point of this resolution very carefully and take it very seriously and we shall give you our reply on the information demanded and the steps taken without delay .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 11.30 a.m.
( The sitting was suspended at 11.45 a.m. and resumed at 12 noon )

Vote
Recommendation for second reading ( A5-0080 / 2000 ) by Mrs Kauppi , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council directive on the taking up , the pursuit and the prudential supervision of the business of electronic money institutions ( 12004 / 2 / 1999 - C5-0306 / 1999 - 1998 / 0252 ( COD ) ) and on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council directive amending Directive 77 / 780 / EEC on the coordination of laws , regulations and administrative provisions relating to the taking up and pursuit of the business of credit institutions ( 12005 / 1 / 1999 - C5-0307 / 1999 - 1998 / 0253 ( COD ) )
Before the vote :
Bolkestein , Commission .
Following the debate that took place last night , and repeating the arguments which I put forward yesterday , I would sum up the Commission 's position as follows . The first two amendments deal with redeemability at par value .
The Commission 's opinion is that this introduces unnecessary legal uncertainty into the text .
That is why the Commission cannot see its way to agreeing to the first two amendments .
Amendments Nos 3 and 4 propose to limit substantially the circumstances in which Member States may waive some or all of the provisions of the directive to certain limited electronic money schemes .
As I said yesterday , if there are legitimate concerns they can be dealt with at the review of the whole procedure within the next few years .
Therefore , the Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 3 and 4 .
On Amendment No 5 , the last amendment , although the Commission itself would take a less negative view of that amendment than it takes of the first four amendments , it still is of the opinion that it would be better to reject all five amendments and to leave the proposal as it is .
( The President declared the first common position approved as amended and the second common position approved )
Recommendation for second reading ( A5-0084 / 2000 ) by Mr Staes , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy on the common position of the Council with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council directive amending Directive 95 / 53 / EEC fixing the principles governing the organisation of official inspections in the field of animal nutrition ( 10804 / 1 / 1999 - C5-0273 / 1999 - 1998 / 0301 ( COD ) )
Before the vote :
On behalf of the Commission , and in particular , on behalf of my colleague Mr Byrne , let me say that the Commission sees its way to accepting all the amendments that have been proposed by Parliament .
I need not add anything further since Parliament , I am sure , will welcome this .
( The President declared the common position approved as amended )
Report ( A5-0072 / 2000 ) by Mr Lannoye , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Directive 95 / 2 / EC on food additives other than colours and sweeteners ( COM ( 1999 ) 329 - C5-0068 / 1999 - 1999 / 0158 ( COD ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0090 / 2000 ) by Mr Kirkhope on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the initiative of the Republic of Austria with a view to adopting a Council Decision to combat child pornography on the Internet ( 10317 / 1999 - C5-0318 / 1999 - 1999 / 0822 ( CNS ) )
Before the final vote :
Ladies and gentlemen , the Commission supports all the proposed amendments adopted .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0091 / 2000 ) by Mr Frahm , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a Council decision creating a European Refugee Fund ( COM ( 1999 ) 686 - C5-0120 / 2000 - 1999 / 0274 ( CNS ) )
Before the vote on the amendments :
Mr President , the European People ' s Party would like a separate vote on Amendment No 19 . As such , we would like to propose a split vote .
I am sorry but it is too late .
The request was not submitted in time .
It has to be made the evening before the votes .
The Rules are very clear .
I should explain to the House that the reason we do this is so that all the groups can prepare their voting slips and so that there is no confusion during the votes .
If we start breaking that rule then it just creates chaos during the votes .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
EXPLANATIONS OF VOTES
Staes report ( A5-0084 / 2000 ) :
The proposal before us today aims to amend Directive 95 / 53 / EC in order to provide a legal instrument more appropriate to the requirements of inspections in the field of animal nutrition .
Following the dioxin crisis in May 1999 , it was apparent that it was necessary to adapt this legislation .
At that time the Commission announced a legislative programme with a view to improving food safety regulations .
The programme was adopted by the Council and by the European Parliament , and included a revision of Directive 95 / 53 / EC .
At the time , several problems had been identified .
Mismanagement of the crisis , particularly the poor coordination between the various authorities involved , became apparent and was noted in the course of the Commission inspection .
There were delays in transmitting the information on dioxin contamination to the Commission , and measures taken at national level were inadequate .
In order to offset these omissions , the proposal aims to stipulate that Commission and Member State experts should have the possibility of carrying out inspections not only within the Community but also in third countries , particularly following the emergence of a phenomenon likely to have an adverse effect on the fitness for consumption of animal feeding stuffs marketed within the Community ; that a safeguard procedure should be set up and that the Commission should have the opportunity , if necessary , to assign Community experts to the site in order to check whether Community regulations are being observed and to take any appropriate measures necessary ; that the Commission should be responsible for adopting specific coordinated inspection programmes , in addition to the general programmes already stipulated by Directive 95 / 53 / EC , in the event of unexpected contamination which may represent an imminent and serious risk to human and animal health .
The common position did not adopt the European Commission ' s right to take safeguard measures appropriate to the context of animal nutrition in the event of an emergency .
Obviously , this is extremely reprehensible and even irresponsible !
This is why the rapporteur proposes reintroducing this clause , and I am pleased to see it because without this clause there is no guarantee of consumer protection in food crisis situations .
Lannoye report ( A5-0072 / 2000 ) :
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on his work on the proposal for the directive amending Directive 95 / 2 / EC .
This directive authorises the use of a number of new food additives which are currently banned but which have been assessed recently by the Scientific Committee for Food ( SCF ) and deemed fit for human consumption .
The report clearly expresses consumer concerns in the face of the flood of additives , of chemicals , into our daily diet .
Indeed , our diet has changed radically under the influence of lifestyle changes and the contributions of new technologies .
The time devoted to preparing meals has been reduced considerably .
This often leads us to eat ready-made meals , which are practical but which do not really suit our tastes or fulfil our vitamin and mineral requirements .
The fact is , the industrial foodstuffs which wind up on our plates have often undergone intense processing leading to the loss of flavour , texture and colour .
In order to overcome these disadvantages , the chemists of the agri-foodstuffs industry add artificial flavourings , flavour enhancers , firming agents , colorants , etc .
What is more , with food distribution chains becoming ever longer , it becomes unavoidable to have recourse to preservatives and oxidation inhibitors .
This cannot fail to give rise to concerns on the part of consumers who , following recent food crises , are increasingly anxious to know just exactly what they have in their plates !
In response to these concerns , the European Union has endowed itself with a particularly complex arsenal of legislation which is supposed to eliminate any risk to the consumer .
So , in order to justify the inclusion of an additive in a foodstuff , there are three criteria which must be fulfilled , though there is still rather a wide margin for interpretation .
The technological need for the additive to be approved , for example , is obviously determined by the industry itself , which argues primarily in terms of reducing production costs and winning markets .
At the moment , this criterion is the weightiest consideration .
Usefulness for the consumer is a particularly vague concept .
Does the consumer really wish to eat a fruit or vegetable which has remained in his fridge for a month without changing in appearance ?
Finally , there is the criterion of harmlessness .
Before any substance may be authorised for use as a food additive , it must , in principle , be subjected to toxicological assessment .
Normally a great many tests are carried out on laboratory animals in order to determine whether the substance is harmless , and at what dosage it may be safely consumed .
There are still loopholes !
On the one hand , the human being does not always react in the same way that animals do , so extrapolating from the results of tests on animals to human experience is always problematic .
On the other hand , these experiments assess the effect of each substance taken in isolation .
Our diet , however , often contains a cocktail of different substances whose combined effect is rarely identified !
The precautionary principle must be used with the utmost rigour in matters of foodstuffs !
The Commission ' s proposal has not taken adequate account of this principle !
We therefore await Commission proposals for provisions that are directed more at improving consumer protection but also at promoting quality foodstuffs !
Kirkhope report ( A5-0090 / 2000 ) :
The Danish Social Democratic Members of the European Parliament have chosen to vote in favour of the report and fully and wholeheartedly support the initiatives being taken where this is concerned .
The Internet has created an entirely new situation where the duplication , sale and distribution of child pornography is concerned .
The Internet operates across national borders . It is not , therefore , possible for an individual State effectively to contain the spread of child pornography .
Initiatives such as this , in which cooperation between States is increased in the common struggle against the spread of child pornography , is absolutely necessary .
As I stated during the previous part-session , in our debate on child sex tourism , there is nothing that arouses more horror and disgust than the sexual exploitation of children , and we have to admit that the Internet facilitates such ' practices ' by enabling all manner of perverts to consult illegal sites anonymously .
Having made this extremely alarming observation , it is essential to consider the means of combating this phenomenon in order to protect our children .
I must , in addition , congratulate the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs on its work , which produced some very interesting proposals .
One suggestion it makes is that every European Union Member State should make special police units responsible for monitoring the Internet , looking for pornographic material involving children .
If we wish to take effective action against child pornography on the Internet , it is not enough to simply react to crimes which have already been discovered .
In addition , the report sets the cut-off age at 16 for the definition of what must be considered to be child pornography .
I further support the rapporteur in insisting that the Council decision should be more binding and that the proposed measures should not be left to the discretion of the Member States .
In the same way , the idea of the ' offence of child pornography ' must be seen as quite comprehensive !
There was a proposal to add that ' the production , sale and distribution or other forms of trafficking in child pornography material and the possession of such material is punishable ' , but ' possession shall be punishable only where it is the result of an intentional or deliberate act or , if it is not , where possession is deliberately retained . '
Without this qualification , users ' surfing ' the Internet and inadvertently accessing a site displaying child pornography would also be punishable .
Productions which , although they do not actually feature children , may suggest or intend to suggest that children are involved are also covered by the definition of offence .
Users of child pornography must be punished severely to serve as examples .
In addition , it is very important to organise better cooperation between Member States police forces through Europol .
The European Parliament must make bold proposals and must remain very vigilant .
We must utilise all the preventative and restrictive means possible to combat such phenomena .
This proposal is a step in this direction and I can therefore only give it my support .
This Council initiative is essential because it is not possible to allow childhood and naivety to be exploited for degrading commercial purposes , in denial of all humane values .
It is of the utmost importance to prevent such violations of the rights of individuals and the rights of children and not to confine ourselves to merely reacting .
I share the opinion of our rapporteur and the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , that the Council proposal should be made more binding .
The definition of offences of child pornography must also be stricter , and I find the definition given by the parliamentary committee perfectly appropriate , ' the production , sale and distribution or other forms of trafficking in child pornography material and the possession of such material is punishable ' with the proviso that ' possession shall be punishable only where it is the result of an intentional or deliberate act ' .
We need all citizens to be involved and to be vigilant , not just police forces through Europol , and public authorities , but also Internet users and the economic network producers , in order to be able to identify the people who use these electronic messages .
There is too much at stake for us to fail to call for the mobilisation of the general population against this danger , and that is why I am compelled to vote in favour of this report .
Regarding Amendments Nos 22-28 , which are the subjects of a joint vote , we would state the following . We regard the problem of child pornography with the utmost seriousness , whether it be on the Internet or in other media , and we obviously share the view that both the Member States and the Applicant States should do everything in their power to combat child pornography .
In the same way , it is important that joint , effective measures should be taken and that the European Parliament should be kept informed of how this work is progressing .
For the same reasons that we have a negative attitude to the proposals to establish special registers of convicted sex offenders ( Amendments Nos 21 , 30 and 32 ) , we do not consider Amendment No 24 to be politically desirable .
Even if it were technically possible , registering the identities of everyone allocated e-mail addresses would constitute too far-reaching a curtailment of personal privacy , as well as risk discouraging such lawful use of the Internet as is much to be desired .
The twenty-first century is the century of communications .
Paradoxically , it has become more usual to contact friends or colleagues on the other side of the world than to chat with one ' s next-door neighbours .
Within the vast Internet market there are some people who have found ways to make easy money from exploiting human poverty .
Amoral producers and distributors of material have decided to respond to the deviant urges of some individuals by disseminating pornographic documents involving children over the Internet .
No one gets upset at finding large numbers of prostitutes in the streets around this building or at seeing them on display in the windows of Brussels , no one protests when newsagents sell , albeit on the top shelves , magazines flaunting the worst deviations , including paedophilia .
And yet this House is indignant today at child pornography as if it were not all part of the continuum .
Once again this damage is caused by permissiveness , which , while it may satisfy the mania of some , remains a source of unhappiness for many others .
The police and judicial authorities of our respective States must therefore receive adequate resources to combat this plague which affects the most vulnerable of us .
In this area which is cross-border in nature , it may be useful for the European Union to make its own contribution .
While the combat must involve international cooperation , however , it is also essential to fight on a day-to-day basis by preventing all these practices becoming commonplace .
Some people will retort , as they often do , that it has always existed and will always exist .
What a fatalistic comment , and what resignation , what contempt for the human condition !
I am delighted to see that our institutions are today becoming aware of the tragic fate experienced by thousands of children throughout the world , including our own countries , and are deciding to find a solution to it .
I am however afraid that the usual double standards may make these measures meaningless , for how credible are policies which would restrict the fight for human dignity to some parties and leave out others ?
Obviously we need to offer children special protection , but in a society which has lost its points of reference , whatever they may be , and which leaves life ' s victims by the wayside in the name of individual freedom , it is our duty to fight to ensure that everyone , man , woman and child , is enabled to live in dignity .
I hope , without too much confidence , that the day will come when our main concern will once again be for the public good , responding to the highest aspirations rather than to the lowest temptations .
Frahm report ( A5-0091 / 2000 ) :
Mr President , creating this European Refugee Fund is the very least that could be done to face up to the reception of refugees and forcibly displaced persons likely to enter European Union territory .
We are therefore voting in favour of creating the Fund , although it is clearly inadequate to ensure the decent reception of refugees and it is , above all , an alibi for lack of action .
Let us just mention the unspeakable attitude of the countries of Europe , particularly those responsible for the bombing raids on Serbia and Kosovo , with regard to the refugees forced into exile , many of them precisely because of these bombing campaigns .
Refugees which wealthy Europe has abandoned , in the most part , to the care of neighbouring countries in the region , which have still not recovered .
We also deplore the fact that the States of the European Union are making the allocation of refugee status ever more restrictive and more arbitrary .
We deplore the fact that great numbers of women and men fleeing from oppression are being refused this status and are being made stateless persons under permanent threat of being returned to their country of origin with the risks , often serious risks , that that involves .
The creation of a European Fund for refugees , which the European Parliament has just adopted , despite the Union for a Europe of Nations Group ' s voting against it , provides a fine example of these hypocritical proposals which will solve nothing at grass-roots level and will serve only to make the situation worse by transferring costly and unsupervised jurisdiction to Europe .
As I explained in my speech yesterday , this fund is not specifically intended to handle infrequent , exceptional and tragic instances of influxes of refugees originating from crisis-stricken countries , but to handle the day-to-day distribution of appropriations for the management of the usual flow of refugees of all kinds towards the most developed countries .
But what additional contribution is this Fund going to make exactly , in comparison with the present situation ?
As in the case of the structural funds , the citizens will be led to believe that Europe is handing out heaven-sent money in order to assist them in managing refugees .
This money is not really heaven-sent , of course , it is taken away from those self-same citizens without their being aware of it .
Europe is thus creating a good reputation for itself on the cheap .
It is always the same process : some pitiful situation is selected ( the plight of the refugees , in this instance ) in order to appeal not to rational argument but to people ' s sympathy .
We are given the explanation that Europe will bring about the synergy that will solve the problem at minimum expense and , as proof , we are told that the new Fund will be a lightweight body , allocated only limited appropriations .
Over the coming years , however , it will be noted that the competences transferred to Brussels are executed with little discipline , as they are too far removed from the citizens , that the Fund has made the States less responsible , that therefore more money is needed , that European inspectors are also needed in order to supervise the use of appropriations , and that an entire European administration is needed to manage what will have become an uncontrollable monster .
We have just witnessed live the birth of a new sideways shift in Europe , one which will be extremely costly for everyone , and whose only effect will be to make the States mere onlookers and , what is more , it will achieve this using their own money .
At the end of 1998 , the Commission proposed a Community action programme with a view to promoting the integration of refugees within the Union .
Following our opinion and the response of the Council , the Commission replaced this project with a proposal to create a European Refugee Fund , initially for a period of five years ( 2000-2004 ) and I must say that I am delighted with it !
In putting forward a multiannual plan with a wider sphere of activity , the Commission is acting in compliance with the Treaty of Amsterdam in undertaking long-term actions in favour of refugees and displaced persons and responding to the requirements expressed by the European Council in Tampere in October 1999 regarding the creation of an instrument appropriate for emergency situations .
This represents a clear improvement on prevalent practice to date .
The Fund is to establish a financial redistribution system in order to balance out the financial expenses incurred by Member States in receiving refugees and to enable those with the least developed systems to bring them up to speed .
The Fund is a single instrument intended to integrate the three facets of European policy on refugees : the reception , integration and repatriation of refugees and displaced persons .
It will therefore make it possible to support actions within the Member States such as improving reception conditions and procedures in terms of infrastructures and services ( accommodation , material assistance , social welfare , assistance with administrative procedures ) , the integration of persons entitled to some form of stable international protection , voluntary repatriation and reintegration into the country of origin .
The target groups are refugees , under the Geneva Convention , persons that have applied for this status , and displaced persons that have requested protection on a temporary basis .
In addition to the structural measures , the Commission proposes to use this Fund to finance emergency measures in the event of an unexpected massive influx of refugees .
For the financial year 2000 , the Commission proposes an allocation of EUR 26 million for structural measures and EUR 10 million for emergency measures .
As is often the case , this allocation is inadequate to handle the actual requirements .
In order to obtain real results , the budget for this Fund must be increased .
The European Commission must provide us with financial estimates covering the entire period of the programme within the scope of current financial perspectives and , if necessary , a proposal for the revision of appropriations , in view of the fact that much greater amounts will be necessary in order to achieve the Fund ' s objectives .
Let me conclude by emphasising that creating this European Refugee Fund represents the first step towards a common asylum system and we must continue to work towards this .
If the purpose of creating a European Refugee Fund were to make asylum and refugee policy in the Member States of the Union more humane and open , then it would be a welcome step .
The Fund , which is merely the product of a combination of three budgetary lines , will not do this .
There is evidence in addition to the debate as to what the creation of the European Refugee Fund really means . It means " distributing the burden " .
An approach whereby immigrants entering the EU in search of protection are seen as a " burden " which has to be " distributed " is fundamentally flawed .
No policy which takes humane account of the needs of persons fleeing persecution can be constructed on such a basis .
The policy of the Member States and of the Union is geared towards heading off and turning away refugees , as the recent inclusion of a " re-adoption " clause in the Lomé Convention demonstrates .
If this is what the outlines of European asylum and refugee policy really look like and if refugees are seen as a " burden " , then creating a Refugee Fund is a cosmetic exercise designed to hide the real face of a European policy of turning refugees away .
The Fund will not , in this form , cause any country to switch to a policy of greater openness towards the immigration of refugees .
Nor will it improve the legal security of persons fleeing persecution and in search of protection .
But it is precisely the legal security and the right of participation of refugees , which must be considered .
The European Union calls throughout the world for freedom of movement for capital .
But it is reducing the freedom of movement of persons yet further by closing borders and cutting itself off from refugees and asylum seekers .
Every year many refugees die , killed on the external borders of the EU .
To assume in these circumstances that creating a Refugee Fund will make for a more humane asylum and refugee policy is an illusion , which is why I have abstained .
That concludes the vote .
( The sitting was suspended at 12.25 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Outcome of the European Council in Lisbon , 23 -24 March 2000
The next item is the debate on the European Council report and the Commission statement on the outcome of the European Council in Lisbon , the Social Summit .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Lisbon European Council has certainly given new impetus to the European agenda and I am sure that you will be aware of its results , both through reading the conclusions and also as a result of the broad public coverage that this Council received in the European and international press .
The key aim of defining a new world-wide strategy for the European Union within a world economy that is open , competitive and truly global was achieved . That strategy is to make the European Union the most dynamic and competitive economic area in the world , based on knowledge and able to guarantee sustainable economic growth with more and better jobs and with greater social cohesion .
A knowledge-based economy underpinned by a society based on information and research will be a powerful factor in the European Union ' s development and of course requires a swift and consistent process of structural reforms and the completion of the internal market .
This objective also involves modernising the European social model , investing in people and combating social exclusion . It also involves implementing sound macroeconomic policies encouraging economic growth and employment .
Strengthening the European Council ' s coordinating and guiding role will be vital to developing the Lisbon strategy . The European Council will annually monitor the progress that has been made , by holding a European Council meeting each spring .
It will also establish the broad guidelines for the sectoral Councils . A coordination method was established , with specific timetables for the short , medium and long term , outlining objectives , benchmarking based on best practice and also other kinds of indicators .
This is an open method of coordination , which we hope will produce optimal results .
These guidelines will also be transposed into national policies , and will be periodically monitored and assessed as part of a process of mutual learning between Member States .
The goals set at the Lisbon European Council are extremely ambitious and give specific mandates to the Commission .
Just yesterday , President Prodi presented the Commission ' s programme in this area to the Council and also to the various Council formations , and it is therefore crucial that we bear in mind the diversity of platforms on which the strategy laid down in Lisbon was developed , with its implications for the fields of scientific research , education , the single market , industry and so forth .
Developments in electronic commerce , the liberalisation of the telecommunications market and the establishment of a framework for reducing the costs of access to the Internet are , of course , crucial factors in the success of this modernising strategy , and the e-Europe Action Plan , which will be presented to the Feira European Council , will also be a key instrument in speeding up the progress of the European Union towards becoming an information society .
Just yesterday , I was able to inform the General Affairs Council that the Portuguese Presidency had already prepared a timetable for the remits given by the Council for implementation of specific measures in the various areas , and also for appropriate preparation of the Feira and Nice European Councils .
The Ecofin Council will primarily assume responsibility for strengthening the Cardiff process , the action plan for financial services , the action plan for venture capital , the tax package , the mid-term review of the employment guidelines and for the assessment of the contribution made by public finances to growth and employment .
The Internal Market Council will assume responsibility for electronic commerce , copyright and related rights , for the dual-use export control regime , for removing obstacles to services and public contracts , for Community and private sector electronic procurement systems , for the establishment of a coordinated strategy with a view to simplifying laws and rules and for the Community patent .
The Employment and Social Affairs Council will assume responsibility for conducting a review of the employment guidelines , for mandating the High-Level Working Party on Social Protection to prepare a study on the sustainability of the pensions system up to 2020 , for applying an open method of coordination to policies for combating social exclusion and for considering the future direction of social policy , with a view to reaching agreement on a European social agenda at the Nice European Council .
The Research Council will assume responsibility for the e-Europe Action Plan and for promoting the establishment of a European research area .
The Telecommunications Council will assume responsibility for concluding the review of a regulatory framework for telecommunications and for the liberalisation of the market in this field .
The Consumer Affairs Council will assume responsibility for the distance selling of financial services - by approving pending legislation - and for alternative systems for resolving consumer disputes , by establishing a Community network .
The Education Council will assume responsibility for considering the future objectives of our educational systems , with a view to contributing to the Luxembourg and Cardiff processes by establishing new basic skills at European Union level , for creating a European diploma for basic IT skills , for removing obstacles to the mobility of teachers , for developing a European format for curricula vitae , for monitoring national policies on implementing these objectives , for access to the Internet in schools by 2001 and for the minimum training , by 2002 , of the network of information technology teachers .
The Industry Council will assume responsibility for drafting the charter for small businesses and for establishing a procedure for standardising appropriate practices for the creation and development of innovative businesses , particularly small- and medium-sized businesses .
The Justice and Home Affairs Council will be responsible for adopting the pending legislation on jurisdiction and enforcing judgements .
It should be borne in mind that implementing the remits decided in Lisbon will require close cooperation between the Commission , the Council and the European Parliament , since many of the laws to be adopted are subject to the codecision procedure .
As you can see , the task of setting objectives at the Lisbon European Council is developing into a major timetable for action that the Commission and the various Council formations must now implement .
The Portuguese Presidency has already taken appropriate measures in Council so that the specific Council formations can immediately start implementing the programmes defined for their respective fields , and so that appropriate coordination takes place in this area , through the presentation of a synthesis report , either by the time of the Feira European Council this June , or by the Nice European Council , during the French Presidency .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , as Mr Gama said , the recent Lisbon Summit was a great success for Europe .
It was certainly a turning point .
The European Council defined a new Union strategy , a strategy which will make us a leading power in the new knowledge-based economy and make it possible to restore the necessary conditions for full employment .
Even at this early stage , the revised forecasts for both economic growth and employment are cause for optimism .
The Lisbon European Council made a firm political commitment to an ambitious socio-economic plan ; clear objectives were agreed for the reforms , the European social model was consolidated and , most importantly , it is now possible for the pledges made to be followed with immediate , practical actions .
This amounts to a completely unprecedented sign of confidence in Europe ' s future and in the future of our economy and our social cohesion .
Our success in Lisbon was largely due to the excellent preparatory work of the Portuguese Presidency .
António Guterres ' handling of the debate was exemplary .
The Commission also made a decisive contribution to this success , for the conclusions are significantly similar to the contents of the preliminary synthesis document which we drew up in preparation for the Council .
The Lisbon debate generated substantial agreement on most issues .
The only truly disputed points were the time frames for the liberalisation of the energy and transport markets , public services , the tax package and the competences of regional authorities in education and training .
These issues are major but they are limited in number .
This high level of consensus allowed the Presidency to set an extremely ambitious agenda .
I will not go into the conclusions in too great a detail , but stick to the main points .
The European Council stressed the importance of a strong , sound macroeconomic policy , consolidation in the field of taxation and sustainable financial policies and the structural reforms .
With regard to the information society , the principle elements of the e-Europe initiative proposed by the Commission were put into effect , in particular regarding the legal framework for e-commerce , the opening of the telecommunications market , internet connections for schools and teacher training .
The Commission was asked to develop a benchmarking strategy to define best practice and to guarantee both the development of the necessary infrastructures and the availability of the necessary funds .
With regard to the internal market , the European Council adopted ambitious objectives in the field of procurement and in order to implement action plans for financial services and risk capital .
In addition , measures will be taken to accelerate the liberalisation of transport , energy and postal services .
Research , education and lifelong learning all received a boost .
The Council also agreed on the need for a sharp increase in employment , particularly employment of women , and , I repeat , the forecasts are currently very encouraging .
One of the most significant steps forward was the consensus between the Member States regarding the need to explore the possibility of modernising the social security systems and making pension systems sustainable , on the basis of a Commission initiative .
Until recently , such an agreement would have been unthinkable , and this could be an extremely important development .
The Commission is therefore going to play a central role in the follow-up to this Summit .

I would just like to mention some of the items on our agenda : firstly , we are going to draw up new legislative proposals , in particular regarding the legal framework for e-commerce - which has become extremely urgent due to the inadequacy of the present framework for e-commerce - and for procurement ; secondly , we are going to introduce benchmarking in all the stages of the " open coordination " process in the areas of research , enterprise policy and social exclusion ; thirdly , we are going to present our communication , entitled " A new European social agenda " , which will serve as the basis for the Nice Summit organised by the French Presidency ; finally , we are going to prepare for the spring Councils by producing an annual synthesis of economic and social progress which will be a sort of general report on the economic and social situation in Europe .
These spring conferences , which will take place each year , will be important in terms of assessing progress made and developing future strategies .

The Commission will therefore play a crucial role in ensuring that the Council ' s undertakings are translated into practical measures , and that Lisbon is thus a genuine success for Europe .
The Commission must act as the driving force in this process .
Tomorrow , I am going to meet my fellow Commissioners to ensure that work starts immediately and that the various different objectives set are achieved .
I am determined to see that this Commission makes good its promises .
I would like to thank Parliament , before this House , for its encouragement , but also for the new ideas that it has given us during these debates .
In Lisbon , we also tackled the issue of the Balkans - in a meeting held during the break for supper , which was not on the agenda but was nevertheless a working meeting .
At that meeting I raised the point of the European Union ' s political responsibility for the Balkan region , and stressed that our entire credibility is at stake .
The European Council subscribed to the joint report prepared by the Commission and the High Representative , and also our request for more effective coordination between the various programmes implemented by the Union in that region .
I repeat before this House that the need for this coordination is urgent , spectacularly urgent .
Following my lead , the Heads of State and Government agreed upon the need to clean up the Danube .
We have accumulated the necessary resources and I now expect appropriate measures to be taken .
We also agreed to speed up the procedures for supplying aid to the Balkans .
Finally , on the subject of Russia , the European Council recognised the strategic nature of our relations with Moscow and invited President Putin to take note of our concern over the situation in Chechnya .
I sent him a letter congratulating him on his election and stressing the Commission ' s genuine interest in cooperating closely with the Russian Government , but the Chechnya issue was mentioned specifically .
To sum up , Madam President , I would like to thank this House for its valuable contribution to the Lisbon Summit and for all it did to ensure the Council ' s success .
Ladies and gentlemen , I find the outcome of this Summit very encouraging , and I would like to stress once again the Commission ' s commitment to ensuring the swift , efficient implementation of the decisions taken at the European Council .
I am counting on your full support and your cooperation to help us to achieve this .
The eyes of the citizens of Europe , whom you represent , are on us , and they expect a great deal of the follow-up to Lisbon .
It is our duty not to let them down .
Madam President , Mr Gama , President Prodi , with good reason the Lisbon Summit could be dubbed historic in terms of its political content .
At the meeting the Union ' s strategic objective was to create the world ' s most competitive and dynamic information-based economy , with steady growth and the ability to create more and better jobs .
The aim alone does not , however , make the meeting a historic one ; what does is the range of measures that the meeting is recommending the Union and its Member States take to achieve their objective .
I will borrow the words of the Presidency . Firstly , to achieve the model , we have to put our faith above all in the private sector and in cooperation between the private and the public sector .
That will be dependent on the mobilisation of market forces available and action on the part of the Member States themselves .
The Union will act as a catalyst in the process .
Secondly , we must reduce the tax burden among the workforce , especially among the relatively low paid and less educated .
Thirdly , we have to reallocate public money to increase the relative importance of the growth of capital both physically and in terms of human beings .
Fourthly , we must speed up the process whereby competition is freed up , for example , in the gas , electricity , postal and transport industries , with the objective of having a fully functional internal market in these sectors too .
I have given just a few examples to show that the Council of the fifteen countries of the European Union , fourteen of which have socialist governments , has adopted a totally central to right policy with regard to the economy and development , one which is associated with social responsibility , in many respects like that of the PPE-DE Group .
When I speak of this with such satisfaction on behalf of my group , it is not with the slightest hint of mockery . In our opinion , the essential thing is not to look for political conflict , but to use the right tools for the benefit of our citizens .
In the decisions taken at the Lisbon Council , those tools took the form of a social market economy , which was a good thing .
Let me utter a few words of warning . The main responsibility for achieving results lies with the Member States as far as the liberalisation of markets and the making of electronic commerce cheaper for consumers are concerned .
I would ask whether the astronomical price of the third generation mobile phone licences now being put up for auction in England will be of benefit to the consumers of the future ?
It will not be .
Greed will bring its own revenge in that the system will be made expensive and will be slow to establish itself .
I give the example because it is relevant and not because I want to draw attention to the fact that the United Kingdom is doing something than runs counter to the decisions of Lisbon .
Let me issue a second word of warning . We are on the threshold of enlargement .
As we now step on the gas with regard to an eEurope within the Union , are we making it more difficult for those countries joining the Union to adapt ?
The answer cannot be not to speed up developments in the direction of an eEurope .
The answer is , in fact , a question : are enlargement , which has been planned , albeit relatively slowly , and the budget in accordance with the decisions of Agenda 2000 , mutually compatible ?
Is structural aid to be increased after all , so that those states intending to join are not left even further behind in terms of development compared with the Union ?
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to say finally , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , that we have full confidence that Romano Prodi and the Commission he heads will be able to achieve the Lisbon objectives .
The PPE-DE Group and , to the best of my knowledge , the whole of Parliament , support the Commission ' s work while voicing constructive criticism .
As the imperfections of the Single Market now also stem from protraction on the part of the Member States , the implementation of each of the decisions taken at Lisbon will also depend at institutional level above all on whether the Member States will stand by the solemn theses of Lisbon in the years to come .
Madam President , the Lisbon Summit will mark a milestone .
Following on from Luxembourg in 1997 , when Europe revealed its joint responsibility for employment , the European Council has just outlined a new economic strategy , intended to make the European Union not only the most competitive and most dynamic knowledge-based economic system in the world , but also a model in terms of employment and social cohesion .
" The novelty of this summit is that it dealt with the entirety of economic and social policy . " This is a quotation from Belgium ' s Liberal Prime Minister .
Along with him , the President of the French Republic , and the Heads of Government of Austria , Spain , Ireland and Luxembourg have endorsed the Lisbon conclusions .
Some political forces within this Parliament nonetheless appear to wish to turn the Lisbon Summit into some sort of Socialist International ' happening ' .
How else is one to interpret the refusal of the PPE and ELDR Groups to negotiate a joint resolution common to the main political forces within Parliament ?
Some conservative and liberal ayatollahs seem not to want to hear anything about a macroeconomic and monetary policy of benefit to the European social model .
The untrammelled free market seems to be their only god .
Yet the market economy must necessarily have a social dimension .
Here is a riddle .
In Lisbon , who was it that said that the citizens of Europe are looking to the European Council to give shape to a social Europe ?
Who was it that said that , for European citizens , I quote , " unemployment wrecks lives and societies for entire generations and , even though it is starting to fall , unemployment remains the main concern " ?
That " the across-the-board return to economic growth means that we can do things today which were impossible yesterday " ?
That citizens are scandalised by " untrammelled capitalism , whose relocations , social dumping , ruthless exploitation of the disparities between the social and fiscal legislation of the Member States and remorseless pursuit of profit at the expense of working men and women " ?
These are the words of Mrs Nicole Fontaine , the President of this Parliament .
The Group of the Party of European Socialists also supports Mrs Fontaine in her declaration made in Lisbon to the effect that , I quote , " The European Parliament is committed to the social model in all its aspects " .
The President has our support when she asks the European Council to , I quote , " introduce balanced rules on company mergers within the European Union " ; and says that there should be " a ban on any mergers that do not comply with binding European legislation on prior notification and consultation of workers " ; " that , before such mergers can take place , a serious assessment of their social impact is carried out " , and when she points out that " unregulated mergers , based merely on dominant capitalist concerns , have a devastating effect on the Union ' s social cohesion " .
The Group of the Party of European Socialists agrees with the President , when she demands an observatory of industrial change , and a fairer distribution of income between capital which enables and work which produces .
In short , the Group of the Party of European Socialists endorses the conclusions of our President , whom we congratulate on her fair and courageous statements .
Parliament would appear ridiculous if it voted in favour of the joint resolution tabled by the PPE and the ELDR , who seem to wish not only to disown our President , but also to disassociate themselves from both President Prodi and the Conservative and Liberal Christian Democrat Prime Ministers who endorse Lisbon .
I therefore advise all the Christian Democrats , all the Liberals and all the Democrats in general who want to see a social market economy , to vote in favour of the resolution proposed by the Group of the Party of European Socialists .
We wish to combine economic efficiency , quality of life and social protection .
We want sustainable development in all these aspects .
( Applause from the left )
Madam President , Mr President of the Commission , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I should like to start by saying that we in the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party did not especially agree with the observations made by Mrs Fontaine in her speech at the Lisbon Summit .
However , we were very pleased about the far-sighted messages which were to be found in the conclusions from the Summit .
We are particularly pleased about the emphasis placed upon Europe ' s creating prosperity and employment by strengthening the market economy and increasing competitiveness , partly through greater flexibility in the labour market and reduced social charges in connection with low-paid jobs .
I also want to express satisfaction at the fact that the open coordination with which we are familiar from employment policy is to be used as a tool in other areas to promote the use of information technology and reinforce training and strengthen research .
Working for common goals in this open and flexible way , in which countries can measure themselves against each other and learn from one another , is a good way both of ensuring progress and , at the same time , of guaranteeing individual countries ' freedom to seek their own solutions to their own problems .
I would also express great satisfaction at the fact that the opinion sets a time-frame for developing the single market in important areas , chiefly through the commitment to rapidly create a legal framework for e-commerce .
However , there is , in fact , just a great a need to develop the traditional economy , and I am therefore delighted at the emphasis on increased research efforts and on the enlargement of the single financial market , as well as at the Council ' s support for liberalisation within the energy , postal and transport sectors , even though it has not set a time scale for such liberalisation .
In developing employment policy and combating social exclusion , it is only right to invest not only in economic growth but also in education and training as a way of giving those who are excluded from society a foothold in the labour market and enabling them to help themselves .
There are major advantages in a form of coordination based upon benchmarking , but we should of course be careful that the whole process does not take a bureaucratic turn or lead to over-zealous management .
Finally , I would offer an important and perhaps less complimentary remark .
In the Lisbon conclusions , the Council refers a good deal to what it is going to do in the future , perhaps following proposals on the part of the Commission .
I hope that we are not to read too much into this apparent emphasis upon the intergovernmental character of EU cooperation .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , I think it is clear that , in January , when the Portuguese Presidency issued its first paper , the original impulse was perfectly laudable .
The widespread dissemination of communication technologies was going to cause , indeed , is causing considerable change in the living and working conditions of the citizens of Europe .
The conclusions of the Portuguese Presidency contain many positive commitments and objectives .
Having said that , these are in danger of being watered down , and the motion for a resolution tabled by the PPE Group and the Liberal Group presents an absolute caricature of this , giving Parliament the opportunity to split along the good old left-versus-right divide , which does not match the observation of the practical policies implemented within the fifteen Member States , and which certainly does not meet the challenges of the future .
Having said that , Mr Prodi , the real challenge would be if , in coming months , you did not endorse this motion for a resolution , in the event that Parliament votes in favour of it tomorrow .
We therefore call upon you , along with the Council , to consider in further detail a number of points which we feel are noticeably absent from the Lisbon conclusions .
The first point is the strategic goal .
Has the strategic goal of sustainable development which was supposed to be an integral part of a twenty-first century economy , which would meet the requirements of the planet and its citizens , been forgotten ?
There is not one line on the reports which the Commission nonetheless submitted at the European Council in Helsinki .
Not one line on the practical implementation of Article 6 of the Treaty on European Union .
The connection must be made between the dissemination of modern communication techniques and the implementation of sustainable development .
The second point relates to employment .
European citizens must not be kept in ignorance of the fact that the dissemination of these communication technologies is going to destroy jobs as well as create them , and that at the very core of our societies , at macroeconomic as well as at microeconomic level , it presents a challenge to the redistribution of working time and the redistribution of incomes .
Avoiding these questions is to invite serious social crises despite the spirit of optimism currently characterising the economy .
The same applies to the matter of taxation , which you mentioned .
In one of its documents on the integration of financial markets , the Commission itself said that such integration was possible only with a minimum of tax regulation .
This is also true of the Monti package .
These matters are going nowhere , and integrating the financial markets without fiscal regulation at European level is still tantamount to establishing a two-speed Europe .
Finally , in social matters , I do not think it wise , Mr Monti , for the Commission to give up any legislative proposals in matters of employment law .
The new economy also involves enabling workers , in the event of company restructuring or necessary discussions about the incorporation of technological innovations in companies , to proceed in decent conditions .
This must also be included in the Nice social agenda and we urge you to ensure that this is the case , because my Group wishes to see a strong and ambitious Commission , and will support you if you take the comments I have just made into account .
Madam President , many observers have stressed the fact that the Special Summit was characterised by the triumph of the contentions of Mr Blair and Mr Aznar .
If that means that the Lisbon Summit sanctioned a liberal view of Europe , then I must of course , unfortunately , concur with this analysis .
I cannot however be delighted by it .
I do not by any means wish to allow the current British and Spanish Heads of Government to monopolise the offensive position with regard to the information revolution .
In my opinion , this is indeed a huge challenge which must be accepted .
So when I read the summit conclusions which state that Europe has set itself the goal of promoting a dynamic knowledge-based economy ' capable of sustainable economic growth with more and better jobs ' , I say , ' Go on then , I dare you . '
An annual upturn in investment in people and adopting a proactive policy to promote full employment is something I am firmly in favour of .
The political difference between us is not a question of whether or not to adopt modern methods , but of what our concept of these modern methods is , particularly on the place and the role which all men and women , bar none , must play , both as workers and as citizens .
In this respect , however , Mr Blair and Mr Aznar and their followers are held captive by archaic liberal ideas , which are conformist in the most ordinary way : allow the market , particularly the financial market , to operate , introduce wage flexibility , reduce labour costs , even if it means boosting the mechanism which produces inequality , precariousness and exclusion across the entire planet .
There ' s the rub : do we or do we not have the courage to tackle these taboo areas at the very time when we are starting to see such promising beginnings of a new phase in human civilisation ?
This , in my opinion , is the yardstick against which we will be able to measure Europe ' s true ambition and also the true modernity of the left .
- ( PT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to highlight some positive conclusions resulting from the Lisbon European Council , which essentially relate to the joint motion for a resolution supported amongst others by my group , and which has already been attacked so fiercely here by the Socialists .
These conclusions were presented by the Heads of State and Government as part of a strategic objective to make the European Union the most competitive area in the world within ten years , by developing a knowledge-based economy and adopting policies geared towards growth and full employment .
I must ask this , however : do the statements by those currently in power in Europe , who are , in the majority , Socialists , and who , for various years have headed the governments of their respective countries , not above all reveal more about their shortcomings and the serious failures of the European development model which they have been promoting ?
Is there anything genuinely new and original about the Lisbon Summit conclusions that had not already been diagnosed and stated in the 1993 White Paper " Growth , Competitiveness , Employment " ?
A commitment was made at that time to , and I quote , " information networks " ; today the commitment is stressed , and I quote again " to the area of knowledge and access to the information society " .
In the White Paper , the stress was put on " lifelong learning and continuing training " .
Now , and I quote once again , the issue is " lifelong learning " .
I could go on , as there are countless conclusions completely identical to those in the 1993 White Paper .
There is nevertheless one aspect that deserves a particular mention in the area of policies for full employment .
In 1993 , the objective was to halve the number of unemployed in the European Union , from 17 million to 8.5 million .
The fact is that we are now in 2000 , unemployment still stands at 15 million and the summit conclusions promise us rates of almost full employment in ten years ' time .
This is at best politically irresponsible and displays a mentality which is quite typical of the Socialists , even for those followers of the third way , which is based on the proactive development of a strategy which , as you all know , is the product of many different factors and is ultimately based on the actions of businesses .
As one well-known analyst said , Europe ' s leaders have decided on something that they cannot possibly achieve .
To promise , as they have done , ambitious targets for growth and employment is equivalent to announcing an increase in the population or the number of days of sunshine .
We believe that the role of governments should instead be to focus on developing means to enable social and economic agents to generate wealth and to produce positive results in these areas .
Another aspect that is worthy of attention is essentially that the summit appears to have ignored the fact that the countries of the European Union have different historical backgrounds and economic and social structures . These are disparities which eastward enlargement will only accentuate , and the summit also appears to have ignored the fact that there are still imbalances that even average levels of development cannot hide .
This applies to both positive and negative aspects .
How can we explain , for example , that Sweden and Finland , countries with highly developed social protection systems , have levels of Internet use identical to those in the United States , that is around 50 % , whilst the United Kingdom , a much more liberal country , has levels of around 29 % ?
On the other hand , how is it that there can still be gross disparities in the minimum wage levels of some Member States , marked differences in the quality of social security systems and in the value of retirement pensions , and even in levels of unemployment or hidden unemployment , not to mention increasingly widespread pockets of poverty and exclusion ?
The European Union may have begun its race towards levels of development already seen in America ' s economy and businesses , but this , the real Europe , will not become a reality until the convergence of national economies and internal economic and social cohesion are given top priority .
It was with great interest that I followed the European Council ' s summit in Lisbon . There was a very impressive display of rhetoric , chiefly indicative of impotence on a massive and growing scale .
It is , of course , all well and good to have the strategic goal of becoming the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world with a view to creating sustainable growth .
The first problem , however , is that no specific actions of any kind have been outlined which can give actual substance to this ambition .
The second problem is that the social problems entailed and which ( for better and , particularly , for worse ) are a very significant part of actual life in the European Union have been ignored .
The Presidency ' s conclusions talk of " the European social model " .
I am not aware of any European social model .
I am familiar with a number of different models for social welfare , tied to specific national traditions .
In my own country , there is a tradition which differs markedly from the dominant tradition in the European Union .
The real problem is being completely ignored .
This was hinted at in the negotiations prior to the intergovernmental conference , namely the problem of implementing reforms so as to create a European social model .
I must issue a strong warning against doing any such thing .
There is to be a commitment to majority decision-making in this area .
My own country ' s government opposes this , and so do we who are sceptical about this self-fulfilling development within the European Union .
The most significant legacy of the European Council ' s summit in Lisbon is all the unresolved problems .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Lisbon focused on employment , economic reform and the shift to the digital age .
But Lisbon is not the first summit to discuss the topic of " employment " .
Since Essen , we have had numerous declarations of intent and well-meant action programmes .
The only way to achieve a sustainable increase in the employment rate is to give companies the entrepreneurial room for manoeuvre which they need in the form of framework conditions .
The proposed measures to promote SMEs are confined to analyses and to drafting yet more non-binding declarations of intent .
Paper is cheap .
Unfortunately there is a total lack of concrete results .
A sustained improvement in the employment situation can only be achieved through structural reform , which means reducing the tax burden , simplifying tax systems and making it easier to incorporate a company .
We are all familiar with these requirements .
Everyone says , " Yes , that is quite right " .
But implementation is where it falls down .
As an Austrian member , I must also address the sanctions of the 14 in connection with Lisbon .
The ability to be democratic goes hand in hand with the ability to discuss .
The efforts of the presidency to ban the subject of Austria from the agenda gave me even more food for thought .
It is in the interests of the Union to clarify relations between Austria and the EU .
Refusing all discussion was never a recipe for resolving a conflict .
Many people back in Austria ask me " How can the peaceful house of Europe be built if the highest representatives are not on speaking terms or refuse all discussion ? "
These symbolic gestures are the right way to open up old wounds between people .
I therefore say to everyone who declares that the sanctions are for the government but not the people , that such a separation is not possible .
A democratically elected government cannot be separated from the people who elected it .
This is illustrated by absurd examples such as the taxi boycott in Brussels , problems with school exchange programmes and much else besides .
The distrust shown towards Austria , despite the fact that it has not once violated democratic principles since 1945 stands in clear contradiction to the spirit of this Community .
Judge the Austrian government by its deeds .
You will not find any violation of the spirit of the Union .
( Applause from the right )
Madam President , I wish to welcome the President-in-Office of the Council and to wish him every success in the Portuguese Presidency of the European Union .
I am sure that we are all in broad agreement with the Lisbon Summit ' s strategic objective to make Europe , and I quote , " the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world capable of sustainable economic growth " .
Nobody doubts the importance of preparing the European public for the demands of a society based on information , knowledge , and new communications technologies as strategic weapons , in order to emerge victorious in the future , generating employment with higher-quality work and higher pay .
This would all be fine if the Lisbon Summit had been held specifically to discuss this kind of issue , which would mean that it should have been called the Information Society Summit , or the Knowledge Economy Summit or the New Economy Summit , according to people ' s whims , taste or pretensions .
To call it the Employment Summit , however , would be to depart from its real purpose .
It is like putting a fake label on a product , which does not match the content .
In this case , it was done out of political expediency .
The truth is that the objective of employment goes far beyond these issues .
Firstly , the new economy , which essentially represents a challenge for this generation , cannot put a bomb under the old economy , which is the mainstay of our lives and whose modernisation and structural adjustment represent a stage that we cannot dispense with .
This means that we must immediately discuss strategies for restructuring the traditional sectors of our economy , which rethinking the choices that we will have to make in relation to the guiding principles of the World Trade Organisation would require .
Secondly , a strategic debate on employment would have to start with a substantial analysis of the European Union ' s agents of competitiveness , because that is what sustainable economic growth depends on , and hence employment and social well-being .
The truth is that in a debate of this kind , we are bound to wonder why the EU has grown at half the rate of the United States of America over the last few years , and why no government has had the courage to question the more harmful effects of the so-called " European social model " , because , without wishing to detract from its positive aspects , this model is , to some extent , an incentive to passivity , to indolence and sloth in some elements of society , who could and should work . We should therefore ask ourselves why the level of economic reintegration into the active population has been so low amongst those who have benefited from certain support policies .
This applies particularly to the " minimum guaranteed income " type of system . We must also ask ourselves why we in Europe have a system that is so state-led and so interventionist that it regulates the competitiveness of the economy in a damaging way , and which , in the guise of arguments about society and stability , sometimes conceals high-spending strategies and even , very often , strategies for helping their political cronies .
These strategies certainly have a harmful effect on economic growth , on the distribution of wealth , and consequently , on employment .
A far-reaching debate on the problem of employment in the European Union would inevitably , therefore , have to address these issues properly .
Madam President , I wish to add my warm welcome and congratulations to the presidency on the successful achievement of the Lisbon Summit .
I think we will come to see in the future that all roads did lead to Lisbon via Luxembourg , Cardiff and Cologne , because Lisbon should be the end of a process , one that can actually deliver as regards the sort of priorities we want to bring to a successful conclusion throughout the whole of the European Union .
The key question is how we turn the conclusions of the Lisbon Summit into action ; we must ensure that we turn the rhetoric of Lisbon into a reality .
I shall not dwell too much on the specifics of the Lisbon Summit .
A lot of us have been through that already and we welcome many of the conclusions .
I want to look at the challenges that are inherent in the Lisbon process for Parliament , the Commission and , indeed , all three institutions .
In particular , for Parliament there is a huge challenge in realising the full legislative implications of completing a single market .
There is a challenge in realising the full potential of the e-economy .
There is a challenge for Parliament in playing its part in helping Europe to become the dynamic centre of sustainable job creation , innovation , competitiveness and modernised social welfare .
It is a challenge that Parliament must rise to , working with the other institutions , Commissioner Prodi and his colleagues , and the Council .
If we do not , nobody will understand or forgive us for not realising our aim .
The reason , as I mentioned before the Lisbon Summit , relates to those who are in the gallery with us today - the citizens of Europe .
We have to turn Lisbon into something that means something to them , something to the people in my home town of Wolverhampton .
To me , Lisbon is all about creating a Europe of highly-paid , highly-skilled , high-value-added jobs .
If we can achieve that sort of Europe from the Lisbon process , it will be good for our citizens and for Europe as a whole , because what could be more socially just and inclusive than a Europe that genuinely benefits from full employment and good jobs that everybody can enjoy ?
That is our challenge .
In conclusion , I thank the Portuguese presidency very much .
I thank the President-in-Office , the Minister and , in particular , Prime Minister Guterres for all the personal effort he put into this process .
At Lisbon the Portuguese presidency gave us the key to unlock a decade of sustained innovation , competitiveness and job creation across our continent .
Now is the time for us as a Parliament , the Commission and the Council to work together to ensure that key is turned .
- ( PT ) Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , Mr President-in-Office , the document adopted at the Lisbon Summit is rather abstract , and this may mean that it is not implemented equitably .
The policy that has been adopted could conceivably result in a high rate of growth , rivalling that of the United States , but it is unlikely to prevent social exclusion or achieve social cohesion and regional balance .
I wish to discuss this problem , which affects fundamental European policies .
The European Council ought to be aware that in Europe today , the lowest per capita income and the highest levels of employment exist side by side in the same regions or countries .
This requires a European employment policy with its own budget , linked to the Structural Funds policy that the European Council does not want to blindly accept .
The Council should also be aware of the fact that there are countries in Europe that are not highly developed , but which are nevertheless prepared for the knowledge economy .
They have a high-quality system of technical , university and professional education , but since they do not have the necessary economic development , they are once again seeing their sons and daughters emigrate . These young people , paradoxically , are acting in the same way as computer experts who are trained in India but then go to work in the United States .
The Council ought to think about this and work towards a real Europe .
- ( PT ) Mr President , the results of the Lisbon Summit demonstrate that everything the Portuguese Presidency has up to now presented as a priority for employment and for combating social exclusion has merely been a massive attempt to pull the wool over our eyes .
Its supporters may try to make its conclusions look rosy , whether they are talking about the so-called modernisation of the European social model or about the need to make the European Union the most competitive area in the world , but they cannot hide their real aims , which are to produce a labour market free from the conditions imposed by legislation designed to protect workers ' rights , to put social security entirely in the hands of the financial markets and to speed up the process of liberalisation in fundamental sectors such as gas , electricity , postal services , transport and telecommunications .
Therefore , instead of more high-quality jobs with employment rights , instead of a reduction in working hours whilst maintaining salary levels and without flexible working arrangements , the summit ' s decision will , in practice , lead to poorer jobs , which are less secure , which provide fewer rights , and do not offer an effective system of social protection .
Instead of high-quality public services which meet users ' needs , protect the most vulnerable sectors of society and generate high-quality jobs , the Council has decided to speed up privatisation to satisfy the interests of economic groups and to increase their profits . This will have a harmful effect on employment and on working conditions - which will deteriorate - and on the environment and town and country planning .
If we are to draw something positive from this , it is the major demonstration by tens of thousands of workers who condemned the growing instability of employment as they marched past the Lisbon Summit . They condemned unemployment and social exclusion and demanded more high-quality employment , better salaries , more social rights and a change of direction in European policies , in order to achieve economic and social cohesion .
Mr President , in the debate preceding the Lisbon Summit I said that the preparatory documents seemed to show that , in tackling the new economy , the Heads of States and Government were torn between a centralised , bureaucratic approach and a freer , more simply coordinated approach .
Following this Council meeting , in our view , the scales have tipped in favour of the freer approach , since the Lisbon conclusions declare that there is no question of adding further European regulations to those which exist already but , quite the contrary , of implementing - the expression is used several times - a new open method of coordination .
The knowledge economy which we are moving into is thus already having a retroactive effect on our concept of the European institutions , for this new method of coordination must mean , as we already know , that top-down authoritarian integration and uniformising regulations are to be abandoned and replaced by a system in which the States and national democracies will play a much more important role , and will combine within networks following the specific model of a computer network .
The Union as such must then simply play the role of coordinator and catalyst , to use the precise word used in the Lisbon conclusions .
This new method also entails the European Council rediscovering its fundamental strategic guidance mission , while allowing the various Councils of Ministers to take the practical decisions and the Commission to prepare and execute policy .
This is the way we may finally achieve more balanced and more democratic European institutions .
The Lisbon conclusions , Mr President , may , however , in other respects , give rise to a number of reservations .
Since there is not much time , let me cite just one : the proactive goal of increasing the proportion of women in employment from 51 % to 60 % by 2010 .
This really is the type of authoritarian attitude which should be a thing of the past .
It is not up to the authorities to say how many women must go out to work .
This is a matter for the interested parties and civil society .
The authorities must simply ensure that housewives receive fair treatment and that personal choices may be made freely .
Mr President , I decided to speak in this debate when I read the truly excellent analysis of the current situation in Europe produced by the European Commission before the Lisbon Summit .
It is true that the Lisbon Summit also represented something of a sea-change in attitudes towards the global society and in particular towards issues like e-commerce .
At the same time there was a tension in Lisbon between the old world of the international socialists and the new world of those who have a slightly wider perspective .
So the city of Henry the Navigator may become the city of Netscape the navigator , a new approach which I thoroughly welcome .
The summit was variously described as a social summit and an e-summit and so on .
Much was said about the economic and social policies that were supposed to emanate from Lisbon .
The reality is that the European social model is now living in London and she is called Laetitia Casta .
She is Marianne , the symbol of France but taxes in France are now so high that she now has to go and live in London despite the vastly increased taxation under Labour .
Very soon now the government is about to raise GBP 16 billion through the sale of the third generation mobile telephone licences as Mr Suominen reminded us .
There is tension around Europe but at the same time I detect a sea-change .
I rarely speak in debates after summits but this is an important one .
I therefore look forward to some genuine action from the European Commission .
It is action not words that is needed .
When I talk about words , I am thinking about words like " bench-marking " and " peer review " .
I am sure there are not many people in this Chamber who understand what bench-marking or peer review means .
Do not worry , it is meaningless .
What actually matters is a light touch on the e-commerce directive , a light touch on telecommunications .
Give people the freedom to use the Internet to their advantage , to their benefit , for social reasons , for educational reasons , for the disabled - all the benefits the Internet can give us .
We do not need the heavy regulatory touch of the past .
Please Mr Prodi , ignore your friends on the Left and stick with the new world not the old world .
Mr President , let me say to Mr McMillan-Scott that a spectre is haunting Europe , the spectre of economic efficiency and one wonders why it is still so evasive despite all the great efforts that liberalism has put into it .
It is a question of strategy really .
So what is the strategy for making a success of this incredible economic transformation Lisbon is promising us ?
It is a strategy which is radically innovative .
All those who have endeavoured to tackle the problem of the European economy so far have done so within the context of the old economy .
Guterres decided that the problem was practically insoluble in this context and , rather than having to contend with the deadlocks of the old economy , he decided to circumvent them altogether .
It is what you might call a great inspirational strategy which proposes that Europe put all its effort into the new economy , into information technology and into telecommunications in the hope that , as this new economy develops , the old economy will take a new direction in its wake .
The most basic example is employment .
Europe currently has 16 million unemployed whom it cannot absorb .
At the same time , there are 800 000 highly-skilled jobs in the new economy which cannot be filled due to a lack of skilled human resources .
Some say these figures are set to reach 1.6 million next year .
If Europe does not learn its electronic lessons fast , these unfilled jobs will multiply and the economy will slump .
And even if we do fill these 800 000 jobs , there will still be a further 15 million unemployed .
We do not appear to have solved any problems whatsoever .
However , the new technologies can , with our support , lead to competitiveness and cost reductions in all sectors .
And as all the other sectors become more productive , thanks to the impact of the new economy , they too will create more jobs .
This is the simple yet great idea of Lisbon .
The question is whether this idea will work in practice .
And whether or not it will work in practice depends on whether or not we are capable of a new financial perspective in Europe .
All these years , Europe has been convinced that investing taxpayers ' money into the old-style economy was a waste of time .
This is where all the zero deficits , stability plans and so forth come from .
It is debatable just how much of ECOFIN ' s die-hard approach was totally justified , but perhaps we are now in a position to leave this behind us .
Lisbon may well have shown us how to leave this behind us because , if we are to attain its objectives , we need public investment in the new economy .
We need to build information highways , on which private enterprises can of course then create and run their own vehicles .
However , these highways can only be built by the Member States , by the public sector and by the European Union .
Lisbon will be judged on this , i.e. on whether or not we are capable of integrating the public and private economies in an original and enterprising manner .
Mr President , as far as the European Council in Lisbon is concerned , even though it was dedicated to employment , the unemployment of eighteen million women and men in the European Union and the human and social tragedy that this represents are just a grey area in a current economic situation which is more promising than it has been for a generation .
Such cynicism borders on candour !
The present situation , which is exceptionally advantageous to employers and the property-owning classes , arises specifically because of the extent of unemployment , the pressure that this exerts on wages and the generalisation of precariousness .
As for the promise to create twenty million jobs in the years to come , this is just as deceitful as it is ridiculous .
The Council presented the so-called new economy as the main provider of jobs for the future , but the stock exchange crisis which occurred a few days after the Summit demonstrated just to what extent the new economy was , more than anything , the basis for old-style speculation , and that the promised jobs in information and communication technologies were , after all , just virtual jobs .
At the same time , the demonstration of Alsthom ' s European workers in Brussels reminded us that the real economy , that of big business , is continuing to cut thousands of jobs and to make unemployment worse , while governments back these firms up by cutting support and allowances to the unemployed in order to force them into accepting any old job , at any price , under any conditions .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , on one side of the coin we read that economic growth and employment figures are up , the e-Europe action plan is in the pipeline , unemployment is beginning to drop slightly and the economic and employment forecasts are good .
On the other side of the coin , we read that there are still 15 million unemployed , the telecommunications and Internet services sector is underdeveloped , there is a widening skills gap in information technology , structural long-term unemployment , too many state monopolies and fetters , competitive disadvantages vis-à-vis the USA and shortcomings in the implementation of European innovations .
Lisbon aroused expectations as far as rectifying these shortcomings is concerned .
And anyone who arouses expectations must be measured by his or her actions , must introduce consistent benchmarking , carry out regular follow-ups , formulate ambitious goals , draft a master plan in every country as to how these goals are to be implemented and , above all , quickly follow words with deeds .
We shall measure the Member States , as represented by the Council , by when each school in Europe has Internet access , by when electricity , gas , telecommunications , the postal and transport markets are fully deregulated , by what the charter for small enterprises really says and by when the incorporation offensive is implemented .
We shall measure you by when the financial services internal market is complete and by when the quantity and quality of innovation and its implementation makes Europe the most competitive and dynamic economic area in the world .
Allow me to say in support of Mrs Raschofer that , because of our experience with you , we shall measure you by your conduct vis-à-vis Parliament and the Commission during this process and by when a sustainable reduction in unemployment is actually achieved .
Our eco-social market economy model is the basis for our action and we call for it to be developed further .
Mr President , I welcome the Lisbon conclusions .
In fact , seen from the perspective of employment and social policy and against the long procession of summits which preceded it , Lisbon stands out along with Luxembourg in terms of the potential it offers us .
I stress the word " potential " because , as others have said , we now need to look at the follow-up .
Partly that follow-up is institutional .
We will be looking very carefully , for example , at how the broad economic guidelines will be prepared , at just how successful the input of the Social Affairs and Employment Council will be in emphasising the need for employment and social cohesion when it formulates the broad economic guidelines .
Also , we are told that each spring the European Council will consider an overall report to be produced by the Commission that will deal with structural indicators to be agreed .
We wonder who will agree those structural indicators and just how strong the synthesis report to be produced by the Commission will be .
What will the role of the Commission and this institution be ?
Will it , in fact , be largely intergovernmental ?
If so , I think we will be disappointed .
But we are not just concerned about the institutional follow-up .
We are also concerned about the substance .
What proposals , for example , will the Commission come forward with by June this year on social inclusion , as it was challenged to do in the Lisbon conclusions ?
Further than that , how quickly will the high-level group on the future of social protection begin to move into the realm of a convergence strategy for social protection that this House has called for ?
So we are concerned with the substantive follow-up as well .
One point disappoints me - that is the stance of the EPP in all this .
It is trying to pretend that it welcomes the outcome because it is largely liberal and concentrates upon the liberal market aspects .
It should be honest and say that , like us , it has always supported a social market economy .
We welcome the emphasis upon the smooth and efficient functioning of markets .
But as always we want that to be balanced by solidarity and social inclusion .
I hope the group has the political honesty to accept that it continues to support that point of view .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , from amongst the very interesting Lisbon conclusions , please allow me to highlight a declaration which , because it is apparently technical - although I believe it is politically very important - has not yet been mentioned by previous speakers .
I am talking about the request to the Commission that it contemplate , for 2001 , a coordinated strategy in the legislative field .
At the moment we have , to name but a few , initiatives such as SLIM , the Business Test Panel , the Regulatory Policy Guidelines and the Better Law-Making Report , not to mention the initiatives relating to codification or the quality of legislation .
Clearly this will all have to be coordinated and we will even have to go further in laying down the new regulations or restructuring the existing legislation .
Improving quality must not only be directed at Community legislation but also at the legislation of the Member States .
In all new legislation we must establish a better balance between ' self regulation ' and ' public regulation ' , in accordance with what , in the conclusions of the Lisbon Summit , in some initiatives , has been called coregulation .
We must review the ' Best Business Impact ' initiative .
Throughout the whole of this exercise , we must take account of the interests of the consumers and the interests of the environment , and these are complicated tasks .
Returning to simplification , the SLIM initiative requires a complete revision .
We need a clear programme .
We also need this programme to be applied on a national level , where there is still a lot of ' gold plating ' of directives when they are transposed .
We need expiry clauses and we need to improve codification .
Codification is currently too cumbersome an instrument , too ineffective , and therefore we perhaps have to reform the Treaty .
We have to tackle that reform of the Treaty .
Lastly , we have to regulate more quickly and be more effective .
Since we are in the Internet era , we have to take account of the fact that , in Internet terms , a year is equivalent to three months at the most .
Therefore we need to make improvements in that respect as well .
Mr President , congratulations on a particularly focused summit as regards : the clarity of the objectives ; the analysis of the tasks needed to meet those objectives ; and the built-in progress-chasing system .
There was particular emphasis at this summit on the European area of research and innovation , following the excellent communication from Commissioner Busquin .
This is a domain of severe under-achievement in the European Union .
We need deeper knowledge in science and technology .
We have grasped the need to rectify our lack - by means of patent protection , mapping of areas of excellence , tax incentives for research and development , an electronic network for scientists and enhanced mobility for our researchers .
The sixth framework programme will be another tool .
As well as deeper knowledge , we need wider knowledge .
We need people who have been disenfranchised in the areas of science and technology - women , older people and particularly those suffering disadvantage - to be on board in the quest for this wider knowledge .
We need to use the knowledge in better ways .
Of course , we need new products and we need new processes and we need new ideas about how our society should be run .
We also need new sustainable technologies .
The European Socialists are fully behind the leap forward which is possible given the cogent analysis that took place at the Lisbon Summit .
Mr President , many commentators have drawn adverse comparisons between the European Union and the old Soviet Union .
Both have been profoundly anti-democratic , both have seemed opposed to enterprise and wealth creation .
At the Lisbon Summit it appeared that the EU had rediscovered a commitment to enterprise .
Although I have some reservations about references to the social market in the EPP resolution , I am happy to support it .
Let us hope that it is carried into effect and is more than mere soundbites and press releases .
In direct contrast , the President of our Parliament made a remarkable speech in Lisbon which amounted to a virulent and vituperative attack on multinational companies , on liberal economics , on free markets and on the very heart of western capitalism .
I have no doubt that she was prompted by the best humanitarian intentions .
But we must understand that if her proposals were carried out , they would damage competitiveness and productivity , they would deter investment , they would hurt prosperity and , above all , they would increase unemployment in Europe .
She was attacking nothing less than the foundations of western capitalism , the engine which has delivered wealth and success undreamed of by earlier generations .
She said that Europeans are quite " scandalised by untrammelled capitalism , whose relocations , social dumping , ruthless exploitation ... and remorseless pursuit of profit at the expense of working men and women have a direct and traumatic effect on their lives . "
This goes beyond socialism , this is pure Marxism .
It may have been appropriate for the Kremlin in the 1960s but it is totally out of place in 21st century Europe .
It is typical of this Parliament that we call for an end to unemployment yet we promote actions that have the opposite effect .
Her remarks fit this depressing tradition perfectly .
I do not know whether she was speaking for her party , for the Parliament or in a personal capacity but I absolutely reject , repudiate and condemn her remarks and am delighted to have this opportunity of publicly dissociating myself from them .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , in January and last month , we were able to congratulate the Portuguese Presidency on its initiative to hold this special Council and on the thorough and conscientious way in which the Council had been prepared .
And today , now that the Council has taken place , we would like to offer our congratulations on its conclusions and to congratulate President Prodi on the way in which the Commission , under his leadership , contributed to the Council ' s success through the timely presentation of its own paper .

However , Mr Gama , all such conclusions have one drawback in common : they cannot change the world overnight . Today , we have heard several speeches by Members who would like the Portuguese Presidency to come here and say " before the summit we had 15 million people unemployed and today we only have 10 million ; before the summit we had 40 million people living in poverty and today there are only 30 million " .
We know how difficult the real world is and how difficult it is to get the European Union to agree on a strategic objective .
I would like to express a deep-felt concern here : whilst the presidency , the 15 Member States , the President of the Commission , the Commission itself , the President of the European Parliament and a substantial part of this European Parliament are agreed on an objective and on a strategic plan , the main group in Parliament is deeply divided over what it wants and over which path it should follow in the European Union .
We confirm once again that we agree with this objective and that we are fully behind it , but we also wish to reiterate that the only part of the American model we are interested in pursuing is that of growth , since we do not want Europe to be a carbon copy of the American model . Nor do we want to copy the social aspects of the American model .
We urge the Portuguese Presidency and the Commission to continue in their determination to fight for us to be able to create our own model from the opportunities offered by globalisation , so that the wealth generated can be used to combat poverty and can be more evenly distributed to ensure that social cohesion , full employment and sustainable development will be the outcome - in ten years ' time , but things should steadily improve up to then - of this meeting in Lisbon .
Congratulations , Mr President .
Mr President , I have to say that I have listened to this debate in increasing amazement , especially when I hear the socialist group talk about our resolution .
It appears that the socialist group only wants to hear one-sided applause and praise about everything which took place in Portugal .
We too would like to congratulate you , Mr Gama .
There is a certain likeness between you and your distant predecessor Vasco da Gama at Cape of Good Hope .
The employment situation in Europe seems to be slightly improving .
As far as this is concerned , congratulations are in order , also for the fact that many fine promises have been made .
It remains to be seen whether they will materialise or not .
This is not so evident as the Summit is remarkably opaque about this , especially if we consider the three most important Prime Ministers involved .
First of all , Mr Blair .
He makes enough noise but is destroying the British industry by setting the exchange rate for the pound far too high .
The French government is drafting a definition of social policy which implies that nothing should change and , as such , will run into problems with this social policy .
This is a problem too .
Finally , there is Mr Schröder , who does nothing at all , so we can be very brief about him .
Mr President , in a situation such as this , surely it cannot be expected from the Group of the European People ' s Party and European Democrats that we come up with a ' hurrah ' resolution .
We are satisfied with what the Portuguese Presidency has said and brought about , but we really need to wait and see whether action will follow .
We have listed a few problems .
There may be reservations regarding issues which have been presented by both the liberal group and our group .
However , we as the Group of the European People ' s Party and European Democrats - and this is clearly spelled out in the resolution - proceed on the basis of the model of a social market economy , and this is what it is about .
It has taken socialists a very long time to get this far and we are pleased that they are nearly there .
We also hope that they will implement it efficiently .
Unfortunately , we have not yet seen any evidence of this .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the report to the European Parliament on the results of summits is always an experience . It is an experience because if only half of what is regularly announced to us really happened , if Europe had already achieved the results which have now been presented to us as the slogan of the European Council - fighting unemployment and putting the European Union in the leading position on the world markets - , this alone would be a success .
Has the Council still not learned how little its political promises are worth when it then fails to implement anything and trivial matters are blocked in the Council for years ?
Has the Council still not learned that we never solve any problems in Europe because we keep shifting them to European level ?
Can the Council really back out of its responsibility in the individual Member States so easily ?
As the European Parliament , we should not accept this .
The right model for successfully meeting the challenges of globalisation is competition for the most successful economic , employment , research , education and social policies , not European dumbing down .
Who , if not Europe with its different traditions and cultures , can find an answer to this , provided that we leave responsibility for problem solving where it belongs , namely with the Member States ?
It makes no sense to define European targets for economic growth if we do not remove barriers to growth at Member State level .
It makes no sense to unify education policy at European level if we still have countless problems with arrangements for recognising diplomas .
Even the desire to connect all schools to the Internet is not a question , which should be dealt with at European level .
It needs to be done locally .
As a member of the Committee on Budgets , I warn you against doing this with European funds from the European budget .
Lisbon missed its big chance to really improve things substantially for the citizens of Europe .
Instead , all we heard were pipe dreams which can never be checked and for which the Council is responsible in the Member States , not at European level .
In the end , people will take their leave of such a Europe .
We must not allow that to happen .
Mr President , I believe in a common strategy which must be monitored from within Europe .
I think that the Lisbon Summit has given us a new impulse in this respect .
This is important and these are aspects which one would expect from a Summit .
But it goes without saying that the merit of this Summit , at which so many good intentions were formulated and which is also based on an excellent analysis , will be judged on the action taken subsequently .
Because a number of the matters which were brought together at the Summit - as , in fact , happened - had been formulated previously by the Commission .
The e-commerce document springs to mind , for example .
This is an existing document .
Another example is the intention to draft a legislative frame for pension funds .
This intention was formulated a long time ago .
In addition to the positive aspects of summits such as these , I would also like to make room for some criticism .
These summits try to build a momentum - and it is important that they do so - but this momentum caves in because so little action is taken subsequently , as a result of which people no longer believe in the next momentum .
The press now writes that the most important element of the Lisbon Summit was that it actually took place , nothing else .
This is very serious .
The content of the Summit was not bad , but faith in subsequent action is evidently ebbing and this is a very serious matter indeed .
I would like to list three elements which are lacking in my opinion .
Firstly , fiscal integration , which has been talked about for so long .
In order to take action in the economic field , fiscal integration is required .
Secondly , social security .
There should be a convergence programme , a kind of guideline for social security .
Thirdly , if you want to enhance employment for women , you will need to undertake some action in the care sector and not simply in the new technologies , however important they may be . The care sector will be of key significance in years to come .
Finally , I do not share the view of the British Conservatives and I would like to make this quite clear .
It is important to point out that , within the Group of the European People ' s Party and European Democrats , there are also voices other than these .
Mr President , few words are needed to conclude this debate , for the debate itself has been extremely clear and detailed .

I would like to start from the Mr Martinez ' s happy fault when he juxtaposed the two debates : I say " happy fault " because the atmosphere of the second debate , which was on Africa , could not have been more tragically different from the Lisbon debate .
The few days - hours even - which separated the two debates revealed a wealth of differences : when we talk of a new Europe , an innovative Europe , we must not forget that , across the water , there is a terrible situation in Africa which is out of control .
To return to Lisbon , the debate was intense and passionate because it touched on tangible subjects of major concern .
However , we must be clear on one point : although we did talk in Lisbon of the new economy , we cannot divide the economy into a new economy and an old economy .
Europe is like a huge seed , and its economic strength lies precisely in its tradition of operating in all sectors , both new and traditional , and excelling in the traditional sectors .
Now , the spread of new technologies , which we call the new economy , acts like fermentation process , completely transforming the old economy . This is its strength .
E-commerce is not a separate end in itself . The Internet and the other new tools cannot be regarded as a separate factor , but they can be translated into an enormous increase in the productivity of other sectors .
When the means of distributing the most basic , simple wealth changes , the entire economy changes as well .
This is the boost we were waiting for : we are now in a position to take the leap forwards , thanks to the extensive coordination achieved in Lisbon .
This begs another comment on Lisbon .
I have observed some differences of opinion over the role of Europe and the roles of the individual States .
You must understand that this is a network .
The importance of the Lisbon Summit does not lie in the fact that some areas have to be managed at European level , although a certain amount of large-scale coordination of investments does have to take place at European level .
Most of these innovations are the responsibility of the national , or even local governments .
That is clear . The significance of Lisbon lies in the fact that , when we are united in our action , this boosts the productivity of the system .
If the same countries were each to act separately , the effect would not be great enough to boost the European economy . This is the importance of these Summits : if we unite in our action , we multiply its efficiency .
This is the potential significance of Lisbon .
My final point is , once again , the development of human resources .
This applies to both new and old economies as well .
European investment in human resources is still low , and this is a huge area in which we must make up lost ground .
I feel that the goal of halving the number of 18-24 year olds who attend neither a school nor a training course is both realistic and of paramount importance .
This is clearly the way to overcome the problems experienced even by some of the larger European countries in recent months such as a shortage of young engineers and the need to import Internet engineers from the third world .
This is clear evidence of a development block , which is due precisely to the failure to exploit our human potential .
In Lisbon , our policy-making action was focused mainly on this issue , and certain major horizontal decisions were adopted which engage both public opinion and our own imagination .
Somebody mentioned the fact that the mobility of teachers and researchers was also discussed in Lisbon .
This gives me great pleasure for few people remember it .
Well , for this to occur at European level is revolutionary , although our task now is to set regulations in place to make teachers and researchers effectively mobile .
This is such an unprecedented idea to emerge from the fertile European intellectual climate that , if it succeeds , it will genuinely be a great leap forwards for the productivity of Europe and the European way of thinking .
In my opinion , these are the genuinely important horizontal decisions adopted in Lisbon .
Finally , we need a little bit of luck as well , for perception of this recovery is necessary for all these initiatives to be effective .
We have wept and wailed on each other ' s shoulders for the last three years .
Either we have confidence in ourselves or we do not even attempt such measures , for what we lack is not money but confidence .
There was a meeting of the Commission today on the economic previsions , and I have to say that Europe has acquired a new dimension over the last few months , in terms of employment , commercial orders and company policies .
If we take into account the macroeconomic stabilisation referred to by President Gama , we have the genuine possibility of a sustained period of growth .
In Lisbon , we laid the foundations for exploiting this period of growth : now it is up to us to make sure we build upon them .
Thank you very much , Mr President of the Commission .
I have received eight motions for resolutions pursuant to Article 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 12 noon .
The debate is closed .
EU - Africa Summit ( Cairo , 3 and 4 April 2000 )
The next item is the Council statement on the EU-Africa Summit held in Cairo on 3 and 4 April 2000 .
. ( PT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this Cairo Summit represents the result of four years of diplomatic work which has enabled the countries of the European Union and Africa to come together for this initiative , the first under this framework , overcoming many problems throughout the process , both of substance and of form .
The Cairo Summit instituted a mechanism for global dialogue at the highest political level which will enable us to add a new dimension to EU-Africa relations which have , until now , been limited either to bilateral frameworks or to regional platforms for dialogue , be they the ACP mechanism or the Barcelona Process .
The summit represents a turning point in relations between the two continents and will enable the European Union to make its strategic partnership with Africa as strong as its partnerships with Asia , the Gulf States or with Latin America .
The first sure indication of its success and of its historic importance was the level of representation of European and African countries : 58 countries - 45 from Africa and 13 from Europe - were represented at Head of State or Government level .
This ensured that all issues of common interest to the European Union and Africa were addressed , and on an equal footing , since both sides had the opportunity to express their concerns and also their common objectives .
In this context , all issues covered by these concerns and objectives - economic , political and development issues - were discussed in a frank and straightforward way .
I would like to highlight some significant measures adopted by the summit .
In economic terms , understanding was reached on the need to define policies which will enable African countries to gain maximum benefit from the liberalisation of trade throughout the world , thus reversing the current trend of consistently and progressively marginalising Africa in world trade .
The commitment to reduce world poverty to half its present levels by 2015 was reiterated .
On the important issue of African debt , and despite the fact that at the summit a huge range of countries stated their national policies on this issue , it was stipulated that the bi-regional group of senior officials , which will in the first instance ensure that the summit ' s decisions are implemented , will prepare a report on the debt situation in African countries .
This report will then be studied at ministerial level , under the summit ' s monitoring mechanism .
On the other hand , the African countries committed themselves to promote and respect human rights , to eliminate patterns of discrimination against women , to fully support the establishment of the International Criminal Court and to combat discrimination and intolerance .
In the area of good governance and the rule of law , both parties demonstrated their commitment to adopting specific measures to prevent and combat bribery , corruption and nepotism .
In this context , they expressed their willingness to adopt the necessary measures to guarantee that illegally obtained public funds deposited in foreign banks should be subject to investigation and returned to their rightful owners in the countries of origin .
Concern was also expressed about the harmful effect on development of military expenditure , which is constantly increasing .
Other important issues such as education , AIDS and the environment were addressed under the theme of development , with the understanding that these are essential elements of the challenge of sustainable development in Africa and of eradicating poverty .
One fundamental area of dispute between Europe and Africa is returning stolen or illegally exported cultural goods .
Some progress was made on this issue too .
The bi-regional group of senior officials will prepare a report for assessment at ministerial level of the viability of taking further action in this area .
The last part of the action plan concerns the monitoring mechanisms .
These mechanisms will guarantee the continuity of this overall dialogue between Europe and Africa at the highest political level , at ministerial and senior official level , and it has already been established that the second summit will be held in Europe in 2003 , thus ensuring continuity with this process that has now begun with the first EU-Africa Summit - the Cairo Summit .
Mr President , the holding of the summit was in itself a success achieved after considerable difficulties .
These difficulties - mostly of a political character - remain and need to be tackled by Africa and Europe , both separately and jointly .
The summit was the first encounter at the highest political level between Africa and the countries of the EU .
It will add a new strategic and global dimension to the existing relationship between Africa and Europe and will bring that relationship to the same level as that we already have with Asia and Latin America .
The EU already has a deep and broad relationship with Africa , notably in the field of development , where that relationship is unique and backed up by substantial finance .
We are spending development assistance money at the level of EUR 2.5 bn per year .
For our part , we have done what we should do and more if we look at the HIPC initiative to help the highly-indebted poor countries .
Here the EU is still waiting for a number of G7 countries to play their part .
We want to see the African countries as equal partners in the 21st century - the first century they are entering as independent states .
The EU has a comparative advantage in regional integration that Africa can benefit from , and we will ensure it benefits from it in the coming years , when the organisation of regional economic cooperation will dominate the agenda in Africa .
The summit provided an opportunity for useful discussions on debt and other bilateral problems .
It also provided an opportunity to underline the need for Africans to participate actively in the WTO process and to seek support for the Community 's approach .
It was possible for the EU to tackle politically sensitive issues , such as good governance and human rights , with African leaders at the summit .
Other difficult questions , such as the question of the return of cultural goods , were also discussed .
The declaration and plan of action adopted at the summit take account of the sensitivities on both sides .
Internationally recognised principles , in particular human rights , are respected and clearly reflected in the declaration .
This is important to note in view also of the very few statements made during the summit that deviated somewhat from this general consensus about the basic principles that we and others take for granted .
It is regrettable that the civil society forum could not take place in Cairo but representatives of the forum were received in Cairo in the margins of the summit .
The text adopted in Lisbon by the forum was widely distributed by the Algerian and Portuguese presidencies .
The follow-up to the summit should enable the EU to round off its existing relationship with Africa with a high-level relationship covering , in particular , a continental approach to political and security questions as well as economic issues .
The Commission will endeavour to make a success of the meetings of the bi-regional group to be held at senior official level .
The ministerial-level meeting to be held between summits should concentrate on questions which concern the entire continent , meaning a continental approach must be taken to political and security questions and questions which are not covered by the mechanisms set up under the existing ACP-EU , Mediterranean and South Africa agreements .
Our view is that the follow-up to the summit should wherever possible be pursued through existing mechanisms .
The background is that we already have a credible working relationship .
With the new EU-ACP Convention being successfully concluded a few months ago and with the EU-South Africa cooperation agreement now being implemented as planned , we have two very important additions to the MEDA cooperation and the Barcelona process .
This means that we have not only the perspective of this Cairo summit but also a well-established basis to continue , widen and improve our daily work .
Mr President , I welcome the fact that the Cairo EU-African summit took place , but I must stress my disappointment that no one from this democratically elected Parliament had the opportunity to address the summit , nor did NGOs have any input .
At the very least , the two Co-Presidents of the ACP-EU Joint Assembly could have made statements and this would have given an EU-African balance .
Members of this Parliament , through the Committee on Development and Cooperation and the ACP-EU Joint Assembly , have laid the foundation for many of the policies in the developing countries : the Martens report in 1997 pointing to the benefits of the Lomé Agreement ; the Rocard report in 1998 strengthening the objectives for the future ; my own report in 1999 on regional cooperation and integration which is top of the Cairo plan of action agenda ; lastly , Mrs Kinnock 's excellent report in 2000 on the future ACP-EU partnership agreement that sets the scene for the next 20 years .
The final Cairo plan of action is an excellent document if we can now turn words and good intentions into concrete actions .
I know debt relief was at the top of the African agenda and everything must be done to alleviate poverty , but we must have some evidence that funds saved go towards better health care , better education and an improved standard of living for people and not into arms and war materials .
For these ideas to come to fruition , African countries themselves have to make the effort towards good governance .
We have already seen some good election results .
Let us hope that we can see the same happening in Zimbabwe , Ivory Coast and Togo in the forthcoming elections .
The top priority of regional cooperation and integration should have strong political benefits as well as trade ones .
With only 6 % of African trade being carried out in Africa there is huge potential for an increase in trade if tariff barriers and trade barriers are removed .
Many of these countries will need both time and financial help to compete in the world market , but these countries must understand there is no other option in this new era of globalisation .
This is all unattainable without peace and peace-building ; conflict prevention , management and resolution must be top of the African agenda .
The OAU must be given international support to continue its work and the peace initiatives must come from the African countries themselves .
Where peace is achieved , help must be given for demobilisation and reintegration , and the use of child soldiers below the age of 18 must be banned .
Ethnic cleansing has been the horror of the last 25 years , and religious wars destroy the very fabric of a country .
Peace can bring prosperity .
The main thrust of our aim therefore must be better education leading to better health care .
Through AIDS and malaria , Africa is losing the very generation it needs to build its future .
This summit was a start but much has to be done to turn words into reality , and we , Members of this House , must be part of that new world .
Mr President , I appreciate that wide-ranging coverage of the issues by Mr Corrie .
I would like to concentrate on my view that poverty eradication in Africa must begin with children and the realisation of children ' s rights .
The Cairo summit will be followed up by another forum in Dakar on basic education .
The need for basic education is the single most important cause of global poverty .
Therefore , we need to ensure that girls in particular have equal access at least to educational advantage .
We can see that education will deliver , it will stimulate the economy , it will offer opportunities to control population and increase health awareness .
Dakar is an opportunity to deliver on internationally agreed targets .
The EU should put its political will behind universal primary education by the year 2015 .
Clearly commitments made a decade ago have not materialised .
Africa is falling deeper into mass illiteracy and poverty and being further marginalised from mainstream developments in the economic and democratic fields .
In sub-Saharan Africa more children are out of school now than a decade ago .
40 million African children today are not attending school .
One third of the classrooms in Africa do not even have a blackboard .
They have no toilets .
70 % of their schools do not have any clean water .
Teachers are under-qualified , often unqualified , and they struggle without pencils , exercise books or blackboards , often trying to teach children who are simply too hungry to listen or concentrate .
Julius Nyrere , one of Africa ' s most famous teachers , in those post-independence , optimistic days , said education is not a way of escaping poverty , it is a way of fighting it .
Some of you may be aware that Julius Nyrere spent his spare time translating Shakespeare into Swahili .
But that man ' s wonderful dreams were lost .
He lived to see one third of African men illiterate and two thirds of African women .
I urge the Commission and the Council to make the link between poverty eradication and basic education .
The benefits for us all will be seen in increased child life expectancy , cuts in population growth and improvements in farm production .
We have the blueprints and I urge all of those with the political will to take action , to deliver for the children of Africa .
Mr President , I should like to thank the Commissioner and the President-in-Office of the Council for their reports on the Cairo summit and say how really surprising I think it is that there has never been a summit of this kind before . When , however , one learns that it took four years to arrange it , then this is not perhaps so extraordinary .
Will anything come out of a meeting of this kind ?
Well , that probably depends upon how you look at it .
If you start by considering the disasters , famine , conflicts and problems with AIDS which Africa faces , then , as Mr Prodi says , it is certainly a long way from Lisbon to Cairo , in which case not a lot will come out of the summit . But nor do I think that one could have expected it to .
That was not , of course , the purpose of the summit . The purpose of the summit was to open a dialogue between the EU and African countries .
That dialogue was in fact initiated , and it is safe to say that , at times , it was fairly unrestrained with its demonstrations and its wrangles or , in any case , point-scoring . I believe , moreover , that both Africa and the EU can learn from dialogues of this kind which , I believe , are also a prerequisite of our avoiding the risk of African countries ' displaying bitterness about the history they partly share with countries in Europe .
I believe that the final document will prove to be an important reference point in connection with further cooperation between the EU and Africa .
This is due firstly to the fact that the document in itself constitutes an important signal about increased cooperation between the EU and Africa and about the fact that we have not forgotten Africa , and secondly to the document ' s emphasis upon the interrelatedness of democracy , politics and economics and upon the fact that Africa ' s integration and development should not , therefore , be seen in divided and piecemeal terms but as integral parts of a single whole .
Whether or not concrete results will be achieved in this way will depend , of course , upon the political will we show in the future .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Cairo Summit gave rise to great expectation among African countries , particularly among those which hoped to see their debt cancelled .
Europe ' s response to this was to say that it was too great a call upon its own resources to move towards the complete cancellation of the debt .
On the contrary , we affirm the political need to restore balance in the relations between African and the European Union .
After having plundered the natural resources of Africa very widely , and in fact continuing to do so , we must cancel our historical debt to them by cancelling their current debt to our banks .
This would enable us to pursue relations on a sounder basis .
And the Members of the European Union must stop lying .
We are asking African countries to respect democratic principles , but we are perpetuating antidemocratic practices in order to guarantee our own financial interests , in the style of Elf or Total , in a number of countries .
We order African countries to guarantee the plurality of political parties and allow the NGOs freedom of expression , but we negotiate only with Heads of States , the majority of whom represent only themselves , forgetting to invite the NGOs to the Cairo Summit .
We are asking African countries to accord women a larger place in society , but we ought to begin by establishing parity in our own countries .
Need I remind you that some European Union countries have less than 10 % of women members in their national parliaments ?
We expect the African countries to observe cease-fires , but we are fanning the flames of conflict with our arms exports to belligerents .
But none of this is the key issue .
As long as the European Union does not provide itself with the resources to ensure that the agreements for the granting of mandatory licences for the production of medicines to combat the AIDS pandemic are applied , expecting any progress in the African economy will remain in the realms of the pious hope .
For how can one expect a country in which a quarter of its young people are dying from AIDS every year to have a booming economy ?
Once again , as we have already said , the European Union and the Member States must make their actions consistent with their statements .
For , while we are hesitating , while we are shilly-shallying , while we are discussing , Africa is dying .
Mr President , first of all I would like to emphasise that I consider the fact that this summit has been held to be extremely positive .
It has always been our opinion that every effort should be made to achieve this objective , as we have always felt that it would be a good opportunity to launch a genuine partnership that would be of mutual benefit to both continents .
But we also feel that the results of the summit fell considerably short of what was possible and indeed desirable .
I even think that it was the difficulties along the way that led to the idea that the event should be held in the first place , orthe formal meeting and the group photo , and not what could and should result from it , with a view to establishing a strategy for this partnership on a new footing .
Indeed , the conclusions do not strike me as being adequate to address current needs and opportunities .
It is obvious that economic issues are shaping a genuine rapprochement between the two continents , a fact which cannot be hidden by the individual positions of some Member States , which have a limited but positive influence . I am referring in particular to external debt relief for the LDCs .
This is occurring because the European Union , which has been consistently and mistakenly withdrawing its cooperation , is being affected or guided in its cooperation with Africa by two fundamental ideas .
On the one hand , by the prospect of transferring traditional , preferential relations to the rigid framework of the WTO , a fact that became obvious in negotiations on the post-Lomé agreement . On the other hand , by the priority being given to relations with Eastern Europe , which was clearly demonstrated by the cuts in expenditure on cooperation in the current budget year .
It is obvious that with this kind of outlook and in the light of the enormous problems and shortfalls facing most African countries in terms of the economy , the environment , health , infrastructure , conflict resolution and poverty , amongst others , it is difficult , if not impossible , to cement a genuine partnership which is effective and lasting .
This is the route we must follow in the future .
I say " must " because , contrary to what has just happened , I hope that in future the European Parliament and the NGOs will be part of this process . I also say this because I hope that this summit will at least contribute to a greater awareness of the real problems that exist in the field of cooperation with Africa , and that it will represent a warning call for the need to change tack in this area .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in the 1960s people used to say Africa was not on the right track , and now , in 2000 , Africa has still not arrived .
And why not ?
Because no destination was established .
Where do you expect to get if you do not know where exactly you are heading ?
Africa ' s initial objective was to achieve independence , with nation states instead of ethnic tribes , and the result was Rwanda , the Hutus and the Tutsis , Nigeria , the Ibos , and Biafra .
The next objective was Socialism , the fair-haired comrades .
Black Africa was supposed to turn red .
The result was famine in Ethiopia , Algeria ' s agriculture destroyed , not to mention Guinea under Sékou Touré .
The white man , Mitterand , then offered Africa parliamentary democracy , parties instead of tribes .
The result was a permanent situation of coup d ' état , even in the Ivory Coast .
The present objective appears to be liberalism , the market , the IMF , the World Trade Organisation .
The result is rebellion by the poor people of Tunis and the poor people of Casablanca at the rise in prices , European meat destroying the Fulani ' s livestock farming in Africa , the Latin American banana destroying the Cameroon or Ivory Coast banana , and fats extracted from GMOs are about to destroy the Ivory Coast ' s cocoa .
All in all , from Socialist Africa to ultraliberal Africa , from the European Development Fund to the World Bank , from the summits in Bujumbura , Addis-Ababa , Nairobi , Casablanca , and now , on 3 April , Cairo , it is always the same assessment , the same threesome of poverty , epidemic and massacre .
Even so , on 4 January , the UN found the final solution , or the miracle cure : a proportion of the 800 million Africans would have to emigrate .
They even set a figure : 159 million Africans were to be unloaded on Europe by 2025 .
In the same way that the problems of the inner city are not solved by building towns in the countryside , Africa ' s problems will not be solved by shifting part of Africa to Europe .
The logical thing to do today is to apply to Africa what has worked elsewhere , what has worked wonders in our countries , in the United States , in Europe , the solution which in our countries created heavy industry , agriculture , the textile industry , the solution which in our countries created growth and sustainable development .
There is one word for this solution - protectionism , and there is one instrument for this solution - customs barriers .
This solution has been worked out in theoretical terms , and called ' self-centred development ' .
And , what is more , the new Senegalese President is inspired by this , telling the young people that they should get involved rather than waiting for the billions to arrive from Europe .
In practical terms , Africa will achieve the first stage in growth according to the Rostow model if it protects its agriculture , its livestock farming , its self-employed craft industry , and its emergent economy .
Opening up to the world market , on the other hand , will expose it to the law of the jungle and to the plundering of the natural resources of Africa , wood , oil , minerals , the flora and even the fauna , by multinationals .
This is , moreover , what we have seen , ladies and gentlemen , with the privatisation of specific key sectors in Africa .
For the Africans it was a negative outcome .
Africa does not therefore need either the cut-throat world economy or the economy of world charity , with the Holy Father and the Blessed Jacques Chirac , or the cancellation of a government debt of EUR 300 billion .
The watchword of the solution is customs protection on the African side and , on the European side , intelligent intergovernmental cooperation , of which the Lomé Convention was a prime example .
In this respect , the Mediterranean could serve as a test bench for a Euro-African policy which respects identities .
We in the Front National proposed a practical working method which involved dealing with the individual issues - water resources , soil erosion , desertification , the management of fisheries resources , livestock farming , pollution , control of migration flows - in a Marshall plan for the Mediterranean and Africa which would be funded from customs duties , reimbursable to African states in the form of open credit accounts in European banks .
We have proposed an international organisation , with an intergovernmental high-secretariat of the Mediterranean .
This would have its headquarters in Cairo , Tangiers or Tunis .
An interparliamentary assembly , like that of the ACP .
I feel that Athens would be the ideal site , or perhaps even a university in Valencia , Montpellier , Nice or Barcelona .
And there perhaps the words of Raymond Loulle would hold sway .
The practical implementation of these Euro-Mediterranean projects , respecting the identities of both shores , north and south , and involving around twenty Euro-Mediterranean states , would open the way to greater ambitions .
It could then be extended to relations between Europe and sub-Saharan Africa .
This is a great project , Mr President , on the scale of humanity as a whole , and humanity needs both Africans and Europeans .
All the more reason not to flood Africa with the unregulated world economy and not to flood Europe with an influx of people .
Humanity needs Africa where , it is said for the first time , in Kenya , man first stood upright , and humanity needs Europe where , for the first time , in Greece , thought first stood upright .
Mr President , when Mr Solana came to visit our group last week and was questioned about the outcome of the Cairo Summit , his answer was that the atmosphere had been good , which is more important than an outcome .
I disagree with him on this .
Commissioner Nielson also said something to that effect .
I think that the atmosphere is important , but as a basis for reaching sound agreements .
If the agreements are not forthcoming , then a good atmosphere is neither here nor there .
Nonetheless , an EU-Africa Summit is to be welcomed .
I also feel positive about the Portuguese Presidency ' s initiative .
This huge continent is still beset with a lack of democracy , war , human rights violations , drought , flooding and chronic poverty affecting large parts of its population .
There are most certainly a number of countries which are better off , which boast sound growth figures and where the first signs of prosperity are visible , but there are also countries where the situation has dramatically changed for the worse .
Mr President , the European Union has over the past 25 years invested a great deal of time and effort in development and cooperation .
It is disappointing to have to state that this aid has not always had the required effect .
In our opinion , we need a new Africa policy , a policy in which democracy and sound management are prerequisites for aid and cooperation .
The Union can then also be expected to adapt its agricultural and trade policy in such a way that it is of more benefit to Africa and not , as is now often the case , a source of further disadvantage .
In return , we can expect African countries to cooperate better at regional level , open up their markets and give their economies a fair chance .
At the same time , Africa needs sound budget management combined with effective social policy , good education policy and sound health care .
Excessive spending on defence or futile projects should be avoided .
Mr President , the African countries have asked us to clear their debts .
This is vital for the poorest countries , especially if these enjoy good leadership and a balanced budget .
But more than anything - as underlined by Commissioner Nielson -we need to treat Africa in an adult manner .
We need to support what works but we also need to dare to speak up if certain things are unsuitable .
We need to support good leaders and good governments , but offer no support to dictators , bad leadership or countries riddled with corruption .
If the Africa Summit in Cairo has led to this kind of realism , then we have created more than just a good atmosphere and we are probably on the right track .
Mr President , the recent Euro-African Summit has given rise to concern , even vexation , but at the same time , it has also given rise to satisfaction and hope .
There was concern about the way the Summit was being managed - it did not even appear in the programme for the current six-month period - with moments of confusion , suspense and abundant rumour-mongering , which were incompatible with the seriousness and rigour which should be expected from the European Union given the importance of this historic meeting , the first to be held at the highest level between European and African leaders .
There was concern and vexation as a result of the way in which the European Parliament remained in the margins of the Summit process , partly due to our indifference .
This marginalisation , and that of the African parliaments , demonstrated a considerable incoherence on the part of the organisers .
It is incoherent to go around preaching good government , democracy and the rule of law while , in practice , ignoring the parliamentary institution which is essential for the realisation of those principles .
There was vexation on discovering that certain NGO meetings - the fora of civil society - which should have taken place in Cairo , sponsored by the European Commission itself , could not take place because of communication problems or the veto , still unclarified , of some part or other of the organisation of the Summit .
However , I said at the beginning that there were also positive aspects to this Cairo Summit which were cause for satisfaction and hope .
There was satisfaction at the fact that the conference was able to take place at all - which in itself is a great thing - and we should therefore congratulate the Portuguese Presidency and Commissioner Nielson , whose efforts helped to overcome the difficulties , intrigues and lazy defeatism of many people who assumed that this summit would be suspended , although it was going to fill an unjustifiable vacuum in the external relations of the European Union .
There was also satisfaction with regard to some of the tangible results of the conference in areas such as the cancellation of debt , the elimination of anti-personnel mines and the return of cultural goods pillaged by colonial powers .
Europe must now also commit itself to the prevention and resolution of armed conflicts , the provision of humanitarian aid for famines and the treatment of illnesses such as Aids or malaria which decimate the African population .
However , a Summit of this type should be an important source of hope , especially if it is not an isolated event but a first step in a process which we must set to work on immediately , in the expectation , furthermore , that relations between the European Union and Africa are going to change shape .
I am not impressed by the current pattern of African partners requesting aid in order to resolve their problems , as a result of which the European partners merely grant a part of that aid and little more .
We must go much further , much further than mere cooperation with development , which , by definition , is an unfair form of cooperation .
We must create platforms for dialogue and cooperation in which Europeans and Africans can discuss common problems and put together joint strategies in order to act in a coordinated fashion within the world order , in which we must all play a principal role , in equality , dignity and responsibility .
Thus , that world order will have to be more egalitarian , shared , cohesive , democratic and compatible with the values which we in the European Union proclaim as our distinguishing marks .
Mr President , taking this approach , we will vote in favour of the good resolution with which this debate will conclude .
Mr President , except for photographs and fine words , the Africa Summit has yielded very little .
Africa asked Europe for more market access and debt repayment , and got vague pledges in return .
Europe asked Africa to respect human rights more , fight corruption and cease violent conflicts , and got vague pledges in return too .
The solemn declaration of Cairo was signed by governments which are anything but generous regarding clearing debts and opening up their own markets .
The document is also signed by countries where human rights are being violated on a massive scale , where women are discriminated against , where the little funding that is available is used to massacre other population groups and where corruption has taken on almost ineradicable proportions .
Wealthy Europe must grant generous aid to Africa in support of democratic institutions , primary education and health care and must substantially lighten the debt burden .
The African countries need to understand that , without proper government , none of their developments will come to fruition , and both continents need to realise that strict population policy is absolutely indispensable .
On the photographs from Cairo , the African and European leaders may be rubbing shoulders with each other but , in reality , there is a yawning chasm separating the two continents .
Mr President , the first EU-Africa summit was an important event and had a great deal of potential for taking meaningful steps to reduce the marginalisation of African countries .
So it is a pity that a number of things prevented that potential from being fully realised .
Firstly , neither the European Parliament nor the EU-ACP Joint Assembly was invited to participate in the summit .
Secondly , it is very sad that civil society was not able to have a greater input into the meeting .
The NGOs from the EU and African countries took this summit very seriously and it was a missed opportunity not to engage in more meaningful dialogue with them .
Civil society has a key role to play in Africa ' s development process .
Finally , this meeting could have resulted in a far-reaching action plan of concrete actions .
What we have is a plan full of warm words and good intentions but short on firm commitments , in particular on trade issues .
While it is nice to recall the EU ' s important decision to grant duty-free access for essentially all products , it would have been even more significant to have gone beyond the famous " essentially all " to include those products of real importance to the poorest countries , such as agricultural goods .
Finally - sadly - commodity prices were conspicuous by their absence from this agenda .
A majority of African countries are overwhelmingly dependent on just one or two commodities for the bulk of their foreign exchange earnings .
Until action is taken to reverse the fall of commodity prices , poverty in Africa will not be properly addressed .
Mr President , wanting to achieve relations on the basis of partnership between the old continent and Africa means first of all putting a halt to the present system which operates to benefit the great powers and the corrupt elite of the south .
The continent of Africa is ravaged by epidemics such as the AIDS epidemic and by wars that are conspicuous , or sometimes forgotten .
Antipersonnel mines continue to kill innocent people , arms of all kinds proliferate and fall into the hands of child-soldiers .
The number of undernourished people in black Africa rose from 90 million in 1970 to 180 million in 1995 .
The figures speak for themselves .
Time seems to have stood still between the Biafra famine thirty years ago and the one which is once again devastating Ethiopia .
Illiteracy and unemployment affect the vast majority of young people on the African continent .
So it would be a mistake to think , today , that three quarters of the planet , three quarters of the human race , are going to carry on living in this sort of poverty without causing some serious instability at world level .
We must also do away with aid policies , which are equivalent to giving fish to people living on the bank of the river , as the saying goes , instead of helping them to make fishing rods .
The result is there is never enough fish and there are increasing numbers of people fighting over the leftovers .
Moreover , the IMF ordered ultraliberal policies , supposedly for structural adjustment .
These are policies that have never worked anywhere .
Quite the opposite .
I do not know of a single example of a country which made any progress by applying their directives .
In all its negotiations , the European Union should also demand fighting against corruption , certainly , and for democracy but , in return , African countries can also demand that the friends of Le Pen , Haider and Martinez should stop making regular racist attacks on their populations resident in Europe .
We agree that we cannot carry on supporting dictators in the name of Realpolitik .
We must support democrats unreservedly .
From this point of view , what has taken place in Senegal sends out a strong message , proving that Africa is not automatically condemned to conflict , coups d ' état or tribal warfare .
There is an imperative need for a new policy , based on codevelopment , conflict prevention , and the rejection of the dictates of the financial markets .
Obviously , this necessitates cancelling the 350 billion dollars of debt which is strangling any development in these States .
Finally , Mr President , Europe too made its wealth from colonialism and slavery .
Europe thus has a moral debt towards Africa .
Part of our wealth came from the colonial plundering inflicted on Africa .
Acknowledging that slavery was a crime against humanity would be an important gesture .
Mr President , after months of endless squabbling about agendas and participants , the Cairo Summit did take place eventually .
Only to establish what all of us have known for a long time , namely that the majority of the African population still live in abject poverty and are weighed down by a heavy burden of debt .
There is no doubt that the many informal contacts which the Summit created have been useful .
But I do wonder in all honesty if there can be talk of a Euro-African Summit if civil society is banished to Lisbon and neither the European Parliament nor the ACP-EU Assembly are in any way involved in the Summit .
The European Council gave in to the demand of African dictators not to admit any parliaments to the Summit .
But how much more credible would words such as democracy and the interest of the people have been if those people had actually been represented .
In that sense , Cairo was not a Euro-African Summit but more like a summit of élites .
With his statement that Africa does not need democracy but water pumps , Colonel Gaddafi has undoubtedly put into words what many of his fellow dictators think .
It is evident that our political models cannot simply be transplanted .
Africa has to find meaning for the notion of democracy itself .
But fundamental principles , sound leadership , separation of powers , free and fair elections and respect for human rights are not negotiable .
The European Union ' s reaction to violations of these principles is sometimes feeble and often divided .
Take Zimbabwe , for example , where political opponents are being attacked in the run-up to the elections and white farmers are being threatened and illegally evicted from their own land and where Mugabe provokes violence .
What other messages does the Commission need in order to suspend development aid ?
In an interview with The Sunday Times last Saturday , Kofi Annan reproached the African leaders with greed , megalomania and failure to create better living conditions in their countries .
Against the background of Kofi Annan ' s words , the question arises as to whether the people do not consider the organising of solemn rituals such as those in Cairo as a conspiracy among élites .
The international community should not be tricked into feelings of guilt by the African leaders who do not carry any democratic legitimacy .
It is high time that the European Union told the African dictators where their responsibility lies .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , all too often , Africa is seen by Europe as a lost continent , which is why this EU-Africa summit was long overdue .
This event must not be used as an alibi ; it must mark the beginning of a real partnership .
If we are honest , then we must examine our own motives because , the truth is that a sort of Africa summit would also suit the European Parliament , because dealing with this subject usually means extremely topical and highly dramatic incidents , with conceptional discussions and efforts to find the right perspective generally getting the thin edge of the wedge , if you disregard the fact that Africa is a predominant subject at the ACP assembly .
But who notices that here in Europe ?
Africa is the continent most seriously affected by the injustices of the international economic and financial system and the consequences of globalisation .
The promise by the German government and by other European countries to write off the debts of the poorest countries in the world will help considerably , because the high level of debt is an obstacle to investments in all forms of infrastructure in the countries in question and is hence one of the biggest obstacles in the fight against poverty .
Governments which have not yet decided to join this move should copy those who have already done so .
Success will only be achieved in the long term by finding points which unite rather than separate us and by endeavouring to reach a mutual understanding and to integrate Africa into the international community of nations .
Nonetheless , it is clear that something may , indeed must be demanded of the governments of Africa when it comes to safeguarding human rights , basic democratic order and the rule of law .
There can be no question of allowing dictatorial rule on the African continent which , as in Zimbabwe now , fosters racism , dispossession and forcible suppression and ousts an operational legal system .
The Lomé Convention offers a suitable framework for consultation , political dialogue and , if necessary , the suspension of cooperation .
Still less can there be any question of allowing financial aid and food aid from the European Union to be misused in order to buy weapons .
Newsreels showing wretched people starving are currently flickering across our television screens from Ethiopia , while the government is siphoning millions into new arms and has even turned down Eritrea ' s offer to allow its ports and transport routes to be used for aid for Ethiopia , despite the continuing state of war .
That is immoral and an important chance to make a move towards reconciliation may have been wasted .
Banning the NGO meeting from Cairo was a most unpleasant side effect .
The countries of Africa will have to get used to the fact that non-governmental organisations have an important status as part of the civil society and can act as mediators in the development of an autonomous civil society in these vulnerable countries on the path towards stability and peace .
Mr President , the Cairo Summit has been genuinely significant , an historic milestone .
It has been significant in terms of its meaning but also in terms of its lack of achievement .
It is historically significant because it is the first time that Europe , which was the colonising power and is responsible for the under-development and poverty of Africa , has met with the countries which are the consequence of that , the African countries which are seriously under-developed .
It is also significant insofar as its conclusions could not have been more feeble .
It has been noted that it had been prepared hurriedly , as a cosmetic exercise , without taking responsibility for the past and without preparing comprehensive and solid programmes on the future of relations between the European Union and Africa .
It is truly illogical to lament the constant instability and warfare , when there is a real battle for power and control of resources in Africa which , in turn , increases the cycle of poverty and sends waves of immigrants towards Europe .
It is also contradictory for us to lament the problem of Aids when it has been caused by the instability and precariousness created in those countries by the structural adjustment plans imposed by us , the IMF and the World Bank .
Therefore , Europe owes an enormous historical debt , centuries old , to Africa , and should repay it , not only by means of asking forgiveness , but also by forging social , economic , political and cultural links in order to show an indispensable form of solidarity .
Mr President , the EU / Africa summit was reported in the press under the headline : Kiss and make up !
Unfortunately a unique opportunity to reconcile different ways of looking at current problems and find a solution was wasted .
First , it is astonishing and highly unsatisfactory that the European Parliament was not included in this allegedly forward-looking conference .
The members of the European Council appear to have overlooked the fact here that the people of Europe are represented first and foremost by this Parliament .
Obviously no one was particularly interested in apprising the African states of this fact .
So it was certainly not a mobilisation summit , as the press described it .
As far as the content was concerned , it is perfectly understandable that the developing countries are interested in seeing their debt burden wiped out , but there can be no question of complete remission with no conditions attached .
We found out at the last meeting of our ACP / EU assembly in Abuja that in Nigeria , for example , which has restored democracy , one of the last dictators diverted several billion euros to private accounts .
One can only emphatically advise the developing countries to prosecute these offences , which are also punishable in Africa , and confiscate the money .
Then some , and it is a great deal , of the money would again be available to repay debts .
We would be able to recognise the good intentions of the developing countries and could then negotiate writing off and ignoring the rest of their debts .
In my view , this is all part and parcel of the good governance to which the countries of Africa have committed themselves if they are to receive more development aid .
On the other hand , I totally fail to understand why the German chancellor , for example , is treading a path which goes in the opposite direction of the other EU countries , by saying that the poorest of the poor countries should have all their debts written off first .
This rather flashy and , in fact insubstantial gesture contradicts the resolutions of the G8 summit last year and is in keeping with his departure from the conference .
It does not help matters if , instead of attending working meetings , one prefers to talk to Gadaffi for 10 minutes .
What the topic of conversation was , one may only speculate .
The chancellor of the media , as he is called at home , made his entrance and what came out of the final declaration adopted hours later was obviously a matter of indifference to him .
This is not the way , in my view , to formulate development policy nor is it the way to bring about the urgently needed reconciliation of national development policies .
I think that we , the European Parliament , must continue to denounce these national solo efforts and increase the responsibility of Member States ' governments .
Mr President , it appears that some MEPs here are trying to attribute the problems in Africa mainly to the Africans , while others seem to attribute the blame mainly to Europe and the former colonists .
This seems to be the pattern for the Summit in Cairo too .
Some think it is a missed opportunity . They are extremely disappointed and can think of all sorts of reasons to support this view , while others deem it a unique and historic event .
The fact that , for the first time in history , such a meeting has taken place between the African and European leaders is , of course , an historic event .
The fact that contact has been maintained mainly with Latin America and Asia is indicative of the fact that , evidently , there is something wrong with the normal relations between Africa and Europe .
This is true , of course , because very often it is not the Ministers for Foreign Affairs who travel to Africa but rather the Ministers responsible for emergency aid who then pursue their policy from there .
In connection with the African continent , policy has always been biased towards all kinds of funding for trade , agriculture , foreign affairs and , of course , development cooperation and there has been insufficient room for normal policy .
This is undoubtedly down to our dual approach of pity on the one hand and misericordia on the other , in other words the inability to snap out of the old colonial relations between Europe and Africa .
This is as much our fault as it is Africa ' s .
In the light of this , I consider the Summit more as a good opportunity and a new moment to create a new beginning , despite all the attendant misery - inevitably , there are dictators and there is some European policy which is inappropriate .
I would like to praise the Portuguese Presidency , because they could have quite easily opted out , or it could have quite easily dragged on for a while longer , but they took the bull by the horns .
No , I am certainly not expecting tangible , huge successes , but what matters is what happened at a deeper level .
Parliament received a letter from Mr Prodi in which he says , on behalf of the Commission , that he has ordered proposals to be made for granting countless African products access to the European market at a zero rate .
Such a step is significant .
It has been stated that we want to make a large contribution and take part in a much more far-reaching debt burden initiative , provided we can link this in with social development .
Mr Nielson is in favour of a complete overhaul of the development policy in which attention will focus much more on social development and poverty , both within the ACP-EU Treaty and within the EU .
You cannot develop the African people from within Europe .
The African people have their own plans and want to develop themselves , but want help in order to achieve this .
A new framework such as this really creates opportunities .
Within this framework , room must be made for conflict prevention .
Ordinary , regular contacts cannot work miracles . They will not bring about marvellous new results , but they are necessary .
I am pleased to hear from the Portuguese Presidency that it intends to ensure that a Summit like this will take place again in the foreseeable future .
They should become the norm .
In a normal relationship , we can be tough and businesslike with each other and we can adopt a result-orientated policy .
I would like to add one more point .
I hope that our budget for 2001 - and the Commissioner is only too aware how heavy this weighs on me , because I am the budget rapporteur for that component - will also accommodate some of these promises .
If 45 million children in Africa have never seen a schoolroom before and if we managed to double the education budget next year - not the budget as a whole but if we simply shifted some figures around - then this would be a welcome bonus .
Apart from in this final note , I made my contribution on behalf of the entire Group of the Party of European Socialists .
Mr President , ordinary people in most African countries are poorer today than when their countries became independent .
Poverty , therefore , is a disease inflicted upon innocent populations by evil dictators , greedy and corrupt politicians .
Natural disasters , including climate change , have aggravated the problem .
The Touareg in the desert in northern Niger , the Makonde in Tanzania or Mozambique take their families and put their meagre possessions in a little basket if they wish to move .
They are poor , insecure and exposed to the elements .
They have no water , sanitation , energy , medicine , education or reliable shelter .
Such desperate people cannot think of democracy and human rights in the way we do from our houses and leafy suburbs in the West .
They have no stake in their village , regional or national economies .
Such rootless people , desperate people , are easy prey to evil political manipulation , and that is why we see so much conflict and civil unrest in those countries .
We here in this Assembly offer these people open and free access to our EU markets .
We invite them to be part of the global economy , so that they can come and sit at the tables in Seattle for the WTO discussions .
What does this mean to these poor people , the majority of whom live in the bush , who have no knowledge , no means of efficient cultivation , harvesting , processing , packaging even what little they grow ?
They cannot even market it in their own countries let alone sell it abroad .
So I suggest , let us teach them to be self-reliant and independent , by teaching them the means to grow and harvest what there is in those countries .
Let us give them the technology transfer that makes sense , before we say our markets are open to them .
. ( PT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank you for your speeches , which will encourage us to pursue this European Union policy on Africa .
I would like to clarify a few points .
Firstly , the question of linking parliamentary bodies , such as the ACP-EU Joint Assembly and the European Parliament . As you will be aware , this summit was negotiated with another party : it was not imposed on them , nor could it be .
It was not a summit involving the European Union alone . We had a partner that had to be respected , because the consequence of not respecting our partner would have been to have had neither a dialogue nor a summit .
Well , let it be said that there were even problems in including references to the ACP group in the final conclusions .
Why was this the case ?
Firstly , because this was seen as the first major rapprochement between Africa and Europe and not all Africa ' s countries are ACP countries .
Secondly , the ACP group is not a purely African group . It also covers the Caribbean and Asia .
Therefore , you will understand that incorporating the ACP group into the summit , particularly at Joint Assembly level , would not have been at all easy , especially as the ACP group was not involved at any other level .
Secondly , with regard to the European Parliament , we understand how necessary and important it is for the European Parliament to take part in these initiatives and that is why we , the Presidency , have been involved in extensive dialogue with the European Parliament through the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy and here today , in plenary sitting .
My only regret is that attendance is low , but it is nevertheless of an extremely high calibre .
We have held lengthy discussions on this summit and on the fact that its effectiveness rested on two pillars : one is the European Union , and the other is the OAU .
And the OAU , for its part , does not have a parliament .
There was therefore a problem in accommodating within one summit , which I repeat was a summit of equals , not a summit of parties of a different status , an institution which the other co-sponsoring organisation did not have .
When we prepare the next summit , the 2003 summit , we will certainly look at ways of strengthening the European Parliament ' s participation in a framework that must take account of the other party , given that the other party exists .
And nobody can understand anything about relations with Africa unless they grasp the fundamental point that Africa is out there and has its own opinions and ideas on issues .
Let us not try to insist that all our ideas should be automatically accepted and included in the negotiations just because they are ours .
Another important point is debt .
I would not be as sceptical as some of you have been in your speeches and I even think that the reaction of the Africans at the summit and afterwards to the way in which the problem of debt was addressed showed a degree of confidence .
We must not forget that there is a qualitative difference .
I would remind you of the commitment given by Member States in relation to the world ' s highly indebted poor countries to reduce and even cancel their debt , not forgetting the Union ' s EUR 1 000 million contribution to this programme .
I would also draw your attention to the fact that in 2000 , the European Union will clearly commit itself to establishing , by 2005 , a programme of access to its economy , free of customs duties , for products from less developed countries . This will make a major contribution to stimulating their economies in the context of uneven trade liberalisation .
This is unprecedented and has never been done by any other group of countries .
It is extremely innovative and is greatly welcomed by these countries .
Confirmation of these principles at the summit was generally well received by the African countries .
The summit is not an international financial organisation . The problem of reducing or cancelling debt could not be solved at the summit .
The summit has helped to confirm values and commitment , and it was also extremely significant that many European Union countries took this opportunity to announce publicly that they were reducing or cancelling the debts of the poorest highly indebted countries . This had an important effect in terms of synergy and precedent .
The most important aspect of what took place was in fact consistently highlighted by the Africans : for the first time the European Union has agreed to address the issue of the indebtedness of African countries with the whole of the African continent through the follow-up mechanisms of a summit . The high-level bi-regional group was charged with preparing a report on African indebtedness which will then be discussed at ministerial level .
This represents a complete U-turn in this area . It is the first time that the European Union has agreed to discuss the problem of their indebtedness with all the African countries , in an institutional framework outside the international financial organisations .
The African countries considered this to be one of the most important milestones of this summit .
I should tell you that the aim of the Portuguese Presidency of the European Union was to do something for Africa , not just because we had done something for other continents or regions , such as Latin America and Asia , but also because other countries or groups of countries , such as the United States , Japan and even China had begun to do so before us .
It was time to put right this delay .
And therefore , with the cooperation of Commissioner Nielson , the Development Council held in Lisbon in January was , for the first time in history , devoted to EU-Africa relations .
It had never been done before .
It was the first time .
It was an excellent piece of work , which furthermore was reflected , and rightly so , in the results of the summit .
We also finalised negotiation of the ACP agreements for the second Lomé Convention and we finalised the free trade agreement with South Africa .
We are also working very rapidly on the Barcelona Process and on African participation in the framework of association agreements seeking to create a free trade area by 2010 .
We are working to review the Mediterranean strategy , to produce a rigorous draft of the Euro-Mediterranean Charter for Peace and Stability and also to review the MEDA II regulation .
We held the Mediterranean Forum in Funchal and we will be holding an informal ministerial meeting in Lisbon on the Barcelona Process , specifically to determine its good and bad points , on what needs to be improved and to prepare the summit which will be held under the French Presidency .
With regard to the Cairo Summit , it was not included in our initial programme , because when we took over the Presidency , it had not been finalised , but we always said that if the problems could be resolved , we would be prepared to hold the summit .
Later , we proposed the summit , we resolved the diplomatic problems and held a summit whose results were greatly welcomed by the African countries .
Of course , we did not resolve all the problems of the African continent overnight , but a step needed to be taken , a step towards including Africa in the European agenda .
It was necessary to hold a summit with this scope , on this scale and which would target these goals .
We took that step .
We must now continue , but I am sure that with the African agenda more rigorously defined in European policies , we are in a position to continue in a sustained and successful way , because the African continent requires it to be so . The situation of conflict , poverty and disease requires the European Union to boldly accept its responsibility .
It is also essential for the European Union to have an African agenda .
We , that is , Parliament , the Commission and the Council , are all working towards this .
Let me refer to some of the specific points made in the debate .
Mrs Kinnock mentioned the forthcoming meeting in Dakar on basic education .
As part of our preparations for that meeting I have gone through the bulk of what we are doing on primary education in Africa and I am happy to say that I am in a position to express something positive about what I have seen in the Commission .
We are doing much more than I had expected and I would be happy to inform Parliament about the portfolio of primary education activities in which we are involved in Africa .
This is not to say that we could not do more but it is much better than the picture in general .
Secondly , with reference to Mr Rod , who said that the longer we discuss more people will die of AIDS in Africa , I only have five minutes .
I have discussed AIDS in Africa with President Mugabe .
It was quite interesting that he openly admitted to me that they are now pursuing a policy of open , honest information on AIDS and HIV , pretty much parallel to what Uganda has been doing with some success .
This is not to say that the problem is over but I consider it real progress that one of the statesmen in Africa who , in this discussion , was seen for some time as part of the problem rather than the solution , is now openly saying that he knows he has to change his policy .
I am not claiming to portray the whole situation in Zimbabwe but this is an important point .
Mr Miranda reminded us of the indirect effects on the budget for Africa of the concentration on eastern European Balkan problems .
In absolute terms , our focusing on Kosovo and other activities has not meant a reduction in what we actually do in Africa .
In relative terms this is the case , but we have been able to shield Africa from direct reductions in the volume of what we are doing .
I appreciate the support from Parliament to that effect .
Mrs Maij-Weggen mentioned that development aid has progressed over the years .
I wish that were true .
If we look at total official development assistance , globally it has in fact decreased .
We are now down to 0.23 % and many governments should and could do more .
Against that background it is a privilege to represent the European Union internationally in this field because we have not been part of that downward trend .
In total numerical terms , it is foreseeable that we will be increasing what we do in the coming years .
This Parliament , our budget , and our activities stand out as a sort of corrective measure to the global trend .
We should be proud of that and we should make the most of it in political relations also .
Mr van den Bos and others talked about debt relief and these problems certainly need a lot of attention .
I will remind you though that most of the EUR 1 billion , which is the EU ' s contribution to the HIPC II initiative , will be directed towards Africa .
The EUR 680 million , which is our contribution as a donor , not as a creditor , will all be directed to the African Development Bank earmarked in the special trust fund in the HIPC initiative in order to bail out Africa and make it possible for the African Development Bank to continue servicing the poor countries in Africa .
We are doing quite a lot and the problem now is to what extent the G7 countries - who started up the HIPC II initiative in Cologne last year - will deliver , not just as donors but in their more narrowly defined role as creditors .
We welcome the cancellation of bilateral debt , which is relatively easy to decide politically , the difficult part is multilateral debt .
This is where the EU , as a donor - not directly involved as a creditor - has been able to lend a strong hand .
This is something that should not be forgotten in the on-going discussions .
It may not be enough but it is certainly more than any other group of donors has done so far .
Mr Zimmerling mentioned the problem of Nigeria and getting money back .
We made some last minute changes to the text in Cairo which strengthened the views expressed and I hope that Europe will be able to give a helping hand in identifying some of this money and getting it back where it belongs .
This should be part of international economic governance .
Money should not be able to disappear as has been the case .
It was of real importance that the Heads of State and Governments spent two days together .
They got along quite well .
It was very nice to witness this , which is of considerable importance , not only for the mood between Europe and Africa , but also for the kind of partnership we want to create , which also needs these personal relations .
They certainly developed quite well in those two days .
Finally , I would like to take this opportunity to express my thanks for the very good cooperation established with the Portuguese presidency during this substantial effort .
It was very successful and it has been a pleasure working with the presidency .
That concludes the debate .
I have received seven motions for resolutions tabled pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
External relations package
The next item is the Commission communication on the external relations package .
Mr President , we discussed a number of issues in the Commission today , including the broad economic policy guidelines which have been the subject of a statement by my colleague Commissioner Solbes elsewhere in Parliament during the course of the afternoon .
But I would like to focus on two issues touching on external relations and one of those issues in particular .
Briefly though , I will first of all mention our communication on election observation and assistance , which we will now be publishing and which I will look forward to discussing with Parliament over the coming weeks and months .
I have to say straight away by way of a confession - and since Dr Paisley is not in the House I can probably make a confession - the paper does not represent a radical new approach , but it does attempt to bring order to an activity , which has become a very real growth area in recent years .
We have spent EUR 150 million on this important activity .
It is now clearly a first- pillar activity following the adoption of the regulations , which provide a legal basis for human rights and democratisation activity .
As Members of Parliament will recognise , the communication invites both Parliament and the Council to work with us on a more coordinated approach .
It invites everyone to try to learn the lessons of the past .
It is a very practical document .
It suggests that we need greater coherence in what we are doing and I am looking forward to hearing the views of Members of Parliament on the document , which I hope they will regard as an important and useful contribution to a debate which is going to become more important , not less important , over the coming years .
Let me turn to a subject on which I would like to address the Parliament at rather greater length .
It is a subject which is very close to my own heart - imperfect a specimen though that may be .
It is the rapid reaction facility , which we have been discussing for some time and on which we have come to some conclusions .
My colleague , Commissioner Nielson , was talking a moment or two ago about the EU-African summit in Cairo just over a week ago .
It is true that the President of the Commission , my colleagues Pascal Lamy and Poul Nielson and myself were all confronted during that summit with a litany of complaints about the slow delivery of European Union assistance .
The people making those complaints were very often justified in doing so - not always - but very often .
It is not a new problem , as Members of Parliament will know - particularly Members who have been on delegation visits to other countries .
I have been frustrated at our slow and cumbersome procedures ever since I have arrived at the Commission last autumn .
I want to say once again that this is not a problem created by our staff , who work extremely hard , thin on the ground as they are .
It is a problem which they have been labouring under for a number of years .
The problems of slow decision-making and delivery are both structural and cultural .
Our procedures are old fashioned , they are as I said ' cumbersome ' .
But the traditional legislative approach to Community business is also sometime ill-suited to the fast changing realities in external relations .
This is particularly true for conflict prevention and it is particularly true for crisis management efforts .
Today we are criticised for being slow , today we are criticised for being overtaken too frequently by events , and I think to borrow a cliché ' history is not going to wait for us any longer ' , nor will our international partners , nor even will the Council , and they are right .
We have to make sure that we are ready and capable of acting when action is needed , not six weeks later , not six months later .
We have to do better and we can do better .
Now we have embarked on an ambitious reform of our external assistance programmes , designed to bring a serious improvement in their effectiveness and in their speed of delivery .
We will present our proposals in the next few weeks .
Some things we can do relatively quickly , others will take longer if , for example , complex legal changes are required .
The rapid reaction facility is something that in our judgement we can do fairly quickly if we have the support of Parliament and if we have the support of the Council .
I hope that support will be forthcoming because we have time to lose .
The Helsinki European Council called on us , in the context of development of the Union 's crisis management structures within the ESDP , to set up a mechanism for rapid reaction .
Inertia is only part of our problem today .
We must also be able to combine different tools more effectively and flexibly into a tailor-made mix to suit the particular situation .
The rapid reaction facility responds to these needs .
It is intended to allow us to draw without delay on existing Community resources and expertise to address specific crisis situations , complementing the valuable work already undertaken by ECHO in the humanitarian field .
I am suggesting a mechanism with the following broad characteristics . First , there are the urgent time-limited operations in situations of crisis or emerging crisis .
Action should not normally last for more than nine months .
Second , where longer-term intervention is necessary , actions under the rapid reaction facility will anticipate operations under existing instruments , which can take over the action using the normal procedures .
Third , as with ECHO , the procedures must be streamlined .
The Commission should mostly be able to act under its own responsibility and if it has to consult Member States it will be on the simplest possible advisory basis .
Fourth , the management of the rapid reaction facility will be the responsibility of a small team , the crisis coordination unit in the Directorate-General for External Relations .
I do not want to build up large structures where people create work while waiting for a crisis to happen .
The added value of the rapid reaction facility is speed and flexibility in Community intervention in crisis situations .
It will help us to overcome procedural hurdles which have slowed us down in the past and it will allow for the combination of several instruments within a single action and for a single purpose .
Now I have heard concerns expressed that we are taking on new responsibilities when we should be focusing our efforts .
I understand that concern , but the rapid reaction facility does not create new responsibilities , it tries to get better mileage out of what we already have .
It builds on existing Community instruments , putting them to concerted use in a new framework .
It can cover action in areas as diverse as human rights work , election monitoring , mediation , institution building and media support , customs and border management , mine action , support for police operations , civil emergency assistance , resettlement and rehabilitation .
There is an inevitable , indeed necessary , area of overlap with existing instruments .
I repeat : the facility does not create a new instrument .
It provides a mechanism for drawing more effectively on the existing ones and the overlap is limited by the procedural nature of the rapid reaction facility and the time limit to its interventions .
The facility is a kind of quick-start package .
It will allow us to react in time and if necessary , to take the initiative in urgent circumstances .
In doing so , we will be better placed to put the wealth of Community experience and resources to optimal use in the interest of the Union as a whole .
But rapid reaction facility action is not meant to last longer than absolutely necessary .
If it needs to be pursued beyond the immediate time frame of the crisis situation , it should be taken over as soon as practicable by the regular geographic or thematic Community instrument most suited to manage it in the longer term .
That is why the Commission proposes a rather modest budget allocation for the rapid reaction facility : about EUR 30 million for this year and EUR 40 million for subsequent years .
We need to have sufficient funding available to get crisis action started quickly , but we do not want to tie up large resources , which could and should be put to better use in regular programmes .
Similarly we do not want to create a large new bureaucracy which would hang around waiting for the next crisis to happen .
I have dealt with that point earlier in my remarks .
In sum , I am convinced that the facility will help us both materially - I would have loved to have had it in hand when we launched the Energy for Democracy scheme last autumn - and institutionally by providing a concrete Commission contribution to the evolving ESDP .
It is not an ideal solution .
My own favourite economist and guru , Jane Jacobs , points out that everything is disappointing in practice .
There are rarely ideal solutions , but I do think that it is a very workable solution and if , when we review the programme in three years , we find we no longer need it because we have integrated similar rapid reaction mechanisms in the regular programmes for external assistance , no one would be happier than me .
Mr President , I would first of all like to extend warm thanks to Commissioner Patten for his extensive clarification .
I have a question pertaining to his first point .
As I understand - and I am delighted to hear it - the European Commission intends to provide more structure to the way third-country elections are observed within the European Union .
My question is : will this be a structure similar to that employed in the United States ?
I have always noticed that it is the Carter Institute which is responsible for election observation over there , and it always acquits itself of this task in a very professional and very transparent manner .
The European Union , which may be present on a massive scale , is really lacking such an image .
Could you explain whether you will use this American model as a gauge , because I think this is an excellent example of how things could be done and how they could be done properly ?
The honourable Member has , as ever , made an extremely shrewd observation .
There is an image problem .
It is one we address in the communication .
We want to ensure that what the Union does is more recognisable : it is not just a question of logos or armbands but of the whole presentation of what we are doing .
I think Members of this House will have sometimes been frustrated to discover that , on the basis of European Union funding , people from other countries , even North America , and some other countries are getting all the credit and none is coming to the European taxpayer who pays for all these things .
There is no such thing as European funds , there are European Union taxpayer funds , and it is an important point to remember .
Image is important and we have addressed it in this document .
I hope that if the honourable Member thinks we have not done so adequately , she will let us know .
Part of the purpose of this document is to try to generate more ideas from Members of this Parliament who , of course , are so familiar with the important activity which we are addressing .
Mr President , Commissioner . I concur with Mrs Maij-Weggen ' s question .
I have taken part in several election observation exercises and , according to the principle of " do good and be seen to do good " , we , and I do not mean just I , have often remarked that visibility was often lacking . Now I am all in favour of our continuing to work together with the OSCE and the Council of Europe .
However , it is a poor show that we , the European Union bear all the costs , as is often the case , and yet nobody even notices that the European Parliament is present to observe the elections . I think that we should take reasonable account of visibility in this context .
Secondly , Commissioner , I should like to ask you when you intend to have at least the basic structure of your rapid reaction facility up and running , because it is also important for Parliament ' s work ?
What sort of timetable should we be working towards ?
Thirdly , Commissioner , not all , but many crises to which we must react can be prevented .
Are you satisfied with the state and development of crisis prevention or do you want to couple crisis prevention to the rapid reaction facility ?
Firstly , on visibility : there is an early paragraph in this pretty lengthy communication which , in my judgement , sums up the problem rather well .
It states that EU visibility is not as ever-present as one would like because of a number of factors .
The first is the lack of a clear EU policy and the necessary instruments to implement it .
The adoption of a CFSP joint action is no guarantee of increased visibility , as people found in Nigeria last year .
Another factor is the participation of the European Union under the umbrella of other international actors .
That has often been a problem in the Balkans , and one with which the honourable Member will be familiar .
In other cases , like Palestine , the lack of visibility was due to insufficient effort with the media .
Then we finish perhaps a shade provocatively : " Unlike the United States the European Union does not appoint retired high-level politicians for this kind of job . "
We have politicians who are actually still in the kitchen feeling the heat .
Maybe we should learn something from that , though I agree that there are some important high-level retired politicians whom one would not want to see necessarily supervising elections .
At which point discretion is the better part of valour .
Secondly , as far as the rapid reaction facility is concerned , I want to see this up and running as quickly as possible .
I have enough anecdotes to justify my impatience .
I have no doubt at all that our " energy for democracy " programme , which I mentioned in my remarks , has been an extraordinary success .
The mayor of one of the towns which has benefited wrote last week to his colleagues in the Serbian opposition making that point .
We are now looking at what we can do during the summer , now the winter emergency is over , to build on it .
Nor have I any doubt at all that the tortures of the damned which our officials had to go through to get the scheme launched would have been much easier to cope with had we had a facility like this .
Anybody who thinks that we do not need one should just try talking to our officials who were operating pillar 4 in UNMIK in Kosovo .
Again , there is a legion of almost unbelievable stories which underline the importance of a facility like this - a facility that is not a cop-out , not a way of getting round budgetary procedures but one that allows us within our existing budget to do things more effectively and more flexibly .
Of course , if you can act more rapidly , you make a contribution to crisis prevention .
It is one of the oldest saws in the book that it is incomparably more expensive to fight a war than to keep the peace .
Very often what is required to keep the peace or to prevent a crisis is not just doing things generously but doing them quickly and generously .
We are , as the honourable Member knows because he has been in this business much longer than I , actively involved in trying to develop an intellectually respectable case for preventative diplomacy , trying to pull together all the various non-military capacity headline goals which we think are required .
There are a number of things we will be doing .
I look forward to coming to Parliament with some further ideas over the coming months .
Mr President , Commissioner , you have spoken of the lengthy payment procedures which have an adverse effect on the image of the European Union in the various actions it takes .
We are currently in the middle of a conciliation procedure for the late payment directive , in other words , this is not just a problem in external relations ; it is also a problem within Europe .
I think that it would make sense if you as Commissioner supported the view that the late payment directive should also apply to the European institutions , because then payment could be made , if there was a legal basis , within a certain period of time , namely between 21 and 30 days or , we hope , even sooner .
The idea is that the late payment directive could also be applied in these areas .
That is an interesting and important point , which I shall follow up .
It is an extremely valuable contribution .
I am also concerned about an even larger issue , which is the amount of time between our commitments and our contracting .
This is a serious issue and I hope we will be able to offer some helpful thoughts about that in the course of the next few weeks and months .
Mr President , I wish to congratulate the Commissioner on the progress he has made on the rapid reaction unit .
I should like to ask the Commissioner a couple of questions .
Firstly , although I recognise that he wants to keep the budget small and use existing instruments , is he satisfied that the budget in category 4 is sufficient for the special rapid reaction unit to be able to carry out its objectives over the course of a financial year ?
Secondly , concerning coordination : what will the relationship be between this unit and the European Union special envoys ?
One of the problems we had with Kosovo was not just coordination within the Commission but also coordination among the Member States of the actions they took as individual governments .
What relationship will you be able to have with Member States in order to ensure coordination of their independent activities ?
As the honourable Member knows , because a paper which the High Representative and I wrote for the European Council miraculously found its way into the newspapers , the question of better coordination of Member States ' activities is one that both Javier Solana and I feel strongly about .
For a start , it would be nice always to know what Member States are doing .
The High Representative and his colleagues in the secretariat are bending their best efforts to try to achieve that at the moment .
They are trying to explain , for example , to the United States the full scale of what Europe is doing in the Balkans .
We have had problems which should not have arisen because we have not always known in sufficient detail exactly what Member States , as well as the European Commission , are up to .
So we need to work more closely and in a more coordinated way .
That is an issue which the High Representative and I are attempting to take on more positively .
I hope that the Stability Pact conference a couple of weeks ago was a help along that road but we will certainly continue to pursue that issue .
On the relationship between the rapid reaction facility and the special envoys who are , of course , responsible to the Council - even though we are responsible for the budget - we will want to work closely with them .
There are some in particular whose activities bear on the sort of things we might find ourselves wanting to support through the rapid reaction facility , like the work being done by one of our special envoys in the Great Lakes region in Africa .
We will keep in touch with them .
I do not think that the sums of money that we are talking about are going to give us budgetary problems .
We can manage EUR 30 or 40 million .
I am sure I shall have other opportunities to come back to Parliament and explain some of the pressures we have with much bigger items of expenditure in category 4.One of my continuing obsessions is the gap between the language of our communiqués and what is agreed when finance ministers meet to discuss these things .
I am looking forward to what is called a full and frank exchange with Parliament on those issues .
I should like to begin by thanking the Commissioner for an excellent exposition of the rapid reaction facility .
It is much needed .
I should like to ask him how he envisages disaster relief of the kind that was needed in Mozambique recently - how would this rapid reaction facility liaise and collaborate with Member States ' armies and navies ?
Would he also consider whether he would extend the call for help - if the need arises - to beyond the European Union countries ?
For example , in Mozambique I found it quite extraordinary that the Indian navy was on the other side of the Indian Ocean and could have come to Mozambique very quickly , but nobody ever involved them in disaster relief in Mozambique , while people were hanging on trees .
There are different sorts of crises and different sorts of disaster .
The appalling floods in Mozambique were a classic case for intervention by ECHO as a humanitarian intervention .
The growing food crisis in the Horn of Africa is a classic case for the deployment of traditional food aid , albeit with emergency shipment and emergency on-movement through lorries , etc .
It is very difficult to compartmentalise these crises .
Very often you need to use a number of instruments .
For example , we discovered very early on in the Mozambique crisis the requirement for helicopters and the importance of using some military capacities in support of civil-power operations .
What we have to ensure is that there are not any " Chinese walls " between these various operations .
There need to be " Chinese walls " only in the budgetary sense .
We need to make it absolutely clear that we are not using the rapid reaction facility to cut corners in our budgetary practices , which are not justified by an emergency on the spot .
But the honourable Member is entirely right to say that Mozambique was a demonstration of the extent to which the various forms of intervention are interwoven and that it is very difficult to make precise categories out of different forms of support .
Commissioner , thank you very much for your statement .
I strongly welcome this rapid reaction facility .
It responds to long-held concerns which many of us have had .
You are to be congratulated on the work that you have done .
I should like to elaborate on the point which my colleague Nirj Deva mentioned .
We are not just talking about urgency , we are not just talking about effectiveness of action .
The question of coherence is very important .
You have the overall responsibility for external relations from the Commission 's point of view .
I am thinking again of the role of ECHO .
Do you not foresee an opportunity here to bring ECHO under your policy-making umbrella so that we have a more cohesive approach to emergencies when they arise ; so that we do not have this problem of different instruments ; so that we are addressing the problem with one mind and can then deliver with urgency and efficiency ?
I recognise the case for coherence .
It would be challenging politically , to get up and make a speech in favour of incoherence .
The honourable Member is entirely right about that .
But one has to bear in mind two important facts about ECHO .
ECHO is justifiably jealous of its reputation for delivering humanitarian assistance without political strings being attached and without any political infusion .
For example , you can distinguish very well between the humanitarian assistance which ECHO has given in Serbia and the assistance we have given through the Energy through Democracy programme .
They both help to improve people 's lives made miserable by Mr Milosevic but they clearly have different triggers and slightly different purposes .
Secondly , it is very often the case that what marketing managers would call the deliverables are different .
Very often with ECHO one is talking about food , medicine and blankets .
With our rapid reaction facility one is very often talking about advisors , mediators , observers , customs officials , police officers , and so on .
There are differences .
But I totally accept that there is a need for more cohesion .
It is a considerable advantage that in this Commission the external relations commissioners work together as a team .
We are about to start sharing all the programming decisions together .
I very much hope that , without breaking down some important distinctions , we can ensure that the Community 's various instruments , which involve the expenditure of quite substantial amounts of assistance , are moving together in the same direction .
It has not always been the case in the past .
Mr President , I am sure the Commissioner would agree that writing the report is the easy bit .
The practical implementation is the difficult bit .
When this rapid reaction force actually comes together , will it work in certain cases at a regional basis as well as an individual nation basis ?
There are situations , such as that in the Horn of Africa , which cover more than one state .
The problems in the Great Lakes region cover a number of countries .
It would be useful if you could link these problems on a regional basis and act from that point .
Would the Commissioner agree with that ?
I agree with the honourable Member on that point .
I believe that we should be looking much more constructively at regional solutions in a lot of other areas as well , not least some of our trade relationships with other countries .
This facility has to be used not just on a bilateral basis but in helping groups of countries with what are often common political problems , as well as environmental and other problems .
I just wish to congratulate the Commissioner on his replies .
I am a little upset and worried about his talk of rapid reaction and the refusal of a political infusion into ECHO .
Quite honestly , ECHO needs more than a political infusion : it needs somebody to see what is going on there .

When Mr Deva asked Commissioner Nielson a question on Mozambique and about the delay in getting helicopters there , it was dismissed out of hand by Commissioner Nielson .
That is unacceptable .
We have a situation in Ethiopia where we knew for the past three years that there was a famine coming .
The stores down there are empty .
Where was ECHO ?
Commissioner , why did ECHO not foresee this and foresee that food was needed there when so many people were threatened ?
The Committee on Development and Cooperation and myself have time and time again warned ECHO and the Commission that something should be done about this .
Absolutely nothing has been done .
If the honourable Member , who has made some serious points , does not have anything else on tomorrow morning , he might come to the debate on Ethiopia in which I shall be taking part myself because my colleague has to be elsewhere .
I shall be setting out the figures for our actual disbursements of food aid in Ethiopia and Eritrea .
I just wish to add two points .
Firstly , I do not share the honourable Member 's views on ECHO : it does a very good job in difficult circumstances .
I want to make this point about the Horn of Africa .
I was a development minister from 1986 to 1989 and I spent much of my time trying to deal with the food crisis then in Ethiopia and Eritrea .
I feel rather strongly that we have managed over the years , despite problems from time to time , to increase our ability to get food and other assistance to people in the most appallingly difficult circumstances .
We have managed to increase our ability to deliver humanitarian assistance .
What we have not done is to increase our ability to make that humanitarian assistance unnecessary in the first place .
There is a food crisis in the Horn of Africa .
There are two large armies dug into trenches , buying expensive military equipment from other countries with money which should be going to agricultural extension , to improving water schemes and the life chances of babies and young mothers .
So I hope I catch your eye tomorrow in the debate and make some of these points .
I have great sympathy for the problems being faced by Ethiopia and Eritrea .
However , I have to say that I was dealing with these problems 13 or 14 years ago and , alas , much less has happened to the good than one would have liked .
Mr President , on a point of order .
Could you let us know exactly how Question Time is going to be organised now ?
Will questions to the Commission - ostensibly due between 6.30 p.m. and 7 p.m. be taken ?
I can inform you that Question Time will last an hour .
Therefore , we will be working from seven until eight .
The first part , Questions to the Commission , will last 30 minutes .
We will dedicate 10 minutes to each Commissioner , instead of the usual 20 minutes .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is Question Time ( B5-0216 / 2000 ) . We will examine questions to the Commission .
At the request of the Commission , we will begin with the third question so that Mr Patten can answer it .
First part
Question No 34 by ( H-0306 / 00 ) :
Subject : Commission participation in the Council 's military committee Does the Commission agree that its participation in meetings of the Council and all its bodies is an established part of the acquis communautaire and an essential element of the institutional equilibrium of the European Union ?
Can the Commission comment on rumours to the effect that it is not participating in the work of the new military committee ?
Can the Commission explain the reasons for this non-participation ?
Will the Commission insist on its right to participate ?
The Commission shares the view that its participation in meetings of the Council and all its bodies is part of the EU acquis and an essential element of the European Union institutional framework .
Commission participation is expressly provided for in the Council 's Rules of Procedure , which state that the Commission takes part in all Council meetings , and in meetings of all its preparatory bodies .
Only in exceptional circumstances and on a case-by-case basis can the Commission be excluded from these meetings .
In Helsinki , it was confirmed that the development of ESDP should take place within the existing institutional framework .
This reflects the Commission 's full association with the common , foreign and security policy and its shared responsibility with the Council for ensuring consistency in the Union 's external relations .
Excluding the Commission from work in this area would be tantamount to accepting the emergence of a fourth pillar in the Treaty , contrary to the Helsinki conclusions .
But although the Commission has a right to attend all working structures in the Council , it does not have an obligation to do so .
There are instances where the Commission decides not to participate in a particular meeting , usually because it considers that the items to be dealt with are not of direct concern to it or to Community affairs .
We have agreed arrangements without difficulty to take part in all the post-Helsinki structures , such as the interim Political and Security Committee , with one exception .
We are still discussing arrangements for the interim military body .
We would plainly have nothing to contribute to the interim military body when it deals with purely military business but there will equally be occasions from time to time when it discusses issues which straddle civil and military cooperation .
In cases like these , I think that it is not only natural but in everyone 's interests that the Commission should participate in the meeting in order to contribute to the overall coherence and effectiveness of European Union policies and actions .
Mr President , may I thank the Commissioner for that excellent and comprehensive answer , which goes a long way to reassuring me .
May I ask him to confirm that the Commission 's choice not to participate in certain meetings will be taken , as he put it , on a ' meeting by meeting ' basis , not a structure by structure basis , depending on what is being discussed .
To take a decision structure by structure would indeed create an unfortunate precedent , undermining the acquis communautaire , which is that the Commission takes part in all Council meetings and preparatory meetings .
Indeed it would be counter to the Treaty , which states that the Commission is " fully associated " , not partially associated , with the CFSP and that it will remain the Commission 's choice whether to participate or not .
I realise that the honourable Member is a greater expert on these institutional issues than I am .
It is not therefore surprising that he is holed in one .
The question is whether the choice is meeting by meeting or structure by structure and we have made it gently and courteously but firmly clear what our view is of the matter .
I very much hope that it can be resolved satisfactorily over the coming weeks .
Mr President , if the Council does not agree with the Commission , does that mean the Commission will have to take the Council to the European Court in order to participate in the military committee ?
Secondly , has the Commission drawn any conclusions as to the security implications of its participation in the military committee ?
On the second point , if I may be slightly irrelevant , the history of the last fifty years does not suggest that it is bodies like the Commission which usually are a problem in that regard .
I certainly do not think that is an issue .
There is a general issue about security , which I know the High Representative is addressing and rightly so .
As for the first point , I very much hope that we can resolve these things amicably , and I am sure that if both honourable gentlemen put the case that they have put to me with equal force to their first cousins in the United Kingdom Government , that will very much help to resolve these issues without it taking too long .
I hope that we do not have to resort to the sort of measures suggested by the honourable gentleman .
I hope that we can solve this in a civilised and sensible way .
I repeat , we do not have - to borrow a phrase - " ideas above our station " .
We are trying to follow the terms of the Treaty and to do so only when it is helpful to the overall implementation of a common foreign and security policy .
Thank you very much , Mr Patten .
I believe we have asked you all the questions we were going to ask you today . We therefore wish you a good afternoon .
Question No 32 by ( H-0293 / 00 ) :
Subject : Ability of dialysis-dependent people to travel in the EU The free movement of Member States ' citizens in the EU is a fundamental right .
One group of people that cannot make use of that right are those who require regular haemodialysis because of malfunctioning kidneys .
When travelling , they rely on being able to obtain treatment at dialysis units other than those they normally use .
This poses a major problem especially during the European holiday period , when virtually all dialysis units scale down their activities and frequently turn away ' guests ' who are passing through or visiting their area .
This severely restricts the ability of families with dialysis-dependent members to travel .
Does the Commission intend to take any steps before the next summer holiday period begins to make it easier for dialysis-dependent people to travel within the EU , without having to forego the treatment they need ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should first like to refer Mr Arvidsson to Community legislation on the coordination of individual national social security systems .
According to this legislation , persons temporarily resident in a Member State other than that in which they are insured are entitled to health care services if their condition is such that they require emergency treatment .
The persons in question need to obtain an E111 form from their insurance agency and submit it to the institution in the Member States in which they are temporarily resident as proof of insurance .
In order to ease the situation of temporarily resident dialysis patients and rectify the possible lack of clarity in the definition of emergency treatment , the Member States have agreed on special rules which are laid down in Decision No 163 of the Administrative Commission of the European Communities on Social Security for Migrant Workers of 31 May 1996 .
According to these rules , dialysis qualifies as emergency treatment , provided that the purpose of the visit is non-medical .
However , as the availability of dialysis treatment may differ from one Member State to another , the patients in question are of course invited to make the necessary arrangements in advance with the hospital which is to supply the service in order to ensure that they can receive dialysis treatment while temporarily resident in the Member State in question .
As to the question of whether the Commission will take any initiatives in order to increase the availability of dialysis during the holiday period , I should like to say that there is no standardised social security system in the Community and that it is up to each individual Member State to configure its own social security system and to decide what services will be supplied , who is entitled to them and to what extent they are to be provided .
It is not therefore up to the Commission to intervene here and to influence national rules on the modus operandi of hospitals and clinics in the Member States .
Many hospitals do not regard chronic dialysis treatment as an emergency form of treatment and may therefore deny dialysis-dependent travellers the opportunity to undergo such treatment at their dialysis units .
Children , parents or young people in families where someone is dialysis-dependent are often very keen to travel .
They work and are given holiday-time , but they are unable to go on ordinary tours .
For such people , going abroad is an international issue and , if the national authorities do not do anything to help , their hopes lie with the EU as an organisation .
Even if it is not possible to intervene on a purely legal level , there may be other options for calling attention to the need to increase the provision of dialysis facilities during holiday periods in the Member States .
For example , more prominence could be given to hospitals which make efforts to provide such facilities , or attractive European prizes could perhaps be announced for those which take the relevant measures .
Perhaps my first explanation struck you as overly legal , Mr Arvidsson , and I should perhaps repeat myself in simpler terms : as far as Community law is concerned , the relevant committee has clarified that dialysis during temporary residence qualifies as emergency treatment .
It has nothing to do with whether someone is chronically ill or an acute case .
The decisive question is whether or not this is emergency treatment and the answer to this question is yes .
On the other hand , the Commission , as I have explained , can only propose or make certain information available here .
The Commission departments have made such information available .
But in individual cases and in relation to a specific holiday resort - and you will probably agree with me here - it would be advisable in that case to check in advance if the hospital or institution in question has dialysis facilities .
Question No 33 by ( H-0298 / 00 ) :
Subject : Measures to protect chocolate As part of its policy to ensure the quality of agricultural products and foodstuffs , the Union has set up a system to protect traditional products of specific character , under which chocolate is eligible for recognition .
Council Regulation No 2088 / 92 provides for the Commission to set up and administer a register of certificates of specific character . Under this regulation , producers of chocolate without the addition of vegetable fats other than cocoa butter can apply for a certificate of specific character ( guaranteed traditional speciality ) so that it can be recognised as a food product made from traditional raw materials .
Has the Commission already received from the Member States applications by producers for chocolate of this kind to be included in the register of certificates of specific character ?
Will the Commission take all necessary steps to give effect to the provisions laid down in the regulation and include chocolate without the addition of vegetable fats among the foodstuffs recognised as guaranteed traditional specialities ?
.
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen . The Commission has received no applications from producers for a so-called certificate of special character for chocolate without the addition of vegetable fats other than cocoa butter .
However , if such an application is submitted , it will be examined in accordance with the procedure provided for in Regulation No 2082 / 92 on certificates of special character for agricultural products and foodstuffs .
The name of the special character registered on the certificate allows the words - and I quote - ' guaranteed traditional speciality ' , ' gts ' for short , to be added , together with a Community symbol reserved for them .
If I am not mistaken , the Commission is not considering this option .
I would like to insist on this point because I feel that there is concern among consumers that the creation of the single market is resulting in less importance being attached to product quality .
We must endeavour to allay this concern , and I therefore feel , should the manufacturers of a Member State so request , of course , that within the White Paper on food safety and in other ways , the Commission should consider protecting chocolate which is produced according to traditional methods without additional vegetable oil as a high quality European product , and refuse to set the lowest level as the standard , for this may be permitted by the market , but it is not acceptable in terms of the quality of the produce and the lives of our consumers .
Mr President , Mr Napoletano , as I said , no chocolate producer has yet demonstrated any interest in this form of protection .
No applications have been filed .
However , in order to clarify matters somewhat as you have requested , I should point out to you that the Regulation which I quoted makes provision for two possible forms of legal protection for names .
One possibility is that a name can only be protected if it is connected with the Community name ' gts ' and the corresponding Community symbol , in which case it is possible to find other products on the market which have the same name as the registered product , but which are manufactured using a different process and consequently are not entitled to use the Community name and the Community symbol .
That is the drawback with this variation .
The second possibility is to protect the name per se if it corresponds to a single type of manufacture , namely the type registered , in which case there will be no products with the same name which are manufactured under different conditions on the market .
It would only be possible to register the name " chocolate " and issue a certificate of special character under the first procedure referred to .
Registration using the second procedure would run counter to the future chocolate directive , because chocolate is redefined and may contain a certain proportion of vegetable fats other than cocoa butter .
The Commissioner actually answered my question in the second part of his answer .
As a long-time passionate lover of chocolate for more years than I care to remember , I am sure the Commissioner will agree that , if for sixty years people have been eating a product called " chocolate " , they are entitled to continue to eat the product called " chocolate " .
I am very glad that we finally put this directive to bed in the last session .
We take note of your statement in favour of good chocolate , Mrs Banotti .
Question No 35 by ( H-0307 / 00 ) :
Subject : Children 's rights Given the reports of sexual abuse , of child prostitution and the high number of young children living on the streets of the candidate countries from Eastern Europe , what measures are being taken by the Commission to ensure within the framework of the present accession negotiations , that children 's rights and child protection are a priority and that the welfare of children is taken into account when preparing these countries for future membership of the European Union ?
Mr President , I should like to start by saying that I share the concern behind the honourable Member ' s question .
It is particularly depressing to see that , in a number of Central and Eastern European countries , children are suffering from the consequences or , to be more precise , the uncontrolled consequences of social change .
However , before answering your question with the standard legal arguments , I should like to get a political point out of the way first .
This is not a problem specific to the candidate countries of the European Union .
Unfortunately , as you well know , I am sure , the problem encompasses many , perhaps even the majority of countries in the world .
It is quite clearly a development problem , a problem which stems from poverty , a problem which stems from social neglect and , I believe , a problem which stems from the indifference or lack of decisiveness in our societies to really do something to fight this terrible manifestation of child abuse .
Allow me to tell you what we can do within the framework of accession negotiations .
To get straight to the point , it is not much , but the fact remains that countries wishing to join the European Union have of course undertaken to adopt the Community acquis .
That includes the legally binding regulations for the protection of children .
The most important of these is the joint action to fight the trade in human beings and the sexual exploitation of children , on which a decision was reached on 24 February 1997 .
The Commission also intends to submit a proposal to the Council in the year 2000 , i.e. this year , whereby the trade in human beings and the sexual exploitation of children , taking special account of child pornography on the Internet , will be declared to be punishable offences .
If this proposal is accepted , it will become part of the Community acquis which applies in candidate countries .
The Member States and countries seeking to join the European Union are working together comprehensively in the fight against all forms of organised and other serious crime within the framework of the pre-accession agreements on the fight against organised crime concluded by the Member States of the European Union , the Central and Eastern European countries wishing to join the Union and Cyprus on 28 May 1998 .
Programmes such as PHARE and MEDA and the relevant specific programmes relating to justice and internal affairs such as GROTIUS , STOP , ODYSSEUS and FALCONE also offer the opportunity to support countries seeking to join the Union in this respect and support is indeed given .
The following programmes are relevant to child protection : first the DAPHNE programme approved on 24 January 2000 .
This relates to the period from 2000 to 2003 and includes preventive measures to fight violence against children , young people and women and allows funds to be provided to governmental and non-governmental organisations active in this area .
The countries seeking to join the Union can also join this programme .
Then there is the STOP programme for the period from 1996 to 2000 .
This is a promotion and exchange programme for people responsible for measures to fight the trade in human beings and the sexual exploitation of children .
This programme helps to develop coordinated initiatives to fight the trade in human beings and the sexual exploitation of children .
The Commission will draft a proposal for a new edition of the STOP programme during the course of this year , which will then also be open to countries seeking to join the Union .
The Commissioner showed us where his heart was in the opening remarks .
I should like to ask him if he is aware that , notwithstanding the implementation of many of the Community programmes , in a recent BBC television programme Newsnight there was clear evidence that there is a systematic breeding programme in Romania in particular , where children are being bred for export and sale .
It was a totally horrendous programme , although I agree social exclusion is a major factor in these dreadful occurrences .
There were children who were being bred specifically to be put into an institution from which they were subsequently sold to people coming into that country to buy babies .
There is also the question of Internet pornography .
Poland is one of the significant countries from which much of this is being broadcast .
It is not enough that we have these small , under-funded programmes .
What are we actually doing in terms of the accession discussions with these countries to make our opinion abundantly clear that this is unacceptable ?
I should like to explain to the honourable Member what my feelings are in this matter , not just the legal aspects .
The whole problem could not have arisen and would not exist were there no demand for this horrendous supply in our rich societies , including in the Member States of the European Union .
The entire problem has only arisen because there are people in our societies who will pay money for it .
In Romania there are no people paying for it .
These people are in this country , the country in which we live , in all the neighbouring countries , in all the countries of the European Union .
I would be most grateful to the honourable Member if , before representing one of the poorest countries of Europe in her question here , she were also to point out that the real responsibility for this terrible crime lies with those who pay for and demand it .
Now let me come to Romania .
The subject of children in Romania is , as you know , one of the subjects on which the Commission is most intensively employed , including me personally .
There is no single topic in the context of accession negotiations , apart perhaps from the safety of nuclear power stations , to which I personally have addressed myself more intensively than the situation of children in Romania , including the problem to which you referred .
I cannot confirm the accuracy of the BBC television report .
The fact that something has been broadcast on the BBC does not automatically mean that it is true .
Not that I am saying that it is untrue .
Simply that we cannot confirm it .
It is therefore difficult for me to answer your specific question as to whether children are being bred in Romania for the purpose of sexual abuse with a clear yes or no .
What I can say is that , as Parliament ' s hearing on the subject of children in Romania has demonstrated over recent weeks in Brussels , the Commission is doing absolutely everything in its power to improve the lot of children in Romania .
I assure the honourable Member that we are doing far more than is our duty and , in fact , far more that what is actually politically permissible within the framework of accession negotiations .
I do , however , admit that we are doing so because , in my view , it is also a human rights issue which must be considered in accordance with the political criteria governing accession .
But I must again expressly state that I would guard against representing this problem - although I do not think the honourable Member intended to do so - as a problem specific to the accession or candidate countries .
It is a problem that should be a cause for concern to everyone in Europe .
While we address the question of what we are doing in Romania or in other countries to fight the supply , I would also ask Parliament to address the question of what we are doing to fight the demand .
Question No 36 by ( H-0289 / 00 ) :
Subject : Albanian prostitution rings in Europe The French newspaper ' Le Monde ' recently featured a report stating that Albanian ' white-slavers ' had taken advantage of the war in Kosovo and the illegal immigration networks operating between Albania and Italy and were sexually exploiting some three hundred thousand women - mostly from Kosovo , but also from Moldavia , Romania and Bosnia - in France , Germany and Belgium .
The women are forced into prostitution by threats and violence , and the Albanian pimps often pretend to be Kosovars in order to acquire refugee status .
Will the Commission say what measures it is taking and what policies it is promoting to combat this phenomenon , whether it has any data on the increased movement of women from Eastern European countries , what results have been achieved by various programmes and what is being done to promote the harmonisation of the penal legislation of the Member States and to coordinate efforts to combat the trade in women ?
Second part
Questions to Mrs Schreyer
. ( PT ) Mr President , the Commission is perfectly aware , as it demonstrated exhaustively in the two communications it transmitted to the European Parliament on this matter , the first in November 1997 and the second in December 1998 , of the need for coordinated and multidisciplinary action at European level , for both preventing and combating trafficking in women .
The Commission has been supporting and will continue to support various non-governmental organisations involved in this field in various applicant countries , and recently financed two prevention campaigns which we feel were very successful , one in Poland and one in Hungary . At the same time , the same type of campaign has been funded by the American government , as part of the transatlantic agenda , concerning trafficking in women for exploitation in Ukraine and Bulgaria .
In the area of police cooperation , the Commission wishes to remind honourable Members that in 1996 Europol was given a mandate by the Council to combat trafficking in human beings , with the basic aim of ensuring that all networks of traffickers working in Europe would be closed down .
With regard to criminal issues , the Council would like to repeat that it intends to present a set of legislative proposals to the Council and the European Parliament by the end of the current presidency . The aim of these proposals is to go beyond the February 1997 joint action and to comply with the provisions of Paragraph 48 of the Tampere European Summit conclusions , with a view to adopting a framework decision leading to the joint definition of trafficking in human beings and the prosecution and punishment of those involved .
Finally , the Commission also wishes to emphasise that through the STOP and Daphne programmes , it has already funded numerous cooperation and training projects in the area of combating trafficking in human beings , specifically against the trafficking of women for sexual exploitation , and through these programmes has brought together the relevant bodies , namely police and judicial authorities , non-governmental organisations and social services .
The Commission intends in the course of 2000 to present the European Parliament with a new legal basis for the STOP programme for the period 2001-2005 .
Under this new legal basis for STOP , we will also be able to fund projects for combating trafficking in human beings submitted by non-governmental organisations and by public authorities from the applicant countries themselves .
Lastly , concerning the specific situation in Albania , the Commission acknowledges that networks trafficking in human beings originating in the Balkans represent a major concern , due to the increasing number of cases being seen in European countries .
We therefore acknowledge the fact that under the Stability Pact for the Balkans , priority must be given to combating trafficking in human beings .
I can even answer the honourable Member by saying that a group of experts is already working on identifying the best actions for combating the networks of traffickers in human beings and that I myself had an opportunity recently , on a mission to Greece , to exchange ideas with the Greek Minister for Home Affairs , in order enlist the cooperation of his government in establishing these actions and priorities , bearing in mind the action that Greece is already developing bilaterally on the trafficking of human beings in the Balkans .
Commissioner , thank you for your answer , which I find partially satisfactory as I am well aware of your personal interest in the matter and of the initiatives you have undertaken to combat prostitution rings .
However , we must admit that we have not been very successful so far , since the number of rings has increased and we have recently received reports of abuse , particularly of Albanian and Kosovar women .
Of course , this issue is bound up with the economic , social and political conditions which prevail in the Balkans and which have resulted in the poverty and overexploitation of vulnerable sections of the population , such as women .
However , Commissioner , we must also admit that the intervention of the EU ' s institutions has been both inadequate and ineffective .
Are you aware , Commissioner , that concentration camps still exist where women are raped before being forced into prostitution ?
European women are particularly concerned as to whether there is any political will to dismantle these prostitution rings , whether there is any police or judicial cooperation and whether any victim support measures are in place .
I am going to ask you to be brief and I am going to be brief .
This is the Rule in this House .
For your information , in Annex IIB ( 3 ) of the Rules of Procedure , there are some recommendations for cases such as this when there is no time for questions .
Therefore , in application of the said recommendations , we will allow just one supplementary question per subject and only 30 seconds , which may extend to 35 , but no more , in order to reformulate the questions .
Question No 37 by ( H-0272 / 00 ) :
Subject : Agricultural budget for foreign policy activities in Kosovo With regard to the budgetary forecasts , will agricultural funds be used to foot the bill for Kosovo ?
Are EUR 300m to be deducted from the items earmarked for agriculture funding to cover the costs of Kosovo ?
Mr President , Mrs Izquierdo Rojo , reconstruction in Kosovo and the stabilisation of South-Eastern Europe are among the most important tasks facing the European Union over the next few years .
This has been emphasised in numerous Council and Parliament resolutions , most recently in Lisbon , and for the Commission , this task does , without doubt , have the top priority which it requires .
The funds required for this task need to be anchored in the budget accordingly .
This task was not included in the Council resolution on the financial perspectives for 2000-2006 at the Berlin summit last spring .
The resolution on Agenda 2000 was taken , I would remind you , on the same day that the war in Kosovo broke out .
In the interinstitutional agreement on the financial perspectives concluded between Parliament , the Council and the Commission in May 1999 , Parliament and the Council decided to call on the Commission , in view of developments in the Balkans , to submit the necessary budgetary proposals , if necessary in the form of a proposal to revise the financial perspectives .
It is precisely this call that the Commission is addressing .
It has proceeded by taking the following steps : first by estimating the sum in aid needed from the EU budget ; secondly , by setting new priorities within foreign policy activities , so that funds can be redeployed for South-Eastern Europe and , thirdly , by proposing a redeployment between categories , i.e. between the various political areas .
One of the reasons for the proposal to redeploy EUR 300 billion from the expenditure budgeted as maximum expenditure for agriculture was as follows : the financial perspectives make provision for an increase of EUR 2.8 billion for agricultural expenditure from 2000 to 2001 .
Because the Council reduced the budget estimates by EUR 400 million for the year 2000 in comparison with the maximum amount or ceiling set for 2000 , the maximum rate of increase for next year would have been as high as EUR 3.2 billion .
In the external aid area , on the other hand , the figures in the financial perspectives would have resulted in a reduction in expenditure next year in comparison with this year and I think that everyone is agreed that this does not really reflect the actual situation and actual requirements .
The Commission therefore decided to propose a redeployment of EUR 300 billion to the budgetary authority so that the increase in agricultural expenditure would be correspondingly lower .
I hope that , when faced with these realities , Parliament will support the Commission proposal .
The Commissioner confirms our suspicions that Commissioner Fischler is hiding things from us and hiding himself as well .
I am not surprised that he left the chamber hardly ten minutes ago because this proposal is shameful . It takes from agriculture an amount to pay for a United Nations mission in Kosovo , in European Union resources and agricultural policy resources .
And then we have a Commissioner who is denying farmers subsidies for nuts , whose production they are going to lose , and who is denying European agriculture the aid to deal with the effects of the drought .
All of this demonstrates that Agenda 2000 has been nothing but a great firework display .
This is a disgrace for European agriculture .
It does not surprise me that given this outrage the Commissioner responsible ...
This is a disgrace !
A disgrace !
Mr President , I hope I can risk Mrs Izquierdo 's wrath by saying that I agree with the Commissioner .
I want to put it to her that it is far better to reduce the rate of growth in agriculture in order to protect the money that is currently going to the very poor in this world , because the alternative would be to squeeze further the budget lines in category 4 .
It would be unacceptable to find money for Kosovo - which I support - at the expense of the very poor in the world .
Does the Commissioner agree with that ?
I should like to thank the honourable Member for his remarks .
I should also like to clarify that it is really not in the nature of my colleague , Mr Fischler , to run off and hide .
Clearly there are new priorities and new tasks and everyone here in this House must suggest how these new priorities can be funded .
The Commission has taken the step for which provision is made in the interinstitutional agreement , i.e. to examine the extent to which funds can be redeployed in the relevant categories and then make another proposal .
We have examined this carefully .
Mr Patten and Mr Nielson have come to the conclusion that a total of EUR 1.6 billion could be redeployed in the external aid area for south-eastern Europe and I think that we really must acknowledge that this step has been taken .
In addition , there is a further funding requirement and I should like to emphasise once again that the growth rate in the agricultural policy area is extraordinarily high for next year and my colleague Mr Fischler has accurately calculated the extent to which a reduction in agricultural expenditure by what is a small amount for the agricultural budget is feasible .
I should like to state clearly at this point that this redeployment will not of course have any effect on income support for farmers .
I should also point out that the Commission will propose that even the expenditure budgeted for promoting and developing the countryside be increased to its ceiling next year .
But I think that it is our common responsibility to find an answer , including a financial answer , as far as the important obligation that the European Union has in south-eastern Europe is concerned .
Question No 38 by ( H-0287 / 00 ) :
Subject : Structural measures to overcome delays in payments The EU budget is failing in that commitment authorisations are not being adequately matched by payments .
Payments as a proportion of total commitments have fallen over many years and barely 80 per cent of commitments , reportedly , are paid out .
One of the reasons for this situation is the delays in implementing the Union 's projects .
The absurdity of this system is becoming increasingly apparent . The Member States undertake to fund operations under the supervision of the Union , while there are delays in implementing projects which have long lost any legitimate purpose and which , under this system , preposterously , continue to receive funding .
Such a situation is untenable , particularly in view of the negative public opinion prevalent in some Member States ?
In the Commission 's view , what structural measures are required to overcome the delays in payments ?
Questions to Mr Kinnock
Mr President , the Commission is doing its utmost to settle proper payment applications within 60 days .
The large majority of invoices can be paid within this period and the number of overdue payments is falling satisfactorily .
However , the honourable Member ' s question obviously refers not only to settlements in the narrow sense of the word , but to the question of how many commitments from previous budget years have yet to be paid .
So what we are talking about is the period of time between the first promise of funds for a project and a specific contract and the period of time between the commitment and the actual payment of funds .
The Commission submitted a working paper to the budgetary authority last year in which it made a comprehensive analysis of developments , broken down by sector and underlying factors , and suggested remedies .
The Commission is currently updating this analysis .
In terms of volume , commitments , i.e. sums that will need to be converted to payments in later years , were around EUR 71 billion at the end of 1999 .
Developments in these old cases are influenced , de facto , by several factors and I think that it is important to make that clear here .
The first factor is the ratio between commitment appropriations and payment appropriations which the budgetary authority applies to the budget every year .
For the year 2000 , for example , the budget contained approximately EUR 4 billion more in commitment appropriations than in funds for payments .
The second factor relates to the take-up of these budgetary funds , i.e. both commitment appropriations and payment appropriations .
Finally , the release of commitments for which no more payment applications are expected , so-called sleeping commitments , a somewhat misleading term meaning commitments which obviously will no longer be converted to specific commitments and specific payment commitments , also plays a not inconsiderable role .
However , the Commission is unable to subscribe to the honourable Member ' s view that delays in implementing Community projects robs them of any legitimate purpose ; on the contrary .
As soon as the Commission comes to the conclusion that no more substantiated payment applications are expected for a project , for example because the project has been suspended or abandoned , it orders the corresponding commitments to be released .
This applied to a sum of around EUR 1 billion in 1999 .
I should stress that the time lag between overall commitment appropriations and their conversion to specific projects is a feature of many Union programmes .
This applies , for example , to multiannual programmes and the most important in quantitative terms are the Structural Funds , which are subject to shared administration , with the Commission making commitment appropriations which are then converted into specific projects at Member State level .
In order to reduce the time lag between promises , specific projects and payment , the budgetary authorities need to decide on a balanced ratio between commitment and payment appropriations and there needs to be real pressure to speed up the implementation of programmes .
The Commission has discussed precisely this today as part of the debate on the revision of the financial regulation and I can assure you that we intend to change the rules in order to tighten up the time scale .
I hope that we can count on your support .
Thank you for your answer .
I am pleased that the Commission really has taken note of the problem and intends doing what it can to ensure that the payments are made more quickly .
Commissioner Patten pointed out a while ago in the Committee on Budgets that , within category 4 , there are eight and a half year-old commitments which have still not been paid out .
This state of affairs indicates either that we have major problems in implementing the budget efficiently or that we ought , in fact , to have some kind of deadline or time limit which would be much tougher when it came to writing off old commitments .
Perhaps both these matters are problems which the Commission ought , in that case , to do something about .
I should like to inform the honourable Member that an analysis has shown that it takes approximately one and a half years to convert commitment appropriations into specific contracts .
That is all well and good , but there are also old , sleeping commitments and you may be interested to know that another 20 posts were recently made available , in addition to the 60 posts decided for the SCR last December , in order to see which commitments no longer apply and can be cleared up .
I should like to offer my warmest thanks for your suggestion .
That is exactly the approach which the Commission will take during the revision of the financial regulation and I am therefore sure of at least one person ' s support in Parliament .
Mr President , what I would like to know is , do you think that prompt payment by the European institutions , as set out in the late payment directive currently in the pipeline , might result in a clear improvement to the image of the European Union ?
Do you intend to use benchmarking or best practice methods ?
The honourable Member is right ; it is in fact fundamental if the Union ' s reputation is to be enhanced that both the time lag which I mentioned between promises , to call a spade a spade , and specific contracts must be reduced and payments must be made when invoices , i.e. substantiated payment applications are filed .
Of course benchmarking means that no more than 60 days should lapse and , as I said , more and more payments are being settled within this period .
Of course the aim is to have few , if any exceptions .
Thank you very much , Mrs Schreyer .
Since the time allotted to Mrs Schreyer has elapsed , Question No 39 will be replied to in writing .
Question No 40 by ( H-0332 / 00 ) :
Subject : Institutional reform In the Action Plan on Reform it is stated that an ' external legal expert ' should sit in an advisory capacity on Disciplinary boards .
What is the excact definition of this ' external legal expert ' , and what legal expertise will this person be required to have ?
The Commission is at present implementing , or preparing legal grounds for implementing , the different actions set out in the White Paper on reforming the Commission .
In his question the honourable Member is probably referring to actions 57 and 58 of the Reform Strategy Action Plan which , amongst other things , specifies commitment to making proposals for the establishment of an interinstitutional disciplinary board .
The Action Plan does not , however , specify that an external legal expert should sit on the board .
The Commission will be presenting detailed proposals for the modernisation of disciplinary procedures and related arrangements in a consultative document which is scheduled for publication in October .
The document will include recommendations for improving administrative procedures and for making relevant amendments to the Staff Regulations .
Consultation on those proposals is a legal requirement and the views of Parliament and Member States , as well as those of the staff , will naturally be taken into account on all relevant matters , including the possible use of external expertise on the interinstitutional disciplinary board .
I thank the Commissioner for his reply .
Following on from the Van Buitenen affair and the Commission 's fairly lamentable reaction to it , is there not a case that these disciplinary boards - and especially those called for whistle-blowers - should be independent of the Commission altogether ?
. I am grateful to the honourable Member for his question .
The affair of Mr van Buitenen was conducted completely in compliance with the existing Staff Regulations and however tested , I am sure that any fair-minded person is bound to come to that conclusion .
So far as whistle-blowing is concerned , and as the honourable Member may know , we will be putting forward very comprehensive proposals for radical change in current arrangements which will , when they are implemented - hopefully with the assistance of this Parliament as a legislature - provide the European Union institutions with the best , fairest and most effective system for ensuring that the duty of officials to report their suspicions of wrong-doing will be fully accessible and made totally effective .
Question No 41 by ( H-0342 / 00 ) :
Subject : Institutional reform At present , ' whistle-blowing ' means that a member of the Commission staff has to breach Articles 12 and 17 of the Staff Regulations , accordingly , if someone does come forward as a whistle-blower , he / she will almost certainly be disciplined .
Point 47 of your action plan makes reference to this situation but offers no remedy for it .
How do you plan to address this ?
Are your staff currently examining this problem and , if so , which members of your Cabinet or Directorate-General are actively involved in finding a solution to this contradiction ?
Questions to Mr Byrne
. Mr President , the honourable Member 's question refers to the Commission 's proposals on whistle-blowing in the consultative document on reform adopted by the Commission on 18 January 2000 .
Following that , more detailed orientations were set out in the White Paper on reforming the Commission which was adopted , published and presented to this Parliament on 1 March .
In specific response to the honourable Member 's question , Articles 12 and 17 of the current Staff Regulations do not prevent members of staff from reporting wrong-doing within the Commission and it is consequently not the case that officials have to breach the regulations in order to properly report suspicions or concerns .
In addition , last June the Commission decision implementing the regulation establishing the anti-fraud office , OLAF , explicitly made the provision that officials and servants of the Commission , and I quote , " who become aware of evidence which gives rise to the presumption of the existence of possible cases of fraud , corruption or any other illegal activities detrimental to the interest of the Communities " are obliged to inform their hierarchy or the Secretary-General or the Director of the European anti-fraud office , OLAF .
That legal text also specifically guarantees that officials and other servants of the Commission shall , and I quote , " in no way suffer inequitable or discriminatory treatment as a result of having communicated such information " .
It follows that Articles 12 and 17 of the Staff Regulations do not prevent staff from reporting wrong-doing either within the Commission or to OLAF .
In neither case would disciplinary action result from making such reports .
In the White Paper on reform and elsewhere , the Commission has made direct commitments to reforms which will further improve rules related to the reporting of suspected wrong-doing .
More precise rules on the rights and obligations of officials to report wrong-doing through internal channels and to OLAF are required , and rules defining external channels for the reporting of alleged wrong-doing need to be compiled and proposed , as they will be .
These rules on whistle-blowing will be put forward for introduction into the amended Staff Regulations and officials who follow them would not be subject to disciplinary action .
The Commission will present detailed proposals in a document scheduled for October of this year .
As the law requires , consultations on those proposals will be undertaken with staff and with the other European Union institutions .
Preparatory work on the proposals is progressing under the Director-General for Administration .
One member of my cabinet has specialist responsibility for reform of personnel policy , including whistle-blowing , and others are naturally actively involved in the overall issue .
Further to my question , as the Commissioner has just stated , the Commission is now drawing up its " whistle-blowing " charter to a certain extent . Will this be framed , for example , along the lines of the Swedish Government 's or the British Government 's rules on whistle-blowing ?
Could the Commissioner inform Parliament as to the exact circumstances in which Paul van Buitenen now finds himself ?
Is he still being disciplined by the Commission and has any of his pay which was docked in the past been refunded to him ?
I am grateful to the honourable Member for his question .
Firstly , the development of the proposals relating to whistle-blowing will take full account of best practice in several of the Member States .
The Commission is acutely aware of the provision long established in Nordic democracies , recently developed also in the Public Disclosure Act in the United Kingdom , and several other comparable pieces of legislation .
As the honourable Member would expect , this institution will take account of the breadth of provision and seek to ensure that in terms of accessibility , usability and career security we provide the best possible attainable system to ensure effective whistle-blowing because we believe it to be appropriate as a complement to good conduct in an international publicly accountable administration .
As far as Mr van Buitenen is concerned , he took up employment on 1 April in the Directorate-General for Health and Consumer Protection in Luxembourg in a very responsible job , as the House would expect .
He is not currently the subject of any disciplinary procedure and the honourable Member should be aware that immediately after he ended his period of suspension last April Mr van Buitenen 's full pay , conditions , status and pension rights were restored , as were his rights in all other respects .
I reported to this House previously that Mr van Buitenen , a short time after ending his period of suspension , was informed that he had a right to seek employment in any of the European Union institutions in a job for which he was qualified .
He made a couple of applications , one of which was for a job in the Commission .
He was successful in that application and I am pleased to say that he was duly appointed .
We thank Vice-President Kinnock for his replies .
Since the time allotted to Mr Kinnock has elapsed , Questions Nos 42 and 43 will be replied to in writing .

As the authors are not present , Questions Nos 44 to 48 lapse .
Question No 49 by ( H-0284 / 00 ) :
Subject : Møllergårdens Vivaldi - a Shetland pony The Committee on Petitions decided on 15 May 1997 to examine a case concerning the Shetland pony , Møllergårdens Vivaldi , from Denmark , which the Swedish authorities refused to register as a stallion in Sweden .
In an answer dated 29 October 1997 , the Commission concluded that the Swedish authorities were in breach of Commission Decision 96 / 78 of 10 January 1996 and Council Directive 90 / 427 of 26 June 1990 .
The Swedes have since changed the rules .
However , the Commission has not yet established whether the Swedish authorities are now complying with current EU rules .
Information received this year from the Swedish Shetland Society indicates that the Swedes are not complying with the rules in that a pony must still have been shown in a stallion prize competition before it can be used in Sweden .
In order to be approved for breeding in Sweden , a stallion must undergo an examination of its pedigree to be entered in the Swedish national register .
This must be contrary to EU rules as it is to be expected that a stallion which is already approved in one Member State should automatically be approved in another Member State .
Is the Commission of the opinion that the Swedish authorities are complying with common rules ?
If not , how will the Commission ensure that the Swedish authorities comply with EU legislation in this respect ?
A first-class Danish Shetland pony stallion named Vivaldi and his progeny were denied entry into the main section of the Swedish Shetland pony stud book .
The dispute between what I might describe as a courageous private breeder from one Member State and a breeding association in another Member State , reflects shortcomings in implementation by Member States of both the spirit and letter of related Community law , in particular Directive 90 / 427 on zootechnical and genealogical conditions governing intra-Community trade in Equidae .
I wish to remind you that it is the responsibility of the Member States to ensure that any dispute is settled by action to be taken by the competent authorities in cooperation with the organisation maintaining the stud book of the same breed or even the stud book of origin of the breed .
The Commission , following its inquiries , was officially assured that the Swedish stud book rules had been aligned with EC legislation .
However , in the light of new information , the Commission undertakes to take up the case again and to arrange for a zootechnical inspection mission , should this be required .
I should like to thank you for your answer .
I assume that the Commission will take immediate action on this matter , or will it be a case of the Commission having to be approached again before anything is done ?
I should like to point out that what we are concerned with here is an individual citizen whose livelihood has been affected .
It is a matter costing an incredible amount of money .
As some of us who have been involved with the equine trade know , there is a great deal of money at stake here .
It has cost an ordinary citizen , who has made a business out of horses , an incredible amount of money because Swedish associations have not been willing to approve his stallion .
I would therefore ask whether it is once again necessary to make an application in connection with this matter . Given all the talk currently of the Commission doing something for citizens , might not , rather , the Commission be expected to take the initiative directly ?
I thank the Member for her supplementary question .
As I indicated earlier , this is essentially a matter between two Member States .
The Danish Breeding Association , in my opinion , should have taken up this issue with the Swedish Association .
It is not really the role of the Commission to develop this issue further but it is doing so in the manner I have indicated in an effort to assist the private breeder who - I perfectly agree with you - should not be compelled to have to go through these steps to seek a result in this particular issue .
As I have indicated , in the light of new information , the Commission undertakes to take up this case again and , if necessary , to arrange for a zootechnical inspection mission , should this be required .
The way Question Time is run is not acceptable .
Firstly , it does not start on time .
We had group meetings ; I was watching the screen and you jumped from Question 41 to 49 .
That makes it impossible for Members to be here .
In addition , Question Time did not start at the time stated on the agenda .
How are we meant to function in this way ?
It makes it virtually impossible for us and is not a fair procedure .
Mrs McKenna , today ' s Question Time has been ratified by the plenary in this House .
It was explained this morning at the beginning of the sitting , we have accepted certain rules and we have skipped questions when the authors have not been present .
I am therefore very sorry that we now have to conclude Question Time .
We especially thank Mr Byrne who has been here all afternoon so that he could answer questions .
Since the time allotted to questions to the Commission has elapsed , Questions Nos 50 to 93 will be replied to in writing .
That concludes Questions to the Commission .
( The siting was suspended at 8.10 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m. )

Situation in Turkey
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on Turkey .
. ( PT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today marks a very important step in relations between Turkey and the European Union , particularly in terms of putting the Helsinki conclusions into practice .
There had been no meeting of the Association Council between Turkey and the Union for three years and nor had there been any meeting of this kind after the deliberations and the criteria laid down in Helsinki . This was an important meeting with an agenda that included not only relevant points of political dialogue , but also practical decisions which will translate into a step forward in the negotiating process .
They will do so specifically by establishing eight sub-committees , which will now enable the Commission , in this case represented by Commissioner Verheugen , to rigorously prepare the screening exercise and also to start negotiations on public services and markets . These are negotiations which will increase the present level of trade liberalisation between the Union and Turkey .
By implementing the Helsinki criteria and having made progress in the country itself , Turkey has made significant steps towards these negotiations , which it is important to bear in mind . It has been gradually committing itself to implementing or to adopting a huge range of institutional and legislative changes .
This is progress in the right direction , progress which is still of course experiencing delays and interruptions , and only seeing the process through will ensure that this progress meets with complete success .
Hence the importance of holding the screening procedure that is being prepared and the importance of Turkey ' s commitment to incorporating the body of Community legislation and also to respecting the Copenhagen criteria .
In our political dialogue with the Turkish delegation , we were able not only to assess the progress made , but also to comment on what we felt were shortcomings at institutional and judicial level and also in terms of the actual implementation of economic policies .
Today ' s meeting will be followed up at the forthcoming meeting of an association committee , which will study these issues in greater detail .
It should also be pointed out that there was a very constructive approach to the preparations for this Association Council with regard to drafting a joint position , which was adopted by the fifteen members of the Association Council .
This meant of course that very thorough work was undertaken with the Greek delegation too , which is following this issue with a sense of importance worthy of Athenian diplomacy . Now , however , the delegation is also guided by the spirit of a diplomatic rapprochement , which has been seen in relation to its neighbouring country since the earthquake that devastated Turkey and the consequent expression of solidarity by Greece .
This progress in the bilateral relationship will have considerable influence on progress on this issue in the future , on the relationship between the two countries and will certainly contribute , as will these negotiations between the European Union and Turkey , to establishing a favourable framework and environment for a solution to the problem of Cyprus .
We are working in the right direction .
There are shortcomings , but this right and safe direction is also the only one that will enable the great country that Turkey is to take the appropriate steps for its economic and institutional modernisation and for its complete integration into modern democratic society .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I welcome today ' s debate as an opportunity to take stock , four months after the Helsinki summit and in the run up to the Association Council which the President-in-Office has already spoken about .
The Helsinki resolution brought about a net and lasting improvement in relations between the EU and Turkey .
At last , it is again possible to discuss all issues openly and critically .
Stronger political dialogue is again taking place at all levels .
Today ' s sitting has been marked by a constructive and open discussion ; as a result I am able to say that the overall balance is highly promising even if , as always in such cases , there are both positive and negative aspects .
Above all , Helsinki confirmed that compliance with the political accession criteria was the sine qua non to starting negotiations .
The Copenhagen political criteria concern democracy , the rule of law , human rights and the protection of minorities .
Turkey does not yet meet these criteria , which is why negotiations will not start until they do .
In the meantime , however , Turkey and the other candidate countries will start to benefit from a strategy of rapprochement and stronger political dialogue .
The main element in this strategy of rapprochement will be the accession partnership which is currently being prepared and which will set out the short- and medium-term priorities which Turkey must meet , in accordance with the Copenhagen criteria , in the political , economic and Community acquis areas .
We plan to submit the first accession partnership in the autumn of this year .
I think that the accession partnership will be a central instrument in speeding up the process of political and economic reform in Turkey and we made it quite clear in the discussions held in Brussels , Luxembourg and Ankara that this accession partnership must address important questions in connection with the democratisation process and human rights .
The President-in-Office has already spoken about screening and I need say no more on that subject .
I should , however , like to say a few more words about the political situation in Turkey .
I am sure that you will agree that a series of incidents over recent months has given real cause for concern .
For example , 18 members of the pro-Kurdish HADEP Party were sentenced to three years and nine months in prison and three leading members of HADEP were taken into custody but then released shortly afterwards .
The three mayors who support HADEP were released after the EU troika had expressed its serious concerns to the Turkish Government .
I particularly regret that Akin Birdal , whose health clearly continues to give cause for concern , was returned to prison on 28 March to serve his four-and-a-half month sentence .
The Commission seriously regrets that Akin Birdal , an advocate of the peaceful solution of conflict and human rights , has been thrown into jail once again .
I am sorry that the opportunity was not taken to suspend imprisonment on humanitarian grounds .
I think that everything points to the urgent need to tackle reforms in a decisive manner and to ensure that freedom of expression is properly protected .
I should like , nonetheless , to draw Parliament ' s attention to something which bodes well for the future ; I refer to the interministerial government committee in Turkey which is currently advising on the reforms which need to be implemented in order to comply with the political criteria .
This interministerial committee will submit a report - an initial draft was published in the Turkish press recently and the final report will probably be submitted in June - containing specific proposals on political reforms and the legislative changes needed .
I think it is important for you , honourable Members , to bring pressure to bear in future contacts with the Turkish side , especially the Turkish parliament , in order to ensure that the relevant reform proposals are also accepted .
From an economic point of view , Turkey is in a position to make rapid progress .
It has a clear strategy for structural reform , which is supported by the IMF and the World Bank .
I hope that Turkey can cultivate social dialogue and an active labour market policy still further in order to underpin the adjustment process .
The country has a dynamic economy and a highly entrepreneurial population , which will benefit from a more balanced and transparent growth model based on the EU acquis .
Our relations with Turkey entered a new stage after Helsinki and making progress with the new tasks represents a challenge for both sides .
Of course I shall continue to keep you informed of all aspects of these new endeavours .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , your statements have reinforced a belief and an impression I have .
I believe that the journey on which we embarked at Helsinki will be a long one and that no one is yet able to predict where it will end , except in Turkey ' s assuming an important position either inside or outside of the European Union .
The public and private sector spokesmen we recently met in Turkey all readily agreed on this .
My feeling is that certain representatives of the Turkish people are discovering , as a result of December ' s decision , that accession to the Union will mean not only drastic reform of their institutions , but also radical changes in mindsets .
This is reflected in the distrust shown , as the Commissioner has just reported , towards European institutions in general and the representatives of the European Parliament in particular .
Firstly , there was the refusal of the request to visit Leyla Zana , which resulted in the postponement of the meeting of the joint European Union-Turkey Parliamentary Committee scheduled for 22 and 23 February .
Then , on the same day , at a time when your rapporteur was in Ankara , there was the arrest of three Kurdish mayors from the south-eastern region .
Lastly , on 28 March , there was the arrest and reimprisonment of Akin Birdal , President of the Turkish Association for the Defence of Human Rights , at a time when a delegation from this Parliament was visiting Turkey .
I would ask the Council and the Commission whether it would not be appropriate , given the circumstances , to state quite clearly that while the Union is not in the business of telling anyone what to do , it is founded on the will to promote and safeguard certain fundamental values , prominent among which are respect for human rights and the rights and duties of minorities .
This is what Parliament will once again underline in the resolution , which is to be submitted for the approval of the Members next Thursday , urging the Turkish Government and the political parties of Turkey to turn to good account the constitutional review that is currently in progress in order to implement pressing reforms , in line with the Helsinki Agreements , that will enable the Turkish State to guarantee the democratic rights that we consider essential .
The ball is in Turkey ' s court . It is up to Turkey to decide whether the first obstacles encountered on this new road are to prove insurmountable or not .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am pleased to hear that both the President-in-Office and the Commissioner have taken stock of the first four months and have come to the conclusion that the climate surrounding relations between the Union and Turkey and the potential for discussion have improved .
We MEPs are particularly pleased because most of us - and this cut across all Groups in the House - expressed our scepticism as to whether the Helsinki resolution was the right resolution at the time .
The European Council in Helsinki did what it was entitled to do and passed a resolution which , when it was passed in Helsinki , incorporated certain expectations of the Turkish side and here the European Parliament is in agreement with the European Council .
Commissioner Verheugen has just recapitulated these expectations .
He has spoken of democracy , the rule of law and the protection of minorities as three basic elements in the expectations which the European Union , the Commission , the Council and the European Parliament have of Turkey and which they have formulated .
Four months after Helsinki , Commissioner , I can say on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists that we fully subscribe to your view that the climate surrounding relations has improved but no progress has been made on the three points which you listed .
It is difficult to discern any further democratic developments during these first four months .
Even progress with the protection of minorities leaves much to be desired and we are somewhat sceptical about the question of the rule of law .
You mentioned the example of Akin Birdal and Turkey must look at this example and ask itself how it intends to make us believe that progress is being made in the areas referred to when incidents occur within the country which , in my opinion , are typified by the example of Mr Birdal .
Mr Birdal advocates peace .
Mr Birdal advocates solving the problem of minorities without violence .
Mr Birdal ' s reputation as a human rights activist extends well beyond the borders of Turkey .
The way in which the Turkish Government has dealt with Mr Birdal , the way in which the Turkish judicial system has dealt with this man seems to be typical of the manner in which Turkey proposes to deal with people who stand for exactly what the European Union is demanding of Turkey .
If politics contains symbolic messages then , in my opinion , the Turkish judicial system has committed a serious error four months on from Helsinki in treating Mr Birdal this way .
We in the European Parliament expect far greater efforts than those made so far and we are assuming that what we are saying in this debate here will not go unheeded .
Mr President , when Turkey joins the European Union the impact and the benefits will be considerable .
The EU will then have to adjust , and in a welcoming way .
But , in the shorter term , it is Turkey which has to adjust the most , in particular to meet the Copenhagen political criteria .
I am glad the Commissioner stressed these .
We cannot fulfil our role of critical friend by soft-pedalling on the need for drastic change , particularly with regard to guaranteeing individual freedom and a legitimate right to the Kurds .
Indeed the key to reform is ending the war against the Kurds , which gives the pretext for the state of emergency and the repression that goes with it .
The Kurds deserve a peaceful settlement involving a degree of political devolution and respect for their cultural and linguistic rights .
To say this is not to be anti-Turkish .
Will not other Turkish citizens benefit also ?
The arrest and imprisonment of HADEP leaders like Sakharov prize-winner Leyla Zana and human rights campaigner Akin Birdal is an impediment to Turkey 's progress to the EU .
To allow the European Parliament to vote for Turkey 's accession when the time comes , reformers in Europe and Turkey must work together to lobby for change , as the Commissioner advised .
Mr President , the majority of my Group supported the Commission ' s policy on Turkey and the resolution passed by the Council in Helsinki .
It was and is extremely important to us that the candidate status granted to Turkey should bring about fundamental changes to democracy and hence the way in which human rights are dealt with within Turkey .
We were pleased to acknowledge the declaration by the Turkish Prime Minister that Turkey would meet the Copenhagen criteria as quickly as possible .
The decision to defer the death sentence on Mr Öçalan was also welcomed as a step in the right direction .
However , we were then forced to acknowledge a number of incidents which we were and are unable to accept .
The mayors belonging to HADEP were arrested and we rightly criticised this move .
We are pleased that the Turkish Government reacted quickly and the mayors were released but we shall monitor the court case against them .
The former president of the Turkish human rights association , Akin Birdal , is again under arrest , despite the fact that he requires medical care .
Unfortunately , he must serve another six months of a one-year sentence .
We realise that the measures needed to guarantee the permanent democratisation of Turkish society cannot be introduced overnight .
However , a number of small steps are urgently needed in order to demonstrate that Turkey is prepared to take the path trodden by Spain , Portugal and Greece .
Turkey must at last abolish the death penalty , the only country in Europe yet to do so .
And we should not have to wait for a reform policy on the Kurdish question .
Today ' s report from Luxembourg is good news but we would say , nonetheless , that Turkey must realise that respect for human rights and minority rights are prerequisite to any accession negotiations .
We are prepared to be patient as far as the speed of democratisation is concerned .
But we will not accept a standstill on this issue .
When my fellow Member Daniel Cohn-Bendit visited Leyla Zana , she said to him - and I think to us too - that we should support the reforms in Turkey and that the Helsinki resolution was Turkey ' s only chance .
In this sense we shall continue to support the Helsinki process .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , whoever wants to join the EU must meet the Copenhagen criteria and abolish the death penalty .
Including Turkey .
Despite frequent promises by the Turkish Government , human rights violations continue there .
I should like to list a few examples . The Kurdistan Democratic Party has been exposed to attack since 20 February .
Three Kurdish mayors belonging to HADEP were arrested recently and then released but are not allowed to leave Turkey .
Then the former and present leaders of HADEP , Murat Bozlak and Ahmet Turan Demir , were sentenced to three years and nine months in prison together with 18 other members of HADEP .
It was maintained that HADEP was supporting and helping the PKK which has opted for peace rather than war .
Akin Birdal has started serving the rest of his sentence .
Thousands of Turkish troops marched into northern Iraq at the beginning of April .
More than 50 000 soldiers are stationed on the border in order to fight the PKK , despite its call for peace .
Why are arms being delivered to Turkey ?
More than 300 000 people gathered for the Navruz festival in Diyarbakir under the banner " Peace , Brotherliness and Democracy " .
Having been there , my personal impression is that the people are longing for peace and democracy .
The leader of the ANAP , Mr Mesut Jilmaz , said at an event in Diyarbakir , that the way to the EU was via Diyarbakir .
I therefore call on the Turkish Government to respect human rights and to find a political solution to the Kurdish question .
Because the only way into Europe is via the Copenhagen criteria .
It will be the task of the European Commission and the Council to strengthen their commitment here .
At the moment , the most important task is to advance the democratisation of Turkey , which is why I call on everyone to unite without hesitation and to reinforce democracy and peace .
Mr President , all of us who have visited Turkey recently realise that the picture is very complex .
The first impression is that there is a sort of EU euphoria in Turkey when it comes to the media .
There is a very lively debate in the country . That is very important .
Secondly , the trade unions , popular movements , etc. all say the same thing .
They think it is positive that Turkey is a candidate country .
We even heard Akin Birdal , on the eve of his imprisonment , say that a new Turkey has been emerging in the last five months .
We must realise that we will have a lot of ups and downs in our relationship and that we will have both progress and setbacks .
Perhaps we are seeing something new being born .
But the old legal system is still there .
That is what is working against democratic fighters such as Akin Birdal .
But we also see the reformists who know very well what has to be done according to the Copenhagen criteria .
One party leader said to us that at least 65 articles of the constitution and penal code had to be changed .
When we spoke to people in that country during the Socialist Group visit we found three different approaches to EU membership .
First you have the anti-reformists , the fundamentalists and so on , who do not want membership .
And then you have the reformists - within the government , administration , human rights groups and other parts of civil society - who really want it . They certainly want membership .
Then you have a third group , who say that they want Turkey to become a member , but on Turkish terms .
Here the Copenhagen criteria , and the Commission and our screening are very important .
Almost automatically they will have to deliver if Turkey is to become a member one day .
There are two final impressions and messages received from the people we talked to during the two or three days we were there .
The first was that nothing will prevail without a strong civil society in Turkey .
People we met from civil society also said they appreciated the help from the European Union , but that some of it was slow .
We know that and we would like the Commission to look into that .
The other and last message is that yes , we have the road-map .
But we need more precision from the road-map . Help us to be more precise with the road-map because we want to follow it .
Mr President , the question of whether or not Turkey belongs to Europe is not primarily a geographical issue , nor is it primarily an economic one .
The deciding factor , however , will be whether or not Turkey will subscribe to a European set of values in which human rights , democracy and the protection of minorities are guaranteed .
This will not require any sacrifices , probably unlike Turkey ' s other issues , but it will be for the good of all inhabitants of Turkey itself .
The political solution to the Kurdish issue would not only liberate the Kurds , it would also take a heavy weight from Turkey ' s shoulders .
As a matter of fact , I am of the opinion that we should not aggravate the situation by supplying arms .
I myself am sceptical of Turkey joining the EU , but the current process may well promote peace and stability .
This is why we want to give Turkey the benefit of the doubt .
Whether or not Turkey will join may therefore depend largely on how it will fare in matters pertaining to human rights , democracy and the protection of minorities .
I would like to ask both the Council and the Commission to see things as they really are and not as they appear to be .
I should like to point out that in Helsinki , Greece withdrew its reservations and Turkey became a candidate country .
Greece has made a great many gestures of good will and good neighbourliness , a great many .
Turkey has made none .
Even today in the Association Council , Turkey ' s Foreign Minister , Mr Cem , said that there is no occupying army in Cyprus , only the army which entered Cyprus in order to liberate Greek and Turkish Cypriots alike .
I just wonder who have they been trying to liberate for the last 25 years , and from whom ?
Have they still not managed to do so ?
I would point out that , when we visited Turkey as Parliament ' s representatives , we asked to see Leyla Zana .
We were not allowed to see her because she was in prison .
Akin Birdal , who held talks with Mr Barón Crespo , was taken into prison while he was standing outside .
I just wonder if the Commission ' s regrets will help to get Akin Birdal out of prison tomorrow ?
Is that such a drastic step ?
Finally , I would like to say , to keep within the time permitted , that only two weeks ago , Turkish newspapers published a list of some 100 European journalists , parliamentarians and other individuals , including Archbishop Christodoulou of Greece , who are persona non grata in Turkey .
Today , Mr Cem dismissed the list as media hype ; but , at the end of the day , Turkey does in fact reserve the right to publish lists of persona non grata .
I should like to close by saying that I hope they will not get wind of what I have said here today and include me on this list , because I love Istanbul and I like to go there quite often .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , I was a member of the delegation from our Group which visited Turkey . I do not want to recount my experiences at length , I just want to tell you what my impression was .
It was one of disappointment . I am extremely disappointed that four months after obtaining candidate status , nothing serious has yet been done to move towards compliance with the Copenhagen criteria , especially the political criteria .
Commissioner , you mentioned the interministerial committee .
It is true that numerous structures are being set up .
I have been aware of this in Turkey since 1995 .
If they are obliged to comply with something , they start by setting up committees and commissions , interministerial , extraministerial , every sort of committee under the sun .
The structures are superb , we can all agree on that .
Except that they do nothing .
For example , it would have been very easy without any committees , without any commissions , to abolish Article 312 of the Criminal Code ; all it needed was a vote in the Turkish Grand National Assembly and that would have freed a whole series of intellectuals , authors , journalists and the very same Akin Birdal from jail .
That is how easy it is to take the first steps .
The Turks tell us they need time , they need a great deal of time , because this reform can only be achieved one step at a time .
I warned you about that .
I told you that numerous fellow Members here in this very House , in the European Parliament , were prepared to allow as much time as they needed , 200 years , 400 years , even more .
But I belong to a Group which enthusiastically helped Turkey to achieve candidate status , not just so that Turkey could be a candidate but to give Turkey a real chance to become a member and start negotiations .
Which is why we want to insist and want to press for Turkey to be helped on its way with a road map and a specific timetable and , of course the accession partnership which the Commissioner referred to earlier , and not just to remain a candidate .
Mr President , Turkey was granted candidate status at the Helsinki Summit , but accession negotiations must go on hold until the necessary internal reforms have been introduced and the human rights situation complies with European principles .
During your recent visit to Ankara , Commissioner Verheugen , you too drew attention to the fact that continuing human rights abuses , the failure to establish rule of law and the fact that no solution had been found to the Kurdish question stood in the way of Turkey ' s accession to the EU in the near future .
The unequivocal shortcomings in this area contrast with statements by Prime Minister Ecevit to the effect that Turkey may be ready to start accession negotiations in 2004 .
A number of factors which have been listed here several times already make this sort of prognosis appear premature .
Even the fact that the head of government , Mr Ecevit , described Kurdish as a dialect of Turkish , despite the fact that the two languages have fundamentally different roots , is an indication of the hardening of the political situation in Turkey .
The fact that all this has been accompanied by a recent offensive against the PKK in northern Iraq only adds to this impression .
There can be no question of the European Union having any interest in increasing Islamic fundamentalism in Turkey or of wanting to encourage the Trotskyist PKK , which is also guilty of massive human rights violations , to engage in new clashes .
However , one has the impression that anti-European forces within the army and the administration are behind the recent arrests and the new offensive against the PKK in northern Iraq in order to prevent Turkey from moving closer to Europe .
This demonstrates in retrospect that the concessions made to Turkey in Helsinki were perhaps premature and that the strategy towards this country , which is so important to western security , needs to be reviewed .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have visited Turkey three times in the last six months , once before and twice after the Helsinki resolution .
I experienced surprise after surprise and also disappointment after disappointment .
The situation is in fact as a number of fellow Members have described it .
There are forces which are fighting strongly to move closer to the European Union and there are other forces which reverse all their efforts by carrying out attacks and by putting Akin Birdal back in jail , thereby provoking the pro-European forces .
It is of course a good sign that the Turkish Government now has a written programme setting out the action which Turkey must take on the basis of the demands of the European Union .
And it must take it , because paper alone is cheap .
Changes need to be made here .
The changes also affect the national security council which , according to this proposal , now needs to be reorganised as an advisory council and is no longer the final supreme instance of Turkish democracy or Turkish relations .
It is , of course , a bad sign that there is one incident after another , such as the arrest of Akin Birdal who , as Mr Schori said , has such a positive attitude to the changes in Turkey itself .
It is also a bad sign that no gradual solution has been found to the Kurdish question , the prerequisites for which are much improved today although , Mrs Stenzel , I am unaware of any statement by Ecevit that Kurdish is a Turkish dialect .
What Ecevit said to us was that there were several Kurdish dialects and that he could even imagine Kurdish being used as an official language in Turkey under certain conditions .
I should like to urge you , Mr President-in-Office , to work together with the other fourteen Member States of the European Union to ensure that the European Investment Bank is finally authorised to give Turkey financial support .
It is not easy to ward off criticism in connection with the financial protocol to the effect that we have not kept our promises to support the modernisation and the restructuring of Turkey financially .
My last point is this : of course we are also aware in this House that the question of Turkey , including its relations with Greece , is bound up with the Cyprus issue .
If we could manage to make Turkey more open and more cooperative on the Cyprus question , that would be a very positive development .
However , I should like to say quite clearly on behalf of our Group and , I believe , on behalf of many others , that unless Turkey itself does what it has to on the question of human rights and democracy , even if is cooperative on the issue of Cyprus , and unless Turkey shows that it is willing to change its internal democratic system , there can be no accession to Europe .
Mr President , the discussion here today is quite an interesting one ; nonetheless , we should see to it that Turkey is judged in light of the clear-cut European criteria and that Greco-Turkish relations are not used as a fig leaf to mask a different reality .
I would like to add two or three minor points .
Turkey has its internal problems , but it has its external problems , too .
It could , for instance , show willing by accepting the jurisdiction of the court in The Hague , or the Court of Human Rights .
But no , this is not the case .
Secondly , in our endeavours to help Turkey integrate into the European Union , we must be strict when it comes to compliance with the political requirements we have laid down .
In this sense , if we try to paint a skewed picture of reality , then of course it will be a false one .
And in politics , false realities produce false results .
As for the problems cited by Turkey , there is Kemal Ataturk ' s theory which says that " there is a danger that our unity will crumble and henceforth we should not say that we are Turks , we should say that we call ourselves Turks " .
There is a huge difference in meaning , because to say I am not a Turk , but I call myself a Turk leads some to reason that all nationalities should be ground together into one pulp from which a new human race can evolve .
As you know , historically , such a thing is just not possible .
In this sense , it is clear that , first , the democratization of Turkey must be the most we can strive for and , at the same time , the very least and , secondly , we should put an end to Turkey ' s fears that it will crumble as a nation if its recognizes the rights it should be according minority groups , because there are not only the Kurdish minorities , there are also Arabs , crypto-Christians , and other minority groups .
In any case , what is certain is that if we do want to help Turkey , we must insist that the political criteria are respected , and I would like to add the following : to date at least , as far as I know , the only real forces in Turkey in favour of the European strategy are the forces of economy and we should bear this in mind .
. ( PT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank all the Members of the European Parliament for their contributions to this debate .
I have not interpreted their opinions and points of view as giving a red light to this policy , which says ' no , this policy is wrong and we want a different one .
We want to deny Turkey the right ever to join the European Union ' .
No !
Nobody said that !
And this is something upon which we agree .
I considered the speeches to be demanding ones , calling for the whole process to be scrutinised thoroughly .
The European Parliament obviously has an important role to play in this .
Turkey will not be admitted to the European Union without the European Parliament ' s approval .
Well , the decisions made at Helsinki are demanding ones , with clear benchmarks , and we are not currently negotiating Turkey ' s accession to the European Union .
Turkey has merely been recognised as a candidate .
In fact , as long ago as 1963 , the Ankara Agreement established the possibility that Turkey might join the European Union , with the association agreement to evolve through an initial stage , a transitional stage and a final stage .
The Copenhagen criteria are clear and Turkey must not be discriminated against , either positively or negatively .
Furthermore , the very fact that we are currently making good progress with the planned enlargement of the Union to include Central and Eastern Europe enables us to prove that Turkey is not being discriminated against .
On the contrary , it is being given equal treatment , in the sense that it must comply with a body of legislation , it must amend its own laws and it must behave in the same way in this process as the other countries that have applied for membership .
I can tell you that the Commission is not carrying out an assessment even now .
This has not yet started , but the Commission has been instructed to prepare it .
The Commission is involved in bilateral discussions with Turkey in order to provide it with information on the acquis communautaire .
We have not even moved to the negotiating stage in which the assessment will be undertaken in a multilateral context , with the participation of all countries .
We are , therefore , at an exploratory stage .
We are giving Turkey powerful messages about the need for it to reform itself through its institutions , its laws and its administrative procedures .
We in the Association Council have been very strict with Turkey and Turkey has , to some extent , recognised shortcomings and has stated its willingness to improve them , in particular with regard to laws governing the press , criminal law and the way in which citizenship rights are recognised , specifically in the cultural and language fields .
I think that here too , real progress has been made , although perhaps not progress which has a clear legal form yet .
There have also been steps backwards and we have expressed our deep disappointment at the fate of the leader of one of the most representative human rights organisations , and that of certain council leaders and politicians who have recently been arrested .
It is obvious that the Turkish political process is a complex one .
However , something that can be acknowledged today is that , contrary to what used to happen in crisis situations , when Turkey was always tempted to use military power or to use extremist internal forces , thanks to the guidelines and the frameworks that were laid down in Helsinki , this strategy has contributed in Turkey to the consolidation of pro-European forces , which will , of course , have to develop a completely pro-European programme in terms of constitutional reform , political changes and new legislation .
Criticism must be levelled at the Turks , not in order to prevent them from continuing in this process , but we must monitor the situation closely so that they can implement the changes necessary for this process to continue successfully .
Mr President , I should like to subscribe to the President-in-Office ' s evaluation and to say that I feel this debate was helpful and supports the line which the Commission has followed .
It does not matter that Parliament has taken a more critical stance than I am able to do at present , for reasons which you will understand .
I have drawn the Turkish Government ' s , the Turkish parties ' and the Turkish parliament ' s attention to the role of the European Parliament in ensuring that no political compromises are made with candidates during access negotiations and in Turkey ' s preparations for access negotiations which contradict the Copenhagen criteria .
I should like to expressly stress here that there can be no discounts for anyone , including Turkey , when it comes to accession conditions .
I should also like to repeat here what I have said on previous occasions : we must be conscious of the fact that the process which we have now set in motion will not be without its setbacks .
I do not know what is easy and what is difficult to do in Turkey .
But I do know one thing and that is that a debate is currently taking place in Turkey of which we only hear a part , a debate which will decide on the fate of the country and , partly on the fate of Europe too .
It is in our interests that the reform-orientated , democratic , pro-Europe forces carry the motion in this debate .
I should like to close by saying that we are still just right at the beginning .
We are in fact at the beginning of the beginning .
We are only just preparing the pre-accession strategy .
We have no pre-accession strategy yet which is why I think it is slightly premature to start talking about disappointments or about the need for a new strategy .
By definition , strategies only deserve to be called such when they can go the whole course .
I therefore advise on a little patience here .
We shall see things more clearly , we shall know what specific progress we can expect in the autumn , once all the elements of the pre-accession strategy have been defined and once we have received Turkey ' s reply .
This reply must be given this year and must refer clearly and unequivocally to what we expect of Turkey and must tell us exactly what Turkey intends to do .
That will be the time to say more than was possible today in this cautious evaluation .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the next voting session .
Deliberate release into the environment of GMOs
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0083 / 2000 ) by Mr Bowe , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council directive amending Directive 90 / 220 / EEC on the deliberate release into the environment of genetically modified organisms ( 11216 / 1 / 1999 - C5-0012 / 2000 - 1998 / 0072 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , I think that today the European Parliament is faced with one of its more important debates in the last few years , given that it is dealing with the dangers of the release of genetically modified organisms into our environment .
It seems to me that this vote could be a watershed .
It would , we hope , give us a new tough set of rules that would ensure that genetically modified crops and other GMO products are used throughout Europe in a safe and sensible way that ensures protection of the environment and guarantees the safety of public health .
There are a number of critical issues which need to be addressed .
The first and the most important is the issue of producer liability .
The European Parliament has long called for legislation which would ensure that companies that want to produce genetically modified organisms would be totally responsible for the products they produce .
In other words , under the terms of the amendments , companies would be required to take out insurance to cover any possible damage to human health or the environment caused by GMOs and could be sued if their crops escaped and created super-wheats or contaminated organic crops or if GM crops were found to damage human health .
Regrettably , instead of accepting their full responsibilities , a number of companies have been launching massive campaigns behind the scenes to try and stop this proposal from advancing .
I am in no doubt that when we have the discussion tomorrow many MEPs will be confused and perhaps split in their vote on this issue .
I feel that the compromise we have found with the Christian Democrats is one that is viable and workable and I hope it will find support here .
At the same time the European Commission can endorse it by giving further reassurances about their own proposals for such a liability measure .
I want to see that European Commission proposals have real teeth when it comes to this Parliament in the not too distant future .
In addition to that critical issue there are also a number of other important questions .
I hope that tomorrow my colleagues will renew their support , as they did at first reading , for the demands for strong new limits on the use of GMOs containing genes with resistance to antibiotics .
Parliament has in the past called for a ban on all GM crops and foods containing such antibiotic-resistant genes , even those used for research .
Tomorrow we may take a softer line , but nevertheless we want to see action in this area .
We want to ensure that serious consideration is given to the dangers of using these crops .
Other measures that I think we need - and on which I would seek the support of the Parliament tomorrow - include new measures to restrict the dangers of the cross-breeding of GMO plants with naturally occurring wild relatives .
We need to ensure that when products are placed in the field , whether they are plants or whether they are animals , they do not cross-breed and irreparably damage the balance that exists in the natural environment around them .
We must also address an issue which was avoided at first reading , and that is the question of the control of the import and export of GMO crops and other GMO products .
Here we need to go to at least as far and perhaps beyond the measures agreed in the Bio-Safety Protocol in Montreal in January .
Many people fear the possible consequences of genetic pollution and it is our job to respond to those fears .
Those fears have recently been heightened by the discovery of GMO-contaminated cotton-seed imported from the USA into Greece for cotton production , which for the moment at least has no approval at all for commercial planting within the EU but nevertheless has found its way across our borders and into use in at least one Member State .
We have been lobbied by very many groups during the process of developing this legislation .
Not just the industry but also Friends of the Earth and Greenpeace have given their backing to various aspects of Parliament 's report .
They have supported us in continuing to press the Council of Ministers to agree on new GMO rules on licensing as quickly as possible , to bring to an end the de facto moratorium on new GMO commercial approvals , which has been in operation since the Commission published its proposal almost two years ago .
The lobbying has become quite intense in the last few weeks .
The outcome of the vote in Parliament tomorrow is likely to bring a few shocks and surprises .
But it should mean that in six months ' time the European Parliament , the Council of Ministers and the Commission will have arrived at an agreed proposal , at a revised directive for the commercialisation of biotechnological inventions and biotechnological products .
That should give biotechnology companies and others involved in the industry a clear idea of the rules that they have adhere to and consequently a more transparent and predictable regime .
That can be only good for the future development of this new technology within the European Union .
At the same time , I would hope that our governments will be able to assure their consumers and their people that GMOs released into the environment anywhere in Europe will meet the much more stringent standards that we are fixing here in Parliament tomorrow and that the public concerns regarding the protection of human health and the environment from the dangers of GMO inventions have been properly addressed .
And I hope one of the significant non-legislative outcomes of this process will be a shift in the balance of power in the approval and control of GMO crops and food in favour of the public . For the biotechnology industry that can only be to the good .
It will create an atmosphere , a situation in which it can work carefully , thoroughly and I hope successfully to make positive use of this very brave new technology that we should all welcome , with the appropriate safeguards .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to start by thanking the rapporteur , David Bowe , for his hard work .
He really has tried to find compromises on this complicated issue but has not succeeded in finding compromises in all areas which all the Groups here in the House are able to support , which is why we shall be voting on one or two points tomorrow .
Those who know me know that I am not a blind advocate of genetic engineering .
Many aspects worry me .
I even have mixed feelings about the announcements which we heard last week on the almost complete decoding of the human genome because I think that we do not yet have enough strict rules in the European Union on the application of biotechnology to human beings in this way .
However , today we are debating the release of genetically modified organisms , especially plants .
And in my view , and in the view of the PPE , this is a different kettle of fish .
The common position is not too weak to guarantee public safety , as some would have us believe ; on the contrary , it is very , very strong .
It makes provision for a great many rules to govern monitoring , labelling and informing the public .
The common position offers an adequate level of safety for both man and the environment , which is why the PPE is against tightening up the common position , especially in certain critical areas .
If certain amendments calling for stricter provisions are accepted , then we can kiss biotechnology in the area of plants goodbye and we can totally ban it right away , but that is not what we want to do .
Take the example of genetic transfer .
All we hear about are Frankenstein plants and superweeds .
However , if you study the subject in detail , you will see that it is not a fact that cross-pollination from genetically modified plants is always an environmental disaster .
I have a key witness here .
The former research policy spokesperson for the Greens in the Bundestag once said that no Frankenstein plants were growing in the fields .
Unfortunately , the Greens did not nominate him again for the Bundestag , but he is right nonetheless , which is why we have tabled a motion stating that we should keep an eye on these risks but not totally ban genetic transfer .
We are also opposed to discrimination against biotechnology when it comes to liability .
We do not want specific genetic engineering liability , we want general environmental liability .
It has frequently been said that the Commission must be forced to do something at long last .
I share that view but we must first praise Mrs Wallström here : she promised during the hearing in the European Parliament that she would present a White Paper on environmental liability and she has done so .
Her predecessor failed to do so for several years and we should now move forward on the basis of this White Paper and decide on specific liability rules to be incorporated in the directive .
The common position is not too weak ; in our view it is too strong on certain points .
The general 10-year limitation on release consent is impracticable for plant cultivation , which is why we support the motion tabled here by David Bowe that the 10-year period should only apply from the first registration of the plants .
I think that the common position gives us good control of the risks .
We should not make the mistake of gambling away biotechnology ' s chances , which is why we shall not be voting in favour of all the tabled amendments .
I should like first of all to thank Mr Bowe for the work that has been done on the recommendation for second reading on amendment of the directive on the deliberate release into the environment of genetically modified organisms .
I think it is a very competent piece of work , and I think some important improvements have been made to the common position .
I shall single out the points I think are most important .
First and foremost , I think it is right that we should now have an actual ban proposed on the use of substances which can produce resistance to antibiotics .
I think it is important for health reasons .
The second point I would make is that , unlike Mr Liese , I am in favour of including proposals to the effect that measures should , if possible , be taken to prevent gene-transfer from GMOs to other organisms , otherwise known as GMO contamination .
I also think it is important that risks should not be assessed on a case-by-case basis when applications and requests concerning consents are examined . Instead , an attempt should be made to carry out an overall assessment of the accumulated effects of the many consents which are issued upon the fertility of the soil , the food chain , biological diversity and the health issues which are of importance to us as human beings .
I think that is a major flaw in current practice in this area .
In this connection , I also think that consents ought to be reviewed every ten years , so that they can only be issued for up to ten years at a time .
In that way , we can be properly sure that the necessary monitoring is carried out .
I also think it is right that this proposal should provide us with legislation ensuring that , whenever vertical legislation is enacted in specific areas , the same conditions regarding risk assessment and monitoring should be complied with as also apply in the case of the general directive .
Finally , I would call attention to the question of objective liability .
I agree with the original proposal in Mr Bowe ' s report to the effect that businesses seeking consents should be made objectively liable and that liability insurance must also be taken out in connection with an application for consent .
If insurance cannot be taken out to cover such circumstances , then the risk in granting a licence is too great .
I hope we shall see the adoption of these amendments designed to tighten up on the common position .
If they are adopted , I also believe we shall obtain a legal basis for granting future consents for GMOs which serves our interests and which will provide the necessary security .
In that way , we shall , in actual fact , obtain the legal basis that should have been in place before the first consent for new GMO crops was issued .
In my opinion , the present legal basis is far too weak .
Mr President , I would like to stress that this is a debate on procedural questions regarding the deliberate release into the environment of genetically modified organisms , or GMOs .
Contrary to what one might think , this is not a fundamental debate on the pros and cons of GMOs or its principles , for that matter .
Needless to say , how we perceive GMOs will be reflected in the positions we adopt during the discussion about these procedures and the framework around them .
In simple terms : in the extensive amendments to this report , which is excellent by the way , the most important aspect seems to be that either we decide to make life easier for the GMO industry or we decide to give it sleepless nights .
But the discussion also reveals that the production of genetically modified food has prompted quite a few questions : ethical and moral questions , questions related to public health and the environment , questions as to what opportunities industry and research are given and questions regarding the freedom of choice for consumers .
The following points are key issues for the Liberal group and these will also influence our voting behaviour .
First and foremost , there is the issue of the freedom of choice for consumers .
It is , of course , too crazy for words , really , that if you want GM-free food , you will need to settle for food with a guaranteed maximum GMO content of 1 % .
This is not dealt with as such in the draft directive but public information , labelling and transparency which crop up in this context are very much part and parcel of this issue .
Secondly , we would like to see the public have plenty of opportunity to have its say during the approval procedure of GMOs .
Thirdly , we would welcome a streamlined procedure that offers security to both consumers and producers and , as far as we are concerned , better harmonisation throughout the European Union .
Fourthly , we would like to see research promoted in Europe in the field of biotechnology so as to offer more clarity regarding what is and is not feasible .
One controversial issue is producer liability .
We are in favour of the self-regulating effect this has .
Ideally , we would like to see this liability included in the long-awaited horizontal regulation of environmental liability .
However , some of us are tired of waiting for this horizontal regulation in which the Commission has been engrossed for some 10 years now , and we want to move forward .
The present proposal is important to both producers and consumers and is welcomed by the liberal group . We , too , would like to congratulate the diligent rapporteur on this report .
Mr President , where the release of genetically modified crops into the environment is concerned , the precautionary principle must be the decisive factor .
At present , it ought to entail a moratorium on the release of new genetically modified crops into the environment .
Scientific ambiguities , especially where the risk of dissemination is concerned , and deficiencies in legislation and in the application of international agreements are both factors which justify a moratorium .
We also consider that each EU country should be entitled to have a tougher policy than the EU in this area , and we shall therefore vote against Amendment No 6 concerning a common EU procedure governing the release of genetically modified organisms into the environment .
The proposals to be adopted tomorrow will not go anything like so far as we would have wished .
We shall therefore vote in favour of as satisfactory a solution as possible to the issue as a whole .
This means that we shall be voting in favour of most , but not all , of the proposals in the Bowe report .
We shall be voting in favour of a situation in which those who release genetically modified crops into the environment are held fully liable under civil law .
We want to see an end to the use of antibiotic resistance markers We want to see clear , compulsory labelling , and we demand that each application should be dealt with separately , and with no use of simplified application procedures .
We are also in favour of having a clear obligation for the provision of information and in favour of recipient countries ' being approved in the case of exports to third countries .
Mr President , the proposal for a directive on procedures for the authorisation of genetically modified organisms has been returned to this House for second reading , even though events since the first reading have done nothing but heighten the fears that we originally expressed .
On 11 February 1999 , at first reading , we opposed this proposal since we considered that it in no way controlled the risks that GMOs pose to the environment and to animal and human health and that a straightforward application of the precautionary principle should have resulted if not in the definitive prohibition of the release of these organisms , at least in a moratorium lasting several years .
Furthermore , we were critical of the authorisation procedures stipulated in the proposal , which seemed to us too lenient and inordinately centralised .
A year on , studies have been conducted that even more clearly highlight the dangers of releasing GMOs .
As recently as last week , a committee of inquiry from the French National Assembly concluded , and I quote , that it ' considered the placing on the market of new products deriving from genetically modified organisms to be premature ' .
In these circumstances , we find the text which has been presented to the House for second reading increasingly outmoded .
All our principled objections , including the request for an official moratorium , are all the more relevant today and , as was the case with BSE , we would like to see any country which is convinced that it is running a serious risk being entitled to take national prohibition and safeguard measures .
How is it possible , in this day and age , that we have to demand a right as self-evident as this ?
Mr President , in February 1999 , we discussed the revision of Directive 90 / 220 at first reading .
I would remind you that in his contribution , Mr Blokland talked about the importance of the precautionary principle .
We are thus delighted that the Council has underlined this principle in the common position .
Both in the main body of the Directive itself , notably in Article 1 , and in its application , the precautionary principle has been accorded an important role when it comes to weighing it up against economic interests .
I mainly have the restriction of the simplified procedure and the attention to GMO traceability in mind .
On the whole , we should therefore be satisfied with the present proposals .
We are thankful to Mr Bowe for his report , which once again contains proposals which we are totally behind .
We are particularly delighted with the stricter wording related to reducing the risks for consumers .
Compared to Amendment No 32 , the original Amendment to Article 28 ( 1 ) was more forceful , in our opinion .
It very explicitly spelled out the possibility of consulting ethical committees in the case of ethical issues .
The present Amendment No 32 , on the other hand , only underlines the importance of being open with the public .
We regret this toning down .
Finally , I would like to point out that it is not sufficient to map out and restrict the risks pertaining to these new production methods .
Plants and animals are not production factors which can simply be manipulated .
The biotechnology debate requires an integral ethical approach .
We believe that God created the world .
Based on this awareness , we need to treat the natural world around us responsibly .
Mr President , this is a debate about plant research and plant protection from research .
It is a debate about the potential of GMOs for good and their potential for risk , and how you manage that risk .
You cannot abolish risk because it is part of our natural environment .
We cannot prevent all man-made risk because that would end scientific progress .
But we must respond to public concern about the potential and unknown dangers to our environment , to our food chain and to our health .
I believe there are four areas where we must act to reassure the public . I believe we can do so without destroying biotechnology .
Firstly , antibiotic-resistant genes must be phased out .
The amendment sets a realistic , but urgent date of 2005 for that .
Secondly , we must be open with the public about where experimental crops are being grown .
That is only right . It is fair .
In return we must ask environmental action groups to show restraint and responsibility with regard to that knowledge .
Thirdly , we must build on the Montreal Protocol as far as the export of GMOs is concerned , and this should be done on the basis of mutual agreement and transparency .
Fourthly , as many Members have said , we must ensure liability ; but it is a question of whether we need any greater liability than applies to other environmental risks .
I suspect we do not , so long as we already have criminal , civil , product and environmental liability in law .
That should suffice , but it is wise to add the provision on negligence as something which can be brought into play within the courts .
We can gain real benefits from GMOs if we get it right .
Fewer crop sprays , for example , would benefit the environment if we grew GMO crops that did not need so many crop sprays .
But we have to take the public with us , with the science .
I believe these measures will help to do just that .
Mr President , ideally GMOs should not be released into the environment .
But if it is going to happen there have to be a number of measures taken to ensure that the industries that say this technology is safe take responsibility .
That is why I cannot understand why the industry and the lobbyists are so concerned about the issue of liability .
If they are so sure that their products are safe then why are they afraid to take responsibility , both as regards liability and compensation ?
The other issue I should like to address is the contamination of gene transfer .
We have a situation where , for example , conventional farms can be contaminated with GMOs .
That means there is no free choice , either for the farmers themselves - and that goes for organic farmers too - or for the consumers , in the long run . If you have contamination of conventional farms or organic farms , there is basically no free option for the consumer .
This is not acceptable .
At the end of the day , the GMO industry does not have anything to offer the consumer or the environment , even as regards the use of chemicals .
It is ironic to think that the same industries that are promoting this so-called chemical-free agriculture are the very same ones that have bombarded us with chemicals over the years and are making those crops reliant on chemicals in the future as well .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Bowe for his report and , in one minute , mention four fundamental questions which have already been discussed .
Firstly , the protection of public health .
It seems to us that we should strictly forbid the use of antibiotic-resistant genes .
Germany , Luxembourg and Austria have shown the way by banning Novartis maize , which has a gene which is resistant to ampicillin , a wide spectrum antibiotic .
Secondly , the commitment to international agreements .
Amendment No 1 refers to the Montreal Protocol and the need to defend biosafety and the consultation of and request for authorisation from non-EU countries for exports .
Thirdly , the civil liability clause , which is clearly necessary for those who are responsible for the release of these genetically modified organisms which may have effects on health or the environment .
Finally , Mr President , the prevention of genetic contamination .
This means preventing the spreading of transgenic pollen which may travel and contaminate other plants and , therefore , seriously affect the environment .
Mr President , I should like to start by complimenting Mr Bowe on his objective and balanced presentation .
In previous debates in Parliament I have put on record my own views in relation to biotechnology .
In the short time available , I appeal to the Commission and , indeed , Parliament to urgently expedite the conclusions necessary to allay consumer fears concerning the public health , environmental and ethical aspects of a technology which has the potential to make a significant contribution to food production and public health .
Of course there are concerns on the part of consumers .
They are entitled to an in-depth and independent evaluation of what is a rapidly changing technology .
The longer we allow the confusion to exist , the greater the delay in enabling society to benefit from its full potential .
In this regard the bio-industry has itself contributed in no small way to public unease by the planned introduction of unacceptable practices such as seed-terminator technology and other ethical issues such as experimentation with human embryos .
It was the vigilance of this Parliament in particular that raised a warning flag in relation to many aspects of the application of this research .
But there are now welcome indications that the industry has taken on board Parliament 's concern in this regard .
An indication of the potential of genetic research to make a positive contribution to food production is demonstrated by the very recent announcement by Monsanto of a significant breakthrough on the genetic structure of rice , which is the staple food on which millions in the developing world depend and about which there is considerable concern with regard to the continuity of supply .
The bottom line in relation to every aspect of the application of GMO technology , particularly in food production , is transparency , consumer information and accurate labelling .
In short , the consumer must at all times be given a choice .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , European consumers are justifiably concerned about genetically modified organisms and their release .
The industrial lobby continues , unscrupulously and in the name of the great god profit , to play the sorcerer ' s apprentice , juggling dangerously with food safety and consumer health .
It is Europe ' s duty to pass stringent legislation that will make these alchemists accountable and to guarantee product quality whilst also providing citizens with clear information .
We totally agree with the line of thinking adopted in this report .
The emphasis should be placed on the traceability facilitated by comprehensive information , including that aimed at third countries which import or export GMOs .
Indeed , consumer safety calls for equal treatment with a view to avoiding any deflection of trade or the export of products unsaleable on the European market .
We must also require the prior approval of the recipient country before any trade can take place .
If the liability of the operator responsible for release is to be officially established , it would also be advisable to define this liability precisely and unhurriedly , in order to avoid introducing an over-general concept of environmental liability .
Lastly , the risks to the environment should be assessed via an annual cost-benefit analysis of these GMO releases , carried out in a transparent manner and extended to cover animal and plant health as well as public and private goods .
Mr President , there has been a significant increase in biotechnology applications and they are becoming more and more important both to the economy and to society , because using applications derived from genetically-modified organisms will be instrumental in improving our quality of life .
Hence , it is essential that we introduce a modern framework governing the development , marketing and exploitation of genetically-modified organisms .
Europe must not be left behind the USA and Japan .
This , however , does not mean that we should overlook the safety issues surrounding these innovative applications , such as public health safety and environmental protection .
I must point out that we have all witnessed the ongoing war of words recently over the safety of genetically modified organisms .
This has led to confusion amongst consumers and has resulted in their being unable to form a sound judgement on the benefits and dangers of biotechnology .
We should therefore win consumer confidence and the way to do so is by improving safety standards .
For example , we can build up public confidence by banning the creation or use of GMOs containing antibiotic-resistant genes and by providing agencies and the general public with detailed and objective information .
Parliament called at first reading for amendments to be incorporated into this directive which cover the above two objectives , i.e. the creation of a useful framework of rules for the deliberate release and trade in GMOs , accompanied by safety measures for the protection of public health and the environment and information for the public and consumers .
It is also important for provision to be made for the directive to be adjusted and amended in line with new developments resulting from the fast pace of change in biotechnology and its applications .
In closing , I should like to dwell on one point which I stressed in the Committee on the Environment and which deserves our particular attention , and that is the issue of safety .
We are awaiting a more general proposal from the Commission on product liability and safety .
We must not overreact if we want this directive to promote and support such a promising sector .
Mr President , to genetically modify food means to break through the barrier that divides different species , for example by introducing a fish gene into a strawberry .
This is not possible in conventional agriculture .
Tinkering with genes holds unknown risks .
This is why measures are needed to prevent gene transfer so that this fish gene cannot contaminate conventionally or organically grown strawberries .
According to the gene tech industry , the risks of such unwanted contamination are low .
If these risks are so low , why is it then that the gene tech industry refuses to accept any legal liability ?
But maybe there is a risk for the environment and human health and in those cases , such a liability clause is most definitely needed .
The Christian Democrats are playing a dangerous game .
Whilst they are in favour of a liability clause in the directive on disposing of dangerous waste , they suddenly want to wait five years when it comes to gene technology .
If liability pertaining to gene food is not regulated now , suspicion among the public regarding this type of food will only grow .
The Christian Democratic position will rebound perfectly off the gene industry .
Mr President , genetic engineering and biotechnology are the key technologies of the future .
If we in the EU hamper or even block the use of genetically modified organisms , we shall be manoeuvring ourselves into a backwater in this important area .
We are already lagging far behind other countries .
The resultant competitive disadvantages for researchers , breeders , seed growers , farmers and even consumers would be immense .
But it is precisely these obstruction tactics which several groups within the European Union are applying .
They of course appear to be rather ideological in nature because generally there are no material grounds for them .
This attempt at obstruction can be found in a series of proposed amendments in the Bowe report .
They are distinguished by the fact that they demand the impossible , knowing full well that these demands cannot be met and can therefore block the release of GMOs in general .
This applies in particular to genetic transfer , which simply cannot be prevented in the open air , and to the question of liability .
The call for special liability means that farmers dare not use GMOs .
I also think that keeping a register of cultivated land beyond the experimental stage is unrealistic because I assume that 80-90 % of farmland would be entered in such as register in a few years ' time .
No one wants to play down genetic engineering , including me .
But nor can we demonise it .
Farmers have always endeavoured to use targeted breeding and cultivation techniques in order to develop efficient plant and animal material .
Techniques continue to develop , including in breeding and cultivation and one new technique is genetic modification .
It is our task to ensure that this technology is used responsibly , not to prevent it .
Mr President , I would urge colleagues to strengthen this report by insisting on environmental liability .
Producers of GMOs should be required to take out insurance against any damage to human health or to the environment from the release of their products .
The Commission promised the introduction of horizontal legislation over ten years ago .
But even though we now have a White Paper , the actual legislation is some years away .
This means that , if it is not accepted into this directive , the victims will have to pay for any damage instead of the companies that are making the profits .
Thousands of people across Europe have chosen not to buy products containing GMOs because of the evidence of health and environmental damage .
We must address those very real issues .
I would urge colleagues to accept my group 's amendments on liability insurance , GMO contamination and the ban on antibiotic-resistant genes .
Consumers are demanding the strictest controls and will be satisfied by nothing less .
It is vital that all the necessary safeguards are now included in this directive .
Mr President , I am pleased that Parliament , in collaboration with the Council , is now finally in a position to give Europe a chance to make its influence felt in the sphere of GMOs .
We must be careful , however , that we do not now just sit back in the belief that we have finished our work .
We have selected an authorisation procedure which is more restrictive than its American equivalent , and this will of course be significant in terms of our ability to hold onto the best companies and researchers .
The time limits we adopt for processing applications should not , therefore , be applied as the rule but , instead , constitute an absolute maximum .
We must reject the proposal that the entire liability for any damage should be shifted onto whoever has released the GMOs into the environment .
A natural consequence of Europe ' s strict authorisation procedure must be that the authorities assume a portion of the liability .
Only by sharing the liability between the authorities and businesses in this way will it be possible to offset the competitive disadvantages presented by the laborious approval procedure , and only in this way will be able to compete with the Americans .
Mr President , when I started at the Commission last autumn I realised very quickly that the directive on the deliberate release of GMOs would be one of the most sensitive dossiers under my responsibility .
Genetically modified products and biotechnology give rise to a number of questions and concerns . The most important are perhaps : what are the benefits ?
What are the risks ?
How do we best avoid possible negative effects ?
How do we ensure that we have access to all the relevant information ?
To tackle these three concerns raised by our citizens we need a wide and open debate where all key players participate and the discussion cannot be limited only to the experts .
Here the European institutions , the Member States , industry and science all have to take their responsibilities .
The basis for meeting these new challenges has to be an efficient and transparent legislative framework .
I should especially like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Bowe , and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy for their hard work in making a rapid and important contribution .
Our role as European policymakers should be to provide for a balanced response to these new challenges .
We need a regulatory framework , based on safety and the precautionary principle which ensure a high level of protection for human health and environment .
At the same time , it has to allow society to benefit from the development of modern biotechnology .
Our European legislation on GMOs guarantees an individual and thorough risk assessment of each GMO product placed on the European market .
We are here today to strengthen and improve the existing framework .
The sensitivity and complexity of the matter might explain why we are confronted with a total number of 52 amendments at second reading .
The Commission can accept in their entirety Amendments Nos 9 , 17 , 19 , 29 and 47 , which improve the quality and the clarity of the texts .
The Commission can also accept in principle Amendments Nos 1 to 4 , 8 , 11 , 24 , 35 to 38 , 46 , 48 , 49 and 52 .
They further strengthen the intention of the Commission to establish an efficient transparent and balanced regulatory framework for GMOs .
Let me comment further on Amendment No 1 and Amendments Nos 13 , 14 and 28 , which all relate to the biosafety protocol and obligations for imports and exports of GMOs .
The European Community was one of the driving forces in the successful adoption of the Cartagena Protocol on biosafety in January .
The Commission therefore welcomes the spirit of Amendment No 1 . This refers to the need to submit the appropriate proposals for the implementation of the protocol when ratified - work has already begun .
However , the Commission cannot accept the inclusion of provisions on import and export obligations in the text of the directive .
We believe that the implications of the protocol on the overall European Union legislative framework have yet to be fully assessed .
Amendments Nos 13 , 14 and 28 are therefore not acceptable in the present revision .
Let me now turn to the issue of liability , and I know that this is an important political subject for all of you .
When I made my presentation to Parliament in the autumn I promised that I would make particular reference to GMOs in the White Paper on environmental liability .
The Commission did exactly that when adopting the White Paper this year .
The Commission is of the opinion that a horizontal approach is the most efficient way to guarantee a comprehensive responsibility regime for environmental damage .
This will provide clarity for complainants and prevent loopholes .
This is also the best way to complement the existing horizontal system for product liability already covering GMOs .
I can assure you that I will do my utmost to be able to present a proposal for legislation on liability before the end of 2001 .
I can therefore accept Amendments Nos 2 , 36 and 46 in principle , as far as they refer to the Commission White Paper .
Let us be clear , if this is put in this directive , rules will have to be made to ensure legal clarity , and how long will that take ?
It must be seen in that context .
However , I cannot accept Amendments Nos 33 , 40 and 45 .
I am also fully aware of the political importance of certain other aspects raised by the proposed amendments .
It is clear that antibiotic resistance marker genes need to be phased out and be replaced with alternatives as soon as practically possible .
A phase-out is already foreseen in the common position .
The Commission agrees to strengthen this political message .
The Commission cannot agree to a general ban of GMOs containing antibiotic resistance marker genes .
At the moment there is no scientific evidence that all GMOs of this type present adverse effects to human health and the environment .
Instead , we should continue to carry out a comprehensive case-by-case risk analysis .
Within these limits , Amendments Nos 11 , 37 , 48 and 52 are therefore acceptable in principle .
The Commission can also accept in principle Amendments Nos 3 , 4 , 8 , 24 and 35 to the extent that they are in line with the logic of the texts and fit within the overall legislative framework .
The Commission can therefore agree to a recital concerning socio-economic aspects which refers to the reporting obligation of the Commission .
This will be done every three years under Article 30 .
The Commission welcomes Amendments Nos 38 and 49 concerning gene transfer .
They constitute a balanced approach between a total prevention and a permissive approach .
However , the wording should be aligned with the text of the directive .
In addition , the Commission reference should be deleted since the Commission does not necessarily play a role under Part B - national consent .
However , the Commission cannot accept Amendment No 12 concerning the prevention of gene transfer .
Gene transfer between organisms is , as we know , a common phenomenon in nature .
Instead we need to ensure that potential risks from gene transfer are thoroughly assessed before GMO products are released for research or placed on the market .
The Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 22 and 23 as they stand , since the provisions foreseen in these amendments would not be workable within the authorisation system established by the directive .
This is both for administrative and legal reasons .
The Commission , however , acknowledges that these amendments aim at addressing the possible problems that certain industries might face with strict time-limited consent .
This concerns in particular the plant breeding industry .
The Commission will therefore consider how due account can be taken of these concerns while ensuring political , legal and administrative consistency .
In this context , Amendment No 26 is also not acceptable since this would limit the flexibility of the optional time limitation of consent for the renewal .
Amendment No 25 seeks to introduce a provision which allows for the introduction of differentiated procedures under Part C of the directive .
This builds on the original proposal as presented at first reading in Parliament .
However , this amendment goes beyond the Commission proposal and is therefore not acceptable to the Commission as it stands .
The Commission is , however , willing to reconsider this amendment in the light of its original proposal and within the framework of an overall compromise .
Finally , I should like to deal as a package with the amendments I have not yet addressed .
The Commission cannot accept Amendment No 21 since the legal basis of future legislative measures is subject to its content and cannot be established in advance by this directive .
Amendment No 6 , concerning a centralised Community procedure , is not acceptable .
However , I should like to stress that careful evaluation of a centralised procedure would be done in the Commission report required under Article 30 of the directive .
Access to the work of the European Group on Ethics and their opinions is an important of the general evaluation .
The Commission is , however , of the opinion that this is already appropriately covered in the Rules of Procedure of the Committee .
Amendment No 32 is therefore not acceptable .
Amendments Nos 5 , 7 , 10 , 15 , 16 , 18 , 20 , 27 , 30 , 31 , 34 , 39 , 41 to 44 , 50 and 51 are also not acceptable since they would introduce legal and technical uncertainty or jeopardise the overall balance achieved in the common position .
To conclude , we urgently need a revised Directive 90 / 220 .
It has to ensure a high level of protection for human health and the environment and , at the same time , allow society to profit from the benefits of these new technologies .
To strike the right balance between these two justified concerns we need a transparent process , a wide dialogue and strong political leadership .
We all have to take our responsibilities in achieving this , and this is the only way in which we will win the trust and confidence of our citizens .
Mr President , I think that tomorrow ' s vote is so important that I should like to ask the Commissioner to clarify two points so that we know what we are voting on tomorrow .
Commissioner , my first question is this : have I understood you correctly , can you promise that you are making provision for an environmental liability with compulsory insurance , yes or no ?
I just want a yes or no .
Or is it correct that you only agree to liability as set out in the White Paper , i.e. just for Natura 2000 areas and with no compulsory insurance .
In plain text , this means that if damage occurs and the person responsible cannot be held liable , the general public , i.e. the taxpayer will pay for it .
Can you give Parliament a guarantee - and I should like a yes or no - that compulsory insurance is contained in a horizontal directive ?
My second point is this : unfortunately , you did not go into proposed Amendment No 42 .
Can you confirm that there is no EU legislation for GMOs in contained use ?
You know that the contained use directive excludes this and , at the same time , Article 2 ( 4 ) of the common position makes no provision for regulations on GMOs for contained use .
There is a gap in the legislation here and I think that this is very important for tomorrow ' vote .
For example , transgenetic fish in contained use would not be covered by the two directives .
I should like a clear answer on this .
I am not reopening the debate .
I will give the floor to the Commissioner if she wants to respond to these two specific points , but I thought the Commissioner 's response was very clear and comprehensive .
Commissioner , do you wish to reply ?
. Mr President , I shall start with the second part of Mrs Breyer 's question .
It is true that there is no specific Community legislation for the contained use of genetically modified plants and animals .
However , Article 2 ( 4 ) of the common position obliges Member States to ensure that these GMOs are handed over to a third party only if stringent containment measures are in place , otherwise notification under Part C of the directive is necessary . Amendment No 42 would prevent any exchange of genetically modified plants and animals for research activities under contained use until Community legislation is in force .
That is why we cannot accept Amendment No 42 .
As you know , we have now issued a White Paper on environmental liability .
It is now open for comments and views and we are ready to discuss it because I want to ensure that this environmental liability paper covers GMOs . Your views are also welcome .
I intend to ensure that this paper covers GMOs .
It already covers product liability . Insurance is one thing we will have to look into in more depth and also get the views of other parties on the practical aspects .
The White Paper is a first step , as you know .
That has to be discussed in depth and I will come back with a proposal .
I believe it will be possible to put an insurance system in place .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Identification , registration and labelling of beef
The next item is the report by Mr Papayannakis , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation establishing a system for the identification and registration of bovine animals and regarding the labelling of beef and beef products and repealing Council Regulation ( EC ) 820 / 97 , ( COM ( 1999 ) 487 - C5-0240 / 1999 - 1999 / 0204 ( COD ) ) .
- ( EL ) Mr President , we all know that the bovine spongiform encephalopathy crisis , the mad cow crisis , is yet another crime which has not been punished , and I doubt it ever will .
But aside from this serious issue , it has left us with an institutional crisis , a market crisis , a drop in sales of beef products , a drop in prices and , most importantly , a consumer confidence crisis .
The regulation under discussion has come too late , much too late in my opinion , but all the same it will help to provide some answers , some solutions and it will help us to take some action to restore consumer confidence .
As you will recall , we fought a hard battle over this regulation last December in order to protect the rights of the European Parliament .
We also fought a battle to push through the implementation of the measures laid down in this regulation as swiftly as possible .
In short , we all know what we are talking about .
On the basis of this regulation , very soon , this year , all bovine animals will , by law , have to be identified and monitored right up to slaughter .
Meat from bovine animals will carry a label indicating the origin and history of the animals from which the meat is derived .
During our analysis of this regulation , we tried to cater for a great many demands and a great many opinions .
We wanted the provisions of the regulation to be kept as simple as possible so that they could be applied , and applied as quickly as possible .
Let us not forget that the system we are going to implement is an extremely complex , extremely technical system , and concerns approximately 100 million animals throughout the EU .
So we are talking about an extremely complex operation .
The system therefore needs to be simple and practicable and it needs to be comprehensible to the consumer ; this is of utmost importance to us . Above all , it must not contain exceptions or what we call loopholes , i.e. ways in which the regulation can be contravened either through complex wording or because of local or special exceptions or applications .
I believe that we have managed to achieve this .
The system that Parliament is endeavouring to establish though its amendments could be applied from 1 September 2000 onwards and we insist on this because one demand of the entire House was that specific dates and deadlines should be set at long last and that we should get started .
I would just like to look at two amendments , two categories of amendments .
First , your rapporteur is calling , with the greatest respect , for a report , a Commission proposal , within the year , on the application of this system to meat products .
If we want to be taken seriously , we should also take account of consumer confidence in all meat products , of which , as we all know , there are a great many .
And secondly , some amendments deal with how permits are to be granted to enterprises , operators and so on to apply the labels , to label the meat .
The provisions recommended by the Commission are , to my mind , extremely minimal .
The interested party submits an application and , after a period of time , the system which he wishes to apply is applied .
I propose that we change this system .
Anyone labelling meat must have explicit approval from the competent public authorities .
This may seem a little more laborious , but we already have a laborious system and we must , at all costs , have state approval for meat labelling . If not , then I am afraid that the system will become too lax and may even become corrupt , and , as a result , we will not achieve our main goal of winning consumer confidence in the system .
Mr President , as draftsman of the Committee on Agriculture , I should like to recapitulate a number of the committee ' s main causes for concern on this question .
The most important objective of the Commission proposal - and I should like expressly to stress this once again - is the traceability of beef or bovine animals from birth through to processing and sale .
This is one of the consequences of the BSE crisis and we must bear the objective of this proposal , i.e. traceability , in mind when debating what information should appear on the label .
We want labels which are practicable , simple , safe , cheap and easy to control .
Labels must be easy for consumers to understand , which is why the information needs to be kept to a minimum .
Consumers want information , not a novel .
Information on the fattening process and , where applicable , on antibiotics or other stimulants administered , as demanded in proposed Amendment No 48 , have absolutely no business to be on the label .
Information which does not come under compulsory labelling but which is requested by market participants or is already included on labels in the Member States can continue to be included within the framework of voluntary labelling .
This applies in particular to information on the region of origin of the meat .
As far as the entry into force of the regulation is concerned , we agree in principle with the Commission ' s approach that compulsory labelling should be introduced in two stages , but we do not agreed with the timetable insofar as we think that the date of 1 January 2003 has been put far too far back .
We shall have problems explaining this to consumers .
The Committee on Agriculture agreed on the wording " by 1 January 2002 at the latest " in a compromise on the introduction of compulsory information on origin , i.e. stage 2 .
Now the Committee on the Environment has opted for 1 September 2001 and I think that we can agree to this date .
It is only a matter of four months .
But we are emphatically against making all the information , including the indication of the place of birth , compulsory when the regulation enters into force in September 2000 , rather than in two stages .
That makes no sense , as the electronic database on which traceability depends is not yet up and running in the majority of Member States .
A compulsory labelling system for beef can only be as good as the system for registering bovine animals and all their movements .
Mr President , beef labelling has two distinct functions . Firstly , traceability in the case of a food safety incident - the recent E. coli outbreak in Scotland for example - and , secondly , to give consumers information about the origin of beef at the point of sale .
The two should not be confused .
For traceability we need maximum information made available to the authorities as and when required but the consumer label should be simple , concise and unambiguous .
The need for information sprang from the BSE crisis .
Member States have differing levels of BSE incidence but there are also variations in the measures to eradicate the disease and protect human health .
Although the United Kingdom has the highest incidence of BSE , it also has the most comprehensive control measures .
Other countries , which admittedly have lower declared levels of BSE , operate a whole-herd slaughter policy which entails the risk of the under-reporting of cases .
Therefore people want to know which country their beef comes from .
Reference to regions should not be an alternative to country of origin but a voluntary addition .
Even regions like Yorkshire , Britain ' s premier region and coincidentally the region I represent , are not known by every citizen throughout the EU .
From a marketing and promotional point of view smaller areas and localities could be used , as well as regional breeds such as Aberdeen Angus .
The well established description of Scotch beef should continue to be used .
Small traditional butcher shops that sell beef unpackaged should be allowed to display information as an alternative to labelling each item .
Many consumers would be confused if given information about hanging or maturation , which could be mixed up with sell-by dates in their minds .
I would draw attention particularly to Amendment No 41 which seeks to exclude farmers from Community aid schemes if the regulation is not strictly adhered to .
I have already had cases drawn to my attention regarding other EU schemes where honest errors by farmers , who are not professional bureaucrats , have resulted in punitive sanctions which often threaten the future of a family farm .
We should not go down this road .
The listing of antibiotics and stimulants that might have been administered would , if adopted , create a two-tier beef market .
Animal welfare would be compromised as farmers would be reluctant to treat animals therapeutically .
Similarly , reference to fattening methods should not be introduced .
I hope that in amending this regulation Parliament can for once simplify rather than embellish and make the labelling of beef consumer- , butcher- and farmer-friendly .
Mr President , my group welcomed the report by Mr Papayannakis and salutes him for his persistence .
I say that because he comes from a small political group - and it is often hard to make headway here - and he comes from one of the southern Member States , which will in some ways have to make sacrifices and introduce regulations to bring about effective , proper beef labelling throughout the Community .
He has also had to face the obfuscation and delays brought about by the Council .
The fact that we have had to wait two years for this proposal to become a practical reality is a poor comment on the urgency with which they regard it , although the situation was plainly critical from the time of the outbreak of the BSE crisis onwards .
However , we are not here today for recriminations but for looking ahead .
This is our chance to put right this sorry process of delay .
Parliament has the opportunity , if it is willing to grasp it , to set a realistic timetable for the two-tier implementation of a comprehensive process of labelling for beef and for beef products .
In the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , we supported most of the amendments from the rapporteur and others and we do so again today .
We do that on the basis that the key proposal plainly has to be the issue of timing .
Some of the versions of this report in themselves have been contradictory in the dates that they gave .
We are now talking about implementation of the first stage in September 2000 and the second stage in September 2001 .
I was glad to hear the representative of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development say that they would settle for the four-month advance that would involve coming forward from January 2002 .
We believe that this is necessary because we should now get the whole European Union on the move .
That is why we want the second stage as set out in Article 13 ( 5 ) to be distinct and a commensurate advance .
Why do we want that ?
There are some here - certainly some from Member States that have very effective traceability and labelling possibilities already - who would like to do the whole thing at once .
They would be able to say to others : look - you cannot do it , you are at fault .
Our job is to bring all 15 Member States together so that the process of traceability throughout the whole of the food chain , from the birth of the animal to its slaughter and disposal , would be universally applied throughout the European Union .
We say to those who are resistant to this : please remember that it is necessary to bring everybody on board .
What everybody wants - whether they are farmers , citizens or consumers in the United Kingdom or anywhere else in the Union - is to feel that they have equal confidence , wherever they are , in the safety of the product that they are consuming .
We have struck out the second subparagraph of Article 13 ( 5 ) and all other amendments which follow the same line of allowing imprecise mixed origins or an indication such as " EU origin " .
One day " EU origin " may be assurance enough but it is not at this moment .
We need to know from which state a product has arrived .
I know that there are people in the Netherlands who disagree with that and I would be interested to know why .
I cannot see that " EU origin " is currently sufficient in the way of labelling and we are opposed to that proposal .
We are also opposed to the derogation for minced beef , which might apply to something like 30 % of the beef output , which ought to be open to labelling .
Minced beef is as much , if not more , at risk as any other form of beef since it frequently comes from a variety of sources .
It is the case in my country that we have seen minced beef and lamb and other meats mixed up together .
We need traceability and labelling there as much as anywhere else .
We agree with the rapporteur ' s intention to stiffen and speed up the compliance provisions in Amendments Nos 42 and 43 .
We also agree that supplementary information should and can be provided for those Member States that need it and for those special regions which have important information to communicate .
My last point is to end where I began .
My country , Mr President , and yours - if I can call Scotland my country too , as I certainly would - have suffered the horrors of BSE .
We know we bore a large part of the responsibility for it .
It was incumbent upon us to make special provisions by way of food safety as a result .
After our years of effort to that end , we can now justifiably say to the Community as a whole that what we want for ourselves we want for everyone else as well .
Mr President , rapporteur , ladies and gentlemen , it is important to reinstate market confidence .
It is , however , still more important to restore citizens ' confidence in the food they buy and eat - in actual fact , it is perhaps in that way that the market will be strengthened .
The crucial factor is that it should be possible to trace with certainty the origins of what we eat .
Amendment No 29 is very important for producers , above all perhaps for small producers in vulnerable areas .
This Amendment would entitle producers to provide information on the label in addition to the name of the nation where the goods concerned originate .
There would be the option to state , for example , the particular area from which the meat comes or the fact that a particular breed of cattle or special breeding methods have been used .
However , there should be no legislation on this matter , other than a ban on lying .
I am very pleased about Mr Whitehead ' s remark about minced meat .
I fully and wholeheartedly support Amendment No 30 from the rapporteur .
For me , the most important aspect of this whole issue is that no exceptions should be made for cheap food .
We who sit in this Chamber , for the most part middle-aged and well-to-do , know perfectly well that it is young people and families with children who buy and eat the cheapest food - sausages , hamburgers etc .
In all social systems and at all periods in history , the most vulnerable groups have had the least purchasing power .
It is our absolute moral duty first and foremost to make cheap food safe before we do the same for fillet of beef .
Mr President , Commissioner , the European Parliament has proven its far-sightedness on this matter and I should like to thank the two rapporteurs from the Committee on the Environment and the Committee on Agriculture for their work .
They have approached the issue with the same consistency demonstrated by the European Parliament .
Allow me to refresh your memory : compulsory registration has applied for a long time , because Regulation No 820 / 97 entered into force on 1 January 2000 .
The postponement adopted is not lawful .
The European Parliament has filed charges against the Council because the postponement was not within the Council ' s discretion .
Nor did the Commission come up smelling of roses here .
It was the Commission which proposed this seemingly elegant but legally dubious procedure .
If nothing is done , compulsory labelling will enter into force on 1 September 2000 .
The Commission is therefore urged to accept the European Parliament ' s proposals in this codecision process by 1 September .
We have tried in our suit to ensure that no equally elegant attempt will be made to implement an extension on 1 September - and I hope that we shall succeed in putting a stop to this .
If we cannot agree on Parliament ' s proposals by 1 September , then the old regulation with the compulsory system will enter into force .
I therefore hope that you will implement Parliament ' s reasonable proposals and that you will give up your plan to postpone this once again until the year 2003 .
It will confuse our citizens and will certainly meet with decisive resistance here in Parliament .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , consumers can be given a guaranteed indication of origin for the majority , I repeat the majority of foodstuffs and for beef in its many and varied forms , if they so wish .
The basis for this was and still is the passport for each individual animal which provides information on place , origin and birth .
Thanks to comprehensive controls of and the wealth of data on the animal trade , the place of origin and rearing can be proven .
What I mean is that we are not starting from square one and , as a producer of several tonnes of beef a year , I know what I am talking about .
The latest crisis in the foodstuffs sector may justify the introduction of stricter standards , as contained in the report ; however , where possible , red tape should be reduced .
I agree with all the proposed amendments which are predicated upon greater promotion of regional marketing and processing of agricultural products and which help to build up regional markets and create greater transparency , irrespective of the date on which they are introduced .
Mr President , the people who will be most shocked to learn of this evening ' s debate must surely be European consumers .
They will be astounded to learn that , so many years after the start of the BSE crisis , the European Union still does not have a reliable traceability system for beef .
Quite clearly , though , consumer confidence must be restored , as a matter of urgency , by guaranteeing the consumer perfect traceability from the stable to the table , so that any potential risk to human health can be efficiently eliminated at an early stage .
Fortunately , the appropriate initiatives by the most enterprising Member States have compensated for the extraordinarily slow reactions of the Community apparatus .
It is therefore all the more deplorable that they should have been deprived of this possibility by the Treaty of Amsterdam .
I am thinking in particular of the compulsory labelling system which was drawn up in France together with livestock farmers and distributors , which has been in force since 1996 .
This system has proved very effective . It has made it possible to restore consumer confidence .
France ' s legitimate wish not to lift the embargo on British beef prematurely , since Britain did not offer the same guarantees of traceability , was in order to maintain this restored level of confidence .
France had simply forgotten that it no longer had the right to do this .
What a decidedly strange Europe it is that penalises Member States which take the necessary initiatives and action to restore consumer confidence and protect citizens ' health !
If legal action can now only be taken at Community level , then let us at least act quickly and stop indefinitely postponing the implementation of the commitments made in 1997 with a view to providing the consumer with transparent and comprehensible information .
Compulsory labelling indicating the origin of goods must therefore be introduced as soon as possible , and it must certainly not be postponed until 1 January 2003 , as the Commission proposes .
We must not agree to any exemptions , again as the Commission proposes , for minced and cut meat , which would be tantamount to excluding 30 % to 50 % of beef , according to the country , from the need for mandatory labelling .
Nor must we agree , as the Commission is once again proposing , to adopt an over-general EC-type generic designation of origin .
Consumers want to be certain of the operators ' ability to monitor the origin of meat accurately .
The Member State of origin must therefore be indicated .
Furthermore , beef imported from third countries must be subject to the same labelling regulations as Community beef , and if it does not comply with European Union regulations on traceability , this must also be clearly indicated .
This , Mr President , is the intention of the amendments which Mrs Thomas-Moreau and I tabled on behalf of the UEN Group , which we are proposing to all our fellow Members who are keen to contribute to bringing about genuine traceability of beef .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , fourteen years after BSE first appeared , we have finally got around to doing something about labelling meat in order to protect consumers and ensure traceability .
This protection is undoubtedly belated in principle but , above all , illusory in practice .
Firstly , in the draft regulation , 50 % of European meat is effectively exempt from compulsory labelling if it is minced or cut .
For the remaining 50 % , labelling is not compulsory until 2003 , which means that we have three years to dispose of British surplus stocks .
And after 2003 , the designation of origin may be limited to a simple indication of ' EC origin ' with no mention of the country .
What is more , to bury the prion under even more details , the label is laden down with indications of : the place where the animal was born , fattened , slaughtered and boned , with the Member State of origin , the region of origin , the farm of origin , a total of twelve items , plus the price and the weight , making a total of fourteen items , which is simply too much to read and take in .

So , Mr Papayannakis is improving the system , the deadline for compulsory labelling has been brought forward from 2003 to 2001 , since 2000 is out of the question ; labelling is to be simplified , the national labelling systems mandatory in France , Belgium and Finland are to be retained .
This is a good move .
The amendments will be adopted .
The unwillingness of the Commission is , however , with apologies to the Commissioner , apparent to everyone .
As a solution , labelling is a good idea only at first sight .
Labelling is no safeguard against GMOs , chocolate containing vegetable fats or , tomorrow , GMO fats , or , at a later date , American hormone-treated beef , or prion-infected meat .
The only effective protection would be checks , and this requires States and frontiers .
We have , however , eliminated frontiers , and this is the price we have to pay for Europe : freedom of movement at the expense of safety .
I just hope , ladies and gentlemen , that no one will have to be punished in future .
Previously one could be punished at the stake , now punishment would mean a steak , a British beefsteak .
Mr President , this debate on the labelling of beef is closely akin to our previous concerns on the subject of food safety .
By means of this report and its conclusions , if they are adopted , we will be raising a number of concerns among consumers , in a very sensitive area where the mad cow syndrome is still predominant .
As far as the EDD Group is concerned , product traceability provides a guarantee both for the protection of consumer health and for the promotion of quality products which all producers , large or small , are capable of producing if they favour quality over base commercial and financial interests which have little regard for human health .
In our view the important and essential thing in this report is that all meat industry products should be covered by compulsory labelling , from basic butchered meat to derivatives , minced meat , cut meat , etc .
In the same way , the consumer must absolutely be provided with a complete set of information , with labelling which gives full details on the way the animal was reared and slaughtered : its place of birth , farming and slaughter , as well as feeding and farming techniques , not forgetting any antibiotics or growth promoters which may have been administered .
Finally , it is essential that these measures should be implemented as quickly as possible , since it is a matter of consumer rights .
Let us not delay , especially as this is no recent matter .
It is high time we took action .
Consumer confidence cannot be decreed , it must be earned .
To that end , as I already stated in our discussions on 5 October 1999 , the CPNT party members within the EDD Group will therefore support any measure in support of complete traceability , which can only be of benefit to everyone concerned : the consumer , who will be informed , and the good producer , who will be protected .
Mr President , I wish to put firmly on the record tonight that the farmers in Northern Ireland are exceedingly angry at the UK Government for not seeking European funding to help promote beef labelling .
Other states have taken up this money to the tune of some £ 4m. the Irish Republic to the tune of £ 100 000 - yet the disgraceful attitude of the London Government is to keep this from the UK farmers .
I want also to say that the place of origin mentioned in any labelling system should be the real place of origin , because any idea of stating where meat is processed as the place of origin is not acceptable .
That is a very fundamental question that must be made perfectly clear in any law that we pass .
Any food labelling policy must be accurate and dependable for both the producers and the consumers .
Whatever may be the policy of this Union in regard to an open market economy , those people who want to buy home-produced meat should be given the right to know it is home-produced .
Farmers deserve to have a guarantee of that , and so should the consumers .
Mr President , the discussion on labelling beef has reached a point at which it is crucial to restore confidence among producers and consumers .
The report focuses on the traceability of beef , i.e. knowing its exact origins , but at the same time , this cannot be detached from consumer confidence , as consumers want information .
It strikes me that this Parliament insists on also making national labelling possible and obligatory , while the Commission places the emphasis on labelling which states " originates from the EU " .
I am convinced that one day , we will be proud again of a label which states : produced in the EU , and that we will have a food safety bureau in the European Union with a forceful , supranational mandate which can act promptly as and when problems arise .
This must be our ultimate goal . We will then be where we need to be .
Until such time , we need to be able to find out exactly what is happening , we need to be able to give the consumer sound information and until such time , we will need to use stop-gap measures to do this .
One of these measures is most definitely the use of a label indicating the Member State .
This is good , because in this way we can start restoring confidence in the producer , especially at a time when food safety is so much in the public eye .
We simply need this .
Another positive step is if it could also be pointed out that there can be a time when confidence will be restored .
In this sense , I have to say that my delegation and some in my group support Amendment No 61 tabled by Mr Maaten and Mr de Roo , in which the times are indicated when assurances can be given with regard to BSE inspections and other matters and which states that there can also be a time when the EU label will be applicable .
I consider this to be an interim step , and ultimately I can see one key goal : to restore confidence , to produce a forceful EU label and ultimately a forceful food safety bureau , because these discussions are interconnected .
Mr President , Commissioner , food safety gets people talking perhaps more than any other issue , and , for that reason , it is good that it also gets us talking here in Parliament .
But the most important consideration is that it does not just get us talking , but that we should also do something about it .
The work of Mr Papayannakis has already been praised here . I would like to express my thanks too : it is a good basis for better standards of consumer safety throughout the European Union .
We have plenty of examples of consumers not having always been given priority when it comes to food production .
The Single Market and the free movement of goods provide more freedom of choice for the public and better markets for producers .
As the issue here is about food , it is even more important than ever to ensure that this freedom is also responsibly restricted , that consumers are protected , and that they have a right to know what they are eating .
In this case , it is especially important that meat and processed meat products are among those products whose origin the consumer knows .
Many have mentioned here that the EC label is not enough and that more precise information is needed .
I agree with this .
It is absolutely essential to know what country the products are from .
In addition , the origin , not only of meat products , but of the ingredients used in processed meat , must be shown as clearly as possible .
Labels must also be made compulsory as quickly as possible .
The timetable that the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy is proposing is not too pressing .
The Member States should have already prepared themselves for it .
Mr President , this regulation cannot be postponed any longer , and I fully support the stricter timetable that the European Parliament is proposing in the amendments to the Commission ' s proposal .
Consumers require information about where the animal was born , bred and slaughtered , and cattle should be identified and registered so that their traceability can be guaranteed .
The Commission must be far more vigorous than it has been so far in putting the screws on those countries which have not established databases , so ensuring that the countries concerned become fully operational in this respect .
The issue is also one of credibility when it comes to implementing joint resolutions in all Member States .
It is also about citizens ' confidence and belief that food quality is everything it should be .
A bit of drive needs to be shown , and no exceptions should be made in the case of cattle which graze in the mountains .
Where registration is required , what , in any case , is the difference between cattle which graze in the mountains and those which graze in valleys or in fields ?
I am in favour of beef being labelled with the name of the country or countries it comes from and I am strongly against introducing a common EU label from which consumers cannot see which countries are involved .
The purpose of the regulation in question must be to achieve a situation in which consumers have confidence in meat from all EU countries .
Until this is a reality , consumers need to know precisely which country their meat comes from .
I have tabled an amendment to the effect that the slaughterhouse ' s authorisation number should not be shown on the label .
In this way , I wished to ensure that small and medium-sized slaughterhouses could continue to supply meat to butchers .
The authorisation number does not provide the consumer with any useful information and has no bearing upon traceability .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to start by thanking everyone who has worked so constructively on this report .
The compulsory registration system for bovine animals due to enter into force is the sine qua non for a reasonable beef labelling system .
As a farmer , I am concerned that every consumer should be able to trace where his schnitzel has come from .
All farmers are proud of the quality of their products and it is therefore in the farmers ' interests for everyone to know whom they have to thank for their extremely safe and healthy food .
Such a system must be practicable if it is to achieve its objective .
We must take account of how the procedures will be applied in practice .
Because of the varying topography of Europe , its farmers must apply different working and production methods .
Take the example of summer pasturing in the Alps .
As you know , every spring a total of 400 000 cattle are driven on to the Alps in Italy , Austria and Germany , where they remain for the summer , i.e. for about three months .
Consideration must be given to the pasturing lists which are already in use and which take account of this situation in order to avoid forcing additional unnecessary administrative costs on farmers .
As we have said , traceability must be guaranteed in all cases .
But the regulation must be adapted to actual and local circumstances if it is to be seen as anything other than EU harassment , which merely triggers abuse and if it is to gain acceptance among the people .
I therefore hope that proposed Amendment No 19 to Article 7 ( 1 ) second indent will be adopted by the entire House .
It has already been adopted by the Committee on the Environment and in the Committee on Agriculture .
Mr President , the discussion on labelling beef is quite loaded .
An important question is whether the " Origin : EU " label should be permitted as an added option .
The Commission thinks it should .
Many in Parliament believe that it is the country of origin that should be on the label .
The background to this is the food crises .
I could not agree more that beef should be completely traceable and that this should be the case as soon as possible .
I also understand that consumers increasingly want information on the country of origin or region of origin concerning their food . This is often a matter of taste .
Furthermore , I agree with the analysis that the " Origin : EU " label could be abused by countries where food safety is not regulated .
But I do not advocate scrapping the option of including " Origin : EU " on the label either .
In my opinion , we should choose another approach .
We need to prescribe conditions for the use of the " Origin : EU " label .
One condition , for example , could be that the identification and registration system must be fully implemented and observed .
There are , of course , other means of enforcing compliance , but this method is far more direct .
Parliament has to keep an eye on compliance with the directives it produces .
This approach has the added advantage that the " Origin : EU " label has a positive ring to it .
Rather than being a cover-up for countries where food quality needs to be regulated , the " Origin : EU " label is thus a quality guarantee .
If the producer prefers to indicate the country of origin nonetheless , this is possible too .
There are a number of additional arguments as to why " Origin : EU " labelling should be possible .
For example , the meat industry and retail trade have raised all kinds of practical objections and pointed at the red tape which too detailed information would entail .
I will not spend any time on this argument , as it is not of key importance , in my opinion .
However , I would like to ask your attention for a question of principle .
The internal market is a large entity .
The principle of mutual recognition is fundamental .
Mutual recognition requires trust , and trust requires common standards , especially in the case of food safety .
If we prohibit the use of the " Origin : EU " label , we would be resigning ourselves to a kind of re-nationalisation of the internal market .
We would then be accepting that we have more confidence in certain countries than others and this is a sign of little faith in our own food safety policy .
This is unacceptable in my view .
All EU Member States need to guarantee safe meat .
" Origin : EU " is then a symbol for quality and I therefore advocate backing Amendments Nos 60 and 61 .
Mr President , Commissioner , in my view , at present this is not a matter of confidence in the safety of food alone : it is very important that we also look to the near future .
We must put our own house , our own part of the world , in order .
The EU is expanding eastward , and we all know the capacity and volume of meat and beef production there , for example .
This should also alert them to the fact that they must now start to put their own affairs in order , so that they can adapt to the model that exists here .
If we are not ready , how can we expect others to be ?
For this reason , labelling must be kept very simple : the labels must show the country of origin , and , if one wishes , the region of production .
But a label showing the country of origin of a product is very important to us , particularly if we want consumers to have confidence in food safety in the future .
Mr President , Commissioner , the beef industry has signed a contract with public opinion , based on the transparency claimed and , I might even say , demanded by the citizen .
Today , this transparency is applicable , within the beef industry , to two different but indissociable areas : BSE and labelling .
France is stepping up its precautionary measures for specified at-risk materials and is implementing an extensive protocol to evaluate ESB tests on bovine animals .
Tomorrow , the European Union is preparing to outline a test programme for all Member States .
In this context , consumers would not understand the delays in the matter of labelling .
I am therefore particularly concerned to ensure that the operators in this industry are not confronted with a legal vacuum which would lead public opinion , quite legitimately , to wonder whether there is a real desire for greater transparency .
How else is it possible to explain the fact that at European level we have managed to obtain an agreement on chocolate but that we are unable to meet the deadlines we set ourselves in an area as sensitive and important as beef .
Let us make no mistake as to what is at issue here .
I am convinced that the subject of beef labelling is no mere technical issue .
I should like to point out that if labelling is of such great importance to consumers it is because it is their guarantee that product traceability has been tightened up , that the operators in the industry and also the European and national public authorities have become more accountable , and that control systems have been improved .
Finally , what our fellow citizens are demanding is the right to information .
This right to be informed is the natural counterpart to the development of trade and the proper exercise of competition .
By virtue of the transparency it conveys , labelling makes it possible to improve the freedom of movement of beef , providing assurances to consumers and guaranteeing their freedom to make an informed choice .
In the beef sector , improving consumer information through labelling represents a strong message from Europe to its trading partners : it demonstrates its intention , over and above product health safety , to safeguard the consumer ' s freedom of choice .
Mr President , I agree with the many speakers before me that what we need more than anything at the moment is a system which enables traceability at all stages of production .
Fortunately , integral chain control ( ICC ) is already well-known in many countries .
In my opinion , this is not related to national borders .
If certain conditions are met - and I would like to refer to Amendments Nos 60 and 61 concerning the inspection of BSE , as others have done so before me - then the designation " Origin : EU " is sufficient as far as I am concerned .
This does not preclude all the other information being added to the label on a voluntary basis .
Mentioning the relevant country , region , town , village , and so on and so forth , is fine but let the consumer decide where he wants to buy the product .
But it should not be an EU stipulation .
If this were to be the case , then this would be a re-nationalisation of Europe ' s common market in a sense , and that would be a retrograde step .
Mr President , I am very disappointed at the delay , though I am delighted now that we are going to have clear compulsory labelling .
I hope this will restore consumer confidence in beef , especially after the BSE crisis .
I would like to see not only the country but also the region of origin on the label .
I represent the West Midlands which has some of the best beef in the world - Herefordshire beef and Shropshire beef .
I should like to see that go on the label .
I would oppose very strongly the idea that " EU " should be on the label and not the country and region of origin .
I am also concerned about some of the words that might go on the label .
One of those words is " slaughtered " .
That will not help with consumer confidence and might put some of the consumers off if they actually see where the animal was " slaughtered " .
I wish we could find a new word for it .
Generally speaking , I am delighted that at last we are going to have clear labelling and , as I said , I want it to be the country and region of origin .
Mr President , I wish to begin by saying that I welcome the report .
A European Union-wide identification system for cattle is long overdue .
The system is certainly very necessary , if nothing else than to achieve a level playing field within the European Union and to ensure that all countries reach the same standards .
I want to sound a note of caution .
I come from an area in Northern Ireland that has a standard of identification and traceability which is as good as any ever will be .
No system is a hundred per cent perfect , so do not think you can bring that about .
There will always be people out to abuse the system .
That has been the case for centuries - and will continue .
You can only try to develop the best possible system of traceability .
I have a number of concerns .
The first is : who pays ?
The problem to date has been , in my experience in Northern Ireland , that the consumer has borne the brunt of the cost of the extra traceability , and this has been substantial .
It has not been borne by the retailer .
The consumer will perhaps ultimately pay - but he or she may not .
From that point of view it is expensive for those people .
I have one further question of the Commission . Is it wise to renationalise the beef market ?
Or even to regionalise it within countries .
I seriously question that point .
We have fought for years within the European Union to achieve a single market and now we are renationalising that market .
I challenge the Commission tonight to answer that question .
Is this a wise move ?
Let us not look to the short term , let us look to the long term , because the long term is the challenge - not five years but ten , fifteen years from now .
What is going to be the situation on the beef market ?
As I said , in Northern Ireland we have full traceability and our measures go beyond the regulations .
I have to say to the Commission , and to producers in other Member States , that my producers have to date not seen any financial benefit from that which they have suffered .
The proposal , as Mr Goodwill has said , has two important aims .
First to ensure the traceability of beef , second to allow consumers to make a fully informed choice .
Unfortunately , although the two aims are compatible , there is some tension between them where the details of the regulation are concerned .
This is particularly the case in relation to Article 13 and Article 13 ( 2 ) primarily serving the first and Article 13 ( 5 ) the second aim .
Amendments Nos 26 and 28 to 13 ( 5 ) therefore seemed rather confused - one seeking less and one seeking more detailed information for consumers .
For this reason , whatever the final form of Article 13 , I regard Amendments Nos 15 and 29 as being of the first importance .
Amendment 29 in particular will allow areas of the EU that are justifiably proud of the quality of their product to identify it as such .
For my own constituency of course , Aberdeen Angus beef is already justly renowned throughout the world but I am sure the same is true for other regions in the rest of the UK and other Member States .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to start by thanking the rapporteur , Mr Papayannakis , and Mr Kindermann , the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture , for their constructive contributions to the debate on the draft regulation under discussion .
A whole series of amendments to the Commission proposal have been tabled , 44 of which were accepted by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection on 22 March .
A further 18 proposed amendments were subsequently submitted for this plenary sitting .
I should like to start with the Commission ' s views on the first 44 proposals .
The Commission is able to accept 18 of them .
This includes proposed amendments which are accepted in full or in part and amendments which require minor editorial changes .
In another 12 proposed amendments I can see what your concerns are but the Commission is unable to accept these amendments .
However , I shall ensure that the Council is informed of your point of view .
This applies , for example , to proposed Amendment No 20 .
A number of the proposed amendments which the Commission is able to accept , such as Amendments Nos 2 , 3 , 4 , 18 and 19 first part , and 21 , 33 , 35 and 42 tighten up the wording .
I also accept proposed Amendment No 19 , second part , which makes provision for a simplification for cattle pastured on the Alps in the summer .
The improvements to the definition of labelling are also acceptable .
The same applies to the information to be included on the label and to the interpretation of the concept of origin .
I am therefore prepared to accept proposed Amendments Nos 22 and 23 , insofar as they concern labelling , and the parts of proposed Amendments Nos 25 , 26 and 28 calling for information on individual regions to be scrapped .
As we are all concerned that the labelling system should be introduced as quickly as possible , I welcome proposed Amendment No 39 reducing the deadline set for the Member States to appoint the competent authorities .
Finally , proposed Amendment No 44 , under which the regulation would enter into force on 1 September 2000 heads in exactly the same direction .
I think the new recital suggested in proposed Amendment No 6 , whereby Member States must ensure that their databases are operational as quickly as possible , is also a good idea .
I am also able to accept the parts of proposed Amendments Nos 25 , 26 and 28 making information on the region optional , whereby I assume , if no decision is made to the contrary , that this information will come under the voluntary system .
As I too take the view that the possibility of confusion with protected geographical indications governed by Regulation 2081 / 92 must be excluded , I agree unreservedly with the new recital in proposed Amendment No 15 .
Nonetheless , we must still investigate how the stated objective is to be reached , whereby I envisage a more comprehensive solution than that suggested in proposed Amendment No 29 .
The question of when compulsory indications of origin need to be introduced is an important point .
As the obligation to enter the place of birth and all stopovers in the animal passport and database has only been introduced for animals born on or after 1 January 1998 , it will be difficult to trace the complete origin of bovine animals over the next five years .
According to our calculations , this problem will apply to just under half the beef produced from 2003 onwards , which is why I have reservations about introducing compulsory indications of origin earlier or even , as suggested in proposed Amendment No 26 , as early as 1 September 2001 .
I would point out in this respect that the Committee on Agriculture has recommended that they be introduced on 1 January 2002 .
I also note that you insist that indications of origin must state the country , even if this means listing several countries on the label .
I am sorry that you find the simplified indication " Produced in the European Union " unacceptable , despite the fact that it is in keeping with the principles of the internal market .
As far as labelling of minced meat is concerned , we must bear in mind that the production of minced meat , for example of hamburgers , is a continuous process .
The obligation to provide a complete indication of origin for this meat would therefore give rise to technical problems and may well bring the entire intra-Community trade in processed meat to a virtual standstill .
I would therefore suggest that you reconsider the simplified labelling system .
The proposed labelling regulation makes provision for the possibility of combining animals in groups rather than entering each individual animal with producers who take the trouble to guarantee the traceability of each individual animal given an incentive in the form of a special logo .
I must admit that I do not fully understand why you demand in proposed Amendments Nos 14 and 31 that we should let go of the only instrument which guarantees real and complete traceability .
As far as the Commission ' s powers to react to unusual and unforeseen circumstances are concerned , I am , unfortunately , unable to accept proposed Amendments Nos 16 and 38 because they prevent a practicable solution .
Finally , I think it is premature to commit ourselves to extending the labelling system to processed products containing beef , as suggested in proposed Amendment No 40 .
Let us gain some experience with the system being proposed now and then we can consider this idea at a later date .
As far as the proposed amendments tabled subsequently at the end of last week are concerned , I have already explained in connection with proposed Amendments Nos 45 and 46 that the Commission agrees with you that the first stage of the compulsory system should start on 1 September this year .
If proposed Amendment No 44 is accepted , the regulation automatically enters into force on this date .
Proposed Amendments Nos 45 and 46 are therefore superfluous for technical reasons .
As far as proposed Amendment No 47 is concerned , I should like to advise against continuing the national compulsory beef identification system as soon as the full EU system has been introduced .
In the end we would have 15 different national systems , which runs completely counter to the internal market .
Proposed Amendment No 48 refers to information on the use of antibiotics or stimulants and to fattening methods .
This idea may look simple on paper , but it is in fact extremely complicated to administer and , more importantly , to control .
In addition , there is no definition of the various rearing methods and every animal will certainly be fed using various methods , rather than one and the same method , during its lifetime .
As far as medication is concerned , it would be much better to maintain our high veterinary standards , thereby guaranteeing that only safe beef reaches the market .
The Commission would therefore prefer not to adopt this proposal .
As far as the voluntary system is concerned , which is to be set up alongside the new compulsory system in order to include all the information which is not being made compulsory , the Commission can accept two of the four amendments adopted by the Committee on the Environment , namely proposals 33 and 35 .
It is obvious from the vote in committee that Parliament is not in favour of amending the Commission ' s basic attempt to simplify the approval procedure .
However , I see that a total of nine new proposed amendments have been tabled for this plenary sitting which were not adopted by the Committee on the Environment .
These amendments seek to re-introduce a formal approval procedure for voluntary information on labels .
Let me assure you that such amendments do not cause any particular problem because their purpose is to reinforce the administrative procedure .
For the rest , recent discussions in the Council have gone in the same direction .
I am therefore convinced that these proposed amendments will be taken on board by the Council .
From now on , the Commission will be acting as go-between between the two decision-making institutions on this matter .
With just over three months , we do not have much time left for a final decision .
Given the speed with which you have worked here in Parliament , hopefully the Council will decide on its common position as quickly as possible .
That concludes the debate .
The vote will be taken on Wednesday at 11.30 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 12.10 a.m. )
Adoption of the Minutes of the previous sitting
The Minutes of yesterday ' s sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mrs Ludford , are you sure your point of order is related to the Minutes ?
Madam President , I signalled I wanted to raise a point of order , although it is not actually on the Minutes .
I do not want to delay the House unduly , but I think that as we prepare to debate the construction of Europe , it is important to take note of a landmark court judgement in the UK .
The so-called historian , David Irving , has lost his libel case against the American academic , Deborah Lipstadt , who accused him of manipulating evidence to deny the Nazi genocide of the Jews .
The judge has ruled , in a devastating judgement , that he was " an active Holocaust denier , anti-Semitic and racist and that he associates with right-wing extremists who promote neo-Nazism " .
This judgement is important , not just for Europe ' s past , but also for its present .
With the rise in racism and anti-Semitism and the electoral success of extremist parties , this judgement boosts the fight to make Europe a society free of racism and at ease with diversity .
Thank you , Mrs Ludford .
I am happy to take note of your point of order .
But for the time being I would like comments to relate to the Minutes , so that we can adopt them .
After that Members are free to move any other points of order .
Madam President , item 2 of the Minutes on page 5 , which is in fact the first substantive page , refers to the points I raised about certain political groups apparently not respecting the Rules of Procedure in that they appear to allow individual members of their group to table amendments in plenary , supposedly in the name of the group , although this cannot possibly be the case because contradictory amendments are tabled in the name of the same group .
I would like to underline that although the Minutes mentioned specifically the EPP Group , it is in fact not the only group to have acted in this way .
For instance , the Technical Group , the TDI Group , which did not table any amendments at committee stage whatsoever , has now arrived in plenary with between 20 and 30 amendments , many of which are contradictory .
They are tabled by different members within that group taking different positions and therefore cannot possibly be a group position .
That does not respect our own Rules of Procedure , which allow only 32 members or a group to table amendments in plenary .
Madam President , my point concerns the section of the Minutes on Question Time yesterday evening , when I raised a point of order .
First of all , Question Time was put back to 6 : 30 p.m. , then it was announced on the screen that it would begin at 6 : 50 p.m.
In the end it was after 7 : 00 p.m. before Question Time started .
The first part was supposed to last 30 minutes , according to the Agenda ; but it lasted much longer .
Basically , my problem is that I had questions down - as some other people did - to Commissioner Byrne .
We had group meetings at the time and saw on the screen " Question 41 " .
But by the time I reached the plenary , you had moved on automatically within a few minutes to Question 49 .
So five or six people had questions down to Commissioner Byrne , but none of us were here to ask the questions .
Commissioner Byrne seems to have taken offence at this and seen it as some kind of snub .
But it is very difficult for Members to sit right through every single question during Question Time just in case we jump from No 1 to No 99 in a matter of seconds .
So , could we please stick to the Agenda : thirty minutes for the first part of Question Time , twenty for the second part and so on .
We should not keep changing the Agenda because then it is extremely difficult for us to operate .
Thank you , Mrs McKenna .
I take note of your comment and will ensure this does not happen again .
Madam President , in recent days , immense natural catastrophes in which quite a number of people have died have again occurred on the banks of the River Tisza .
I would therefore ask the President to send our condolences to both the Romanian and Hungarian parliaments .
At the same time , we must be alert to the kind of environmental risks these natural catastrophes may entail for our common European environment .
The Tisza flows into the Danube delta , which is one of the world ' s most significant protected areas of environmental interest .
Thank you , Mrs Thors , I am quite prepared to do so .
Madam President , with rather more levity .
Last night in the Committee on Budgets when the refreshments were being distributed , Mr Colom pointed out that the small cartons of milk were marked " for distribution in schools only " .
Had it said " for schoolchildren only " one could understand why it was being distributed in the European Parliament , but it was marked " for schools only " .
Could we find out why this has happened ?
It is so embarrassing .
I know we campaigned for more school milk but , on this occasion , we did not want it here .

Thank you , Mr Wynn , I cannot answer you right now , but I will have the matter investigated .
Madam President , I wish to inform you and the Members who come into daily contact , although sometimes without noticing them , with the Parliament staff who ensure the running of the House as a whole , that certain sections ( security guards , receptionists , firemen ) were on strike yesterday afternoon .
They were protesting at having to work 12 hours at a stretch , day and night , for an average net salary of FRF 6 000 , without even receiving extra pay for night or weekend work .
I want to express my solidarity with them .
Moreover , we have written you a letter , Madam President , on behalf of the LO and LCR Members , and hope you will follow the matter up .
Thank you , Mrs Laguiller .
I will give the letter my utmost attention .
Madam President , I have been listening to the translations of the speeches on my headphones for a long time now , and the sound disappears sometimes , even if I change places , and I also get a rasping noise , not only here but also in our Group ' s room .
There is some technical fault here , and I wish the relevant people would check whether there is too much interference here , owing to mobile phones , for example .
Even the position of my head affects audibility , and I cannot really sit here listening with my head tilted to one side .
The other request I have is for a technician to adjust the sound volume here .
Some Members shout into the microphone , even though the microphone is , in fact , there to make shouting unnecessary , thereby making it impossible to hear anything over the headphones .
So whenever someone shouts into the microphone - even though they should not - I would ask that the sound volume in the Chamber be lowered immediately , so that we can also hear what is being said over the headphones .
Thank you , Mr Paasilinna , we will look into all that and check the sound system in general .
( The Minutes were approved )
IGC
The next item is the report ( A5-0086 / 2000 ) by Mr Dimitrakopoulos and Mr Leinen , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on the European Parliament ' s proposals for the Intergovernmental Conference ( 14094 / 1999 - C5-0341 / 1999 - 1999 / 0825 ( CNS ) ) .
First of all I must inform the House that the Union for Europe of the Nations Group has moved the report ' s inadmissibility , pursuant to the Rules of Procedure .
Let me point out that the Council consulted Parliament on convening the Intergovernmental Conference and that the report by Mr Dimitrakopoulos and Mr Leinen was entered on the agenda in accordance with the appropriate Rules .
Mr Ribeiro e Castro will present the motion .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this report should not have been admitted .
It is generally anti what Europe really represents and anti most of what Europe has achieved .
Paragraph 15 of the motion for a resolution is a symptom of this aggressiveness towards Europe .
We are all attached to fundamental rights and the rule of law , starting here in this House .
So how can we agree when the fundamental right of recourse to the courts is being threatened ?
This is not a question of internal affairs , but external affairs of great importance .
We are Members of this House and we represent our electors .
Anything which discriminates in our legal and political conditions , between our political parties and groups in terms of freedom and equality affects our right of representation and ultimately the rights and very freedom of our electors .
These are the elements particularly under threat in this report which wants to interfere with and discriminate between the statutes of the political parties .
The very essence of Europe is under threat .
The fundamental right of recourse to the courts cannot be altered by anyone and nor can the rule of law .
Paragraph 15 ruins the whole text by defiling a very serious issue .
The temptation for those in power to act arbitrarily which this paragraph encourages is a clear illustration of the position taken in the rest of the report , and a terrible omen .
We therefore move the inadmissibility of this report which , in addition to having a dubious legal basis , was not properly prepared and does not enjoy the broad consensus which Europe must have .
This is evident in both the injudiciousness of this regrettable paragraph and the fact that 222 , I repeat 222 , amendments were tabled on this report .
Is there any better proof that this report is totally inappropriate ?
We therefore propose , in order to defend Europe and the rule of law , the immediate rejection of this report .
Thank you , Mr Ribeiro e Castro .
Does anyone wish to speak in favour of this request for referral back to committee ?
Madam President , I think Mr Ribeiro e Castro is quite right to consider the Dimitrakopoulos-Leinen report inadmissible because it conflicts with and even infringes a number of rights enshrined in our institutions .
First of all , Mr Ribeiro e Castro is right to single out paragraph 15 , which states that ' no actions may be brought in connection with the interna corporis affairs of the European Parliament . '
That statement clearly infringes the fundamental right of every citizen , and thus also of Members , to bring an action .
But more generally I believe this report infringes a whole range of different rights , beginning with the rights of the small and medium-sized states which have formed an integral part of our institutions and been highly respected by them since the early days of the Treaty of Rome .
Thank you , Mr Berthu .

Mr Dimitrakopoulos and Mr Leinen , the two rapporteurs , wish to speak against this motion .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , however much I respect the opinion of the Members who have just spoken , I find it harsh and unjust to regard our report as inadmissible because of paragraph 15 .

Other colleagues have tabled amendments with a view to voting against that paragraph , and Members may agree with those amendments .
To agree or not agree with a paragraph in a report is justified and democratic , and that is what we are here for .
But I do not think it is right to move that a report is inadmissible because of one paragraph .
I call on Members to vote against this motion .
We must examine and vote on the report during this part-session , because it is not a matter of voting for the two rapporteurs but of voting for the European Parliament ' s opinion .
Madam President , I am delighted that of all the groups , it is the UEN Group that is standing up for more fundamental rights and more democracy at European Union level .
I am pleased about that ; it is a major step forward .
However , I also believe that the strong language my fellow delegates are using is completely uncalled for .
The EU countries have completely different cultures .
In some countries Parliament can draw up its own rules of procedure and one does not have the option of going to the court of justice .
Some countries have a different system .
We have recital 15 .
Mr Dimitrakopoulos has already mentioned that there are amendments .
The UEN Group are welcome to vote against them and then we will see if it is left in or taken out .
All in all , I believe that there is no call for excessively strong language , and I am also in favour of us rejecting this amendment .
Madam President , I do not think this amendment is something we can vote on , as the Treaty of Amsterdam makes express provision for the relationship between the institutions and the procedures to be framed differently .
In this respect , this report forms part of the implementation of the Treaty of Amsterdam , and one cannot vote on erroneous , legal proposed amendments , one can only reject them !
( Laughter and applause )
If you feel duty-bound to reject it , you will have an opportunity to do so .
I shall now put the motion presented by the Union for Europe of the Nations Group to the vote by roll call .
( Parliament rejected the procedural motion )
Madam President , Minister , Deputy Minister , Commissioner , we are at a really very important juncture so far as the vocation of the European Union is concerned .
Today , through the proceedings of the Intergovernmental Conference , the European Union is being called upon to address the great challenges involved in the transition from the 20th to the 21st century , challenges we all recognise , which are important , which influence the course of the European Union every day , and challenges which , above all , raise a fundamental issue : how ready are we , as an institution , as the European Union , to face them ?
The Intergovernmental Conference attempts to answer just that question .
It is common ground that in the face of all those challenges , the way the European Union functions at present is certainly in need of some changes , changes whose important aim will be the future progress of the European Union on the basis of what we have all accepted until now .
The report you have before you today is significant in that it covers the following points .
The first point is once again to consolidate the institutional nature of the European Union .
We repeat and insist that the European Union is both a union of states and a union of peoples .
It is precisely our acceptance of that principle which has guided the European Union towards the many successes we can mention , and which , of course , we all like to refer to from time to time .
The second point is to reconfirm and consolidate another important principle , the principle of a balance of powers , a principle that relates precisely to the role and relationship of those who participate in the European Union , a principle expressed by the way all the Member States express themselves in all - I repeat , all - the European Union ' s institutional bodies .
And as you know , the European Union has got to where it is today , achieved what it has achieved , precisely because it has been and is functioning on the basis of a balance of powers as agreed and commonly accepted .
The third basic principle safeguarded in the report is the proposal for a general - and I stress the word general - review of all the institutional bodies that make up the European Union .
For some , perhaps , that may be a risky proposal .
However , I must stress that it is necessary and essential , particularly since we all agree that over and above all , the current reconsideration of how the European Union works is directly linked to the great challenge presented by the European Union ' s enlargement .
It is only natural , when already in a Europe with 15 Member States we find and all agree that some things do not work quite so well and must be put right , that this will be all the more necessary when we it concerns a European Union with 18 , 20 , 25 and 27 Member States .
The fourth point concerns a number of new proposals , despite the fact that the issues to which they relate had always been debated .
I refer very specifically to closer cooperation .
Closer cooperation , at least as we view it , must comprise two main elements .
Firstly , it must be an incentive and not an obstacle - I stress : not an obstacle - it must be an incentive for all the Member States to participate more and in greater depth in the European procedures .
Secondly , it must contain a very highly developed element of democratic awareness , which means that if any country or countries for some reason do not wish to participate , at least during a first phase , this should not be regarded as an exclusion or as a factor that restricts the presence of those countries in the European Union .
We have taken a great many steps and we certainly can point to two examples of closer cooperation . The Schengen Agreement , and Economic and Monetary Union itself .
I would also like to see closer cooperation in foreign policy issues and others as well .
To put it clearly , closer cooperation is a Community process and both foreign policy and common defence policy issues should be dealt with as a Community process , because it provides control mechanisms .
I would like to close by expressing my thanks to the Portuguese Presidency and in particular to Mr da Costa for his cooperation , to Commissioner Barnier , to you and all our colleagues , and of course , to my co-rapporteur Mr Leinen , with whom we worked hard but very well .
I would also like to thank the members of Parliament ' s Secretariat who assisted us and the interpreters , who on very many occasions worked long hours to enable the difficult negotiations you all know about to take place .
Madam President , I am sure it will come as no surprise to you if I talk about citizens ' freedoms and rights and justice in relation to this fascinating report , whose two rapporteurs I congratulate .
It is the view of this Committee that the construction of this area of justice is important and , to this end , a reform of the Court of Justice is necessary .
In order to reform the Court it will be necessary to amend the Treaty , so that the Statute and the Regulations of the Court of Justice and the Court of First Instance become operative .
None of them is currently operative .
Our first demand is therefore that qualified majority be established with the assent of the European Parliament .
With regard to the Court , Parliament also asks to be able to participate in the process of selecting judges as already happens with the posts in the constitutional courts in our states .
On the other hand , with regard to freedoms and rights , we want citizens to be provided with full rights to appeal so that they can be assured that Community legislation will be enforced in the event of violations of fundamental rights . This is not currently the case .
We want to see a reform of Articles 230 and 300 of the Treaty so that Parliament is on an equal footing with the Commission and the Council as far as appeals are concerned .
Lastly , Madam President , we want to see a reform of the Treaty so that Parliament , in relation to the third pillar , also has full access to justice by means of repeal in the event of regulations and acts which do not conform .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Court of Justice needs to be properly armed in order to be able to cope with the growing number of disputes , as well as its ever expanding authority .
The Court must be able to focus on the real legal issues and legal protection of EU subjects .
The Court of First Instance must be better accommodated in this framework , and both jurisdictions must be able to take more autonomous decisions regarding their own structures and procedures .
Sound and timely administration of justice is a vital component of the constitutional state .
In the light of this , the role of the European Parliament should be upgraded to that of a fully-fledged legislative body and that of a fully-fledged European institution .
These are , in a nutshell , the motives underlying the opinion issued by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market .
As rapporteur , I am also delighted to note that the Committee on Constitutional Affairs is on the same wavelength for the greater part of its principal report .
Unfortunately , time constraints prevent me from going into any detail .
But in order to bring the report of the Committee on Legal Affairs as far as possible into line with the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , I tabled four more amendments in the plenary meeting .
As some of these amendments are also to be found in the opinions of other committees , I believe that these amendments deserve - and will probably receive - the support of the entire Parliament .
This is where I would like to conclude my brief report on a not unimportant contribution to what will probably be the last IGC before the largest , most historic and most risky enlargement since the inception of the present European integration process .
This is why we need to seize this opportunity with both hands to prepare the European Union , with all its institutions and in all fields , to face the challenges of the 21st century successfully .
, draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Budgets .
( ES ) Madam President , the conditions of my intervention in this plenary session are illustrative of the budgetary problem .
I have just hurried from a meeting which , according to the Treaty , does not exist .
I am participating , on behalf of Parliament , in the tripartite dialogue on the budget to set the budgetary guidelines .
This is precisely the point we have raised on behalf of the Committee on Budgets .
It is the adaptation of the Treaty , Article 272 in particular , to the real situation .
We have spent twelve years practising with a timetable set by the interinstitutional agreements .
We have renewed them three times , and we believe that the time has come to include the fundamental principles in the Treaty so that we will not find ourselves in legally dubious situations , such as the case of the meeting which I have just mentioned .
Specifically , we must simplify the procedure in order to prevent the blocking of the budgetary procedure .
When there are 25 members , the current procedure will not work .
We should simplify it while respecting the existing balances of power .
Lastly , Madam President , we also believe that Parliament , as an institution embodying democratic legitimacy , must fully participate in the decisions on own resources .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , as rapporteur on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , I would like to congratulate both rapporteurs on their report and I would also like to thank them for the pleasant cooperation .
I would like to raise two points .
Firstly , my Committee is of the opinion that in the field of trade policy , the European Community ' s authority and also , therefore , the European Commission ' s negotiating mandate must be reinforced .
So too , however , must be the role of Parliament .
This can be done a ) by introducing codecision for the common trade policy , b ) by introducing an assent procedure for all external agreements and c ) by according Parliament a greater role in approving and monitoring trade negotiations .
My second point concerns energy .
The Commission has concluded that a coherent European energy policy has been lacking in the past .
There are no clear guidelines on institutional mechanisms for defining a common energy policy , let alone cooperation to guarantee the supply of energy or in terms of the environmental aspects of energy policy .
With a view to sustainable development , a new chapter on energy policy must be included in the Treaty , as well as the relevant sections of the ECSC and EURATOM Treaties .
In addition , the European Parliament powers must be adequately enhanced .
This means that the codecision procedure needs to apply to the EURATOM Treaty too .
It will specifically need to apply to the drafting of minimum safety standards for the design , construction and operation of nuclear reactors within the Union .
So far , the Member States have had their own technical standards and regulations .
In the light of Central and Eastern countries joining the EU , it is vital that uniform , European safety standards for nuclear reactors be drafted .
Unfortunately , my proposal to this effect has not been included in the current report .
I would therefore urge you most emphatically to vote for Amendment No 60 which I have tabled on behalf of my group , so that uniform safety standards can be drawn up for nuclear reactors .
We owe this to our citizens .
Madam President I would like to congratulate the rapporteurs warmly on their report , both in general terms and in specific terms because I believe that they have managed to address the points which we have raised in our opinion , albeit not always literally , within the confines of this reasonably concise report , which I hope will be adopted in this meeting by a large majority .
It is very important to mention the social market economy , as already indicated by Mr von Wogau .
It provides a kind of framework for internal policy which we need and renders a whole raft of discussions redundant .
I believe that this results in satisfaction all round .
The second major point is the Union ' s legal personality .
It has been formulated here as if it were only related to foreign policy but it also has enormous significance for internal policy .
Indeed , it then becomes possible to ratify a number of Treaties , such as ILO Treaties and some UN Treaties in the social field , which will add legal clarity to this type of issue .
There are nonetheless two points that are lacking .
One of them is the issue of Article 137 ( 6 ) which , in my opinion , should be repealed .
There are also a number of amendments on the table which I hope will yet be added .
I would like to finish off with a remark on the issue of the tax policy .
The report , in fact , mentions very little about this .
The tax policy , which also includes social security policy , is nonetheless of great importance , and not only to the Member States . The Commission too has given the matter rather a lot of attention and has devoted a great deal of thought to it .
It is rather a pity , in my opinion , that we talk about it so little .
Maybe we will do so in future .
The policy is implicitly included in the report but I still think that , in a sense , not dealing with it now is a missed opportunity .
That does not , however , detract from the deep appreciation which we have for this report .
Madam President , the proposals by the Committee on Women ' s Rights for the Intergovernmental Conference aim to enhance democracy and effectiveness .
It is a fact that the Treaty of Amsterdam was a major step forward for women ' s rights , since it provides a firm base for an effective policy on equality , but unfortunately it does not go further than the professional sector .
For that reason we are proposing that the Treaty should include a uniform and cohesive legal base for equality between the sexes , which will include all policy sectors .
We declare that balanced participation of women and men in decision-making at every level is a prerequisite for democracy and social justice , and we are therefore asking for the related articles of the Treaties to be amended to take account of that principle in the composition of the Commission , the European Parliament , the Court of Justice , the Court of First Instance , the Court of Auditors , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions .
We also stress the need for a close link between the Intergovernmental Conference and the procedure for drawing up the Charter of Fundamental Rights , so that within the scope of the constitutionalisation of the Union , the fundamental right of equality between women and men will be enshrined in Community law .
So besides the essential equilibrium and cohesion that must be secured between the Union ' s large and small countries and between the more and less developed areas and population groups , it is also necessary to take into account the balance between the sexes in planning the future of the EU and in decision making .
- ( PT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the work in the Intergovernmental Conference has been intensive . This time the European Parliament ' s participation has been reinforced through your President and two other representatives and also through full dialogue between the Council presidency and your Committee on Constitutional Affairs .
This reinforcement also stems from the direct information of this House and its debate in plenary , which have no precedents . This is very encouraging for the future results of the IGC .
So far five main in-depth meetings of the preparatory group have been held , together with three meetings of the IGC itself .
Also planned are all the events in the calendar up to the end of Portugal ' s presidency , involving both the IGC and the preparatory group .
A report is also to be prepared which will be submitted to the Feira European Council .
The Council presidency considers that this report should not be purely theoretical but should also make practical proposals . It must enable the next holder of the Council presidency , which will be France , to continue developing this work and to reach a decision by the end of the year .
The issue tackled at the last IGC meeting was the question of extending qualified majority voting .
The Member States demonstrated a certain openness towards this but many have still not made a definitive decision .
Certain areas can already be identified on which the attitude of the large majority of Member States is that these should remain subject to the unanimity rule .
Debates on these issues reveal that there is actually significant reticence , although this may be overcome during the IGC .
The preparatory work carried out to date has also involved questions connected with the European Parliament , the courts , the Committee of the Regions and the Economic and Social Committee .
As regards the decision-making procedure in the European Parliament , there is broad consensus that no revision of the Treaty should be effected which involves changing the existing institutional balance .
As for the scope of codecision , there is some openness towards extending this procedure to all legislative acts adopted by qualified majority without , however , establishing any kind of systematic correlation .
With regard to the Court of Justice and the Court of First Instance , a group of friends of the Council presidency has been brought together to examine possible amendments to the Treaty relating to these two courts .
The study of possible amendments to the Treaty in respect of the Court of Auditors , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions has also been started .
Many consider that changes should only be made where strictly necessary to ensure the effective functioning of the European Union after enlargement .
Consideration has also been given to matters which may be included on the agenda of the IGC , on the Council presidency ' s proposal .
It should be recalled that the conclusions of the Helsinki European Council specify that the Council presidency will submit a report to the European Council and may propose in this report the insertion of new items on the IGC ' s agenda .
In the area of security and defence and the Charter of Fundamental Rights , the Council presidency considers that , depending on the progress of the work , the right should be reserved to propose to the Feira European Council next June the inclusion in the IGC of any adjustments or additions to the Treaties which may prove necessary in these areas .
With regard to other issues likely to be added to the IGC ' s work , an initial debate has been held based on a list drawn up by the Council presidency .
The argument put forward in favour of a prudent approach to the inclusion of new items on the agenda concerned the risk , inherent in the technical complexity of this debate , of causing the deadline of this December for the completion of the IGC ' s work to be missed .
On the issue of the size and composition of the Commission , there is a consensus that the Commission to emerge from this IGC must be strong , independent and legitimate . Its collegiate nature must be preserved .
However , there is clear disagreement between , on one hand , the small and medium-sized Member States which want a Commission composed of one national from each Member State , all with equal status , and , on the other , the large Member States which favour a fixed number of Commissioners regardless of the number of Member States .
The size of the Commission is the main point of disagreement between the delegations . The rest of the debate on the Commission is dependent on this issue as some directly link this question with their positions on the composition , internal organisation and structure of this Community institution .
With regard to the individual responsibility of Commissioners , there is general support for keeping the undertaking currently made by each Commissioner to stand down when asked to do so by the Commission President . The delegations are divided into those which want to keep the informality of this undertaking and those which want the process to be enshrined in the Treaty .
As for the Commission ' s collective responsibility as a college , there is some reluctance to accept alterations to the current institutional framework , with the current supervision exercised by the European Parliament being regarded as sufficient .
The idea submitted by this House of the Commission being able to request a vote of confidence in it was positively welcomed .
On the issue of the weighting of votes in Council , there is consensus that the criterion which should be used as the basis for qualified majority voting in Council must stem from the combination of the two elements which form the foundations of the European Union . These are the population and the existence of sovereign states .
The EU is just as much a union of peoples as it is of states .
As for specific mechanisms to be established for the future system , there is also a split between those who defend a double-majority system and those who prefer simple reweighting .
One recurring argument is that the reform should be acceptable to public opinion and likely to be ratified by the national parliaments . This is a common concern of all the Member States , whether large or small , not only due to the need , in ratifying the new Treaty , to enable enlargement and respect for its timetables , but also due to the feeling that a European crisis should not be allowed to occur on this type of reform .
There is also the idea that these reforms must be submitted to public opinion in the candidate countries of Central and Eastern Europe so that the impression is not given that these are reforms which must be rushed through , not to improve the European Union but to prevent the new Member States from having access to the EU ' s decision-making system .
With regard to closer cooperation , the need or the usefulness for the IGC to tackle this issue was also discussed in an informal debate . Again there was a division of opinion both about the possibility of this issue being discussed and about the scope and nature of any alterations .
The next informal meeting of the Representatives Group on 14 and 15 April in Sintra , Portugal , will deal specifically with this issue which is problematic as there are no examples to follow . There are no specific examples as the Treaty of Amsterdam already allows closer cooperation and so far no Member State has used this instrument and there are no theoretical examples as these are never put forward by the debaters .
Although this issue comes up time and again , it is very abstract .
In terms of the substance of the issue and the introduction of closer cooperation into the Second Pillar , an informal debate has revealed that the majority regard this as unnecessary in external or common security policy , although the possibility of its use in the area of security and defence may be considered .
This means that if closer cooperation were included within the Second Pillar , it would then be necessary to find a specific way of implementing this concept in this area . This could not copy the First Pillar given the dissimilarity between the operation of these two pillars .
With regard to making the existing model more flexible , as supported in particular by the Commission , a certain openness has been detected towards eliminating the recourse to the European Council when launching closer cooperation . However , the limit of eight Member States has been questioned even by those who support altering the requirement for the participation of the majority of Member States .
As you can see , the Portuguese Presidency is continuing to make every effort to take the work forward in order to achieve a comprehensive and balanced agreement which is acceptable to everyone by the specified deadline .
Close contact has been maintained with the Commission and the European Parliament .
In the latter case , this has been through both the participation of your President and two selected Members and the regular information provided to the Committee on Constitutional Affairs and this House . This is ensuring that this institutional reform work is carried out with a much higher degree of participation by the European Parliament than the previous revision of the Treaty .
This augurs well for the success of our work .
Mr President , with the Dimitrakopoulos - Leinen report under discussion , the European Parliament is declaring its great vision for the European Union of the future .
This is a truly historic moment , as has been stressed .
Our fellow-citizens are waiting to be told what we are going to demand from the Intergovernmental Conference for that future .
Institutional proposals on particular issues without prior clarification of the basic philosophy of tomorrow ' s Union of 27 are not convincing .
The draft resolution is therefore quite right to define that basic view in the form of three principles .
According to the draft , the European Union is , first and foremost , a Union of peoples and a Union of states .
Its citizens therefore have both a European and a national identity .
Secondly , it is based on an institutional equilibrium between large and small states .
That must not be just on paper .
Thirdly , the way the Union functions must be made more effective , so that it can cope with the major enlargement .
The above philosophical principles , to which the draft resolution remains faithful , are not metaphysical inventions of the European Parliament but arise from the history and from the political reality which we call the area of Europe .
Anyone who ignores that is building a Europe founded on sand .
The Intergovernmental Conference of 2000 is taking place to make the Union as effective as is required in view of the major enlargement that has been decided .
In this process Parliament ' s responsibility is very great indeed .
For that reason , Parliament ' s approval of enlargement cannot but depend on the adequacy of the institutional changes that will be decided .
That is not a threat , it is a declaration of responsible attitude .
In good faith , all sides are trying , by means of amendments , to make the way in which European Union functions more effective .
But is it enough for procedures to be simplified and speeded up for them to be described as effective ?
The effectiveness of a police service , which indeed demands both simplicity and speed , is quite different from the effectiveness of the fundamental institutions of a democratic public regime .
The effectiveness of democratic institutions is not measured either with a stopwatch , or according to the number of decisions taken .
It is measured by the degree of legitimacy .
The dual legitimacy of the European Union by its European but also its national citizens , by its peoples but also its states , makes the European Union institutionally complex by its very nature .
For that reason the extent to which these procedures can be simplified and speeded up is restricted by the whole complex system of dual legitimacy .
We must bear that in mind tomorrow , when we come to vote on the amendments and the text .
Mr President , within our groups in Parliament and within the IGC itself we are still struggling with the problems that proved fairly intractable at Amsterdam .
These issues are tricky because they expose both the exaggerated self-importance of small states and the folie de grandeur of the big states .
These issues can only be resolved by a greater sense of trust between partners - such trust that is the essential glue of successful federal pacts .
This trust is precisely the quality that is needed so that we are able to ensure the successful accession of the new Member States .
The fact is - and somebody should say this - that if the IGC fails to resolve the Amsterdam questions , enlargement must be postponed .
The Liberal Group supports the efforts of the presidency and of the Commission to build up the extra trust required .
We support the main thrust of this report .
We support especially those elements which expand the European Union ' s capacity for action in global affairs : those that strengthen the status and the profile of the citizen , including the Charter ; and those that will postulate further political reform in the interests of a strong executive and a mature parliamentary democracy .
In this respect the splitting of the Treaties is vital .
So is retention of unanimity within the Council exclusively for the most serious questions .
Liberals everywhere support ministers that will subscribe to the development of European parliamentary democracy .
But we will be savage critics of those who prefer narrow self-interest and threaten the accession of new Member States .
Mr President , the European Parliament does not take part in Intergovernmental Conference negotiations .
It plays a secondary role , as do all those who are not part of a national government .
The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance has always maintained that the intergovernmental method , which excludes elected Members and does not allow public debate , is a very significant weakness of the reform of the Treaties and a substantial barrier to its success .
Therefore , our assessment of this report is based on the fact that it is being presented in an unsatisfactory context , in which our priorities - an open , working democracy capable of rendering economic development environmentally sustainable , which ensures the respect and consolidation of the rights of the citizens and residents , and , most importantly , which is able to enlarge to include new Member countries in a short period of time - are not the same as those of the negotiating governments .
The governments have one sole objective : to reach a unanimous agreement in Nice , whatever the outcome , so that they do not have to move on to some other city as obscure as Maastricht .
Although Parliament cannot take part in negotiations , it has a duty to indicate the way , to define clear options for the future , without pretending to take part in the actual negotiations and without being conditioned by governmental pressure or pressure from artificial comparisons , such as the comparison between large and small countries .
This report only partly achieves this objective , and this is why our Group was not able to be unanimous in its final assessment .
But although the final decision was not unanimous , the Group was united in its view of the positive and negative points of this resolution .
We fully support certain central points , but , unfortunately , our view is not shared by many national governments . The issues on which we agree are as follows : systematic extension , not extension on a case by case basis , of the majority vote to the Council ; codecision ; the urgent need to make the Charter of Fundamental Rights binding and to extend the possibility of recourse to the Court beyond the economic sphere ; the provisions on closer cooperation and so forth .
We are , however , very critical of the reduction of the constitution issue to a mere technical operation separating the Treaties into two parts , which , apart from anything else , would be very similar .
This is not the constitutional process , which should bear no resemblance to convoluted diplomatic negotiations and which , we feel , is essential to give the necessary boost to the integration process which , alone , can mobilise the citizens to strive for a better Europe .
We consider that the insistence on maintaining the limit on the number of Members at 700 , even when we become a 20-State Europe , unnecessarily penalises the regions and those whose political orientations are neither socialist nor conservative .
In this regard , we hope that our amendment will find consensus in the House .
The Group is divided over double majority , closer cooperation , the number of Commissioners and security policy .
In particular , as regards the subject of the number of Commissioners , we will support the balanced position of those amendments which ensure both sufficient representation of the Member States and the efficiency of the Commission .
To sum up , this report may well be useful in assisting our two representatives in their often extremely frustrating daily work at the Intergovernmental Conference where others take the decisions , but to our citizens , it will seem about as clear as an interministerial memorandum .
Most importantly , in the same way as the 1984 Spinelli Treaty , this report does not live up to the challenge of being a milestone , a clear , unambiguous indication of where we want to be with those who wish to be there .
Mr President , our Group wishes to thank the rapporteurs , Messrs Dimitrakopoulos and Leinen , for the important work which they have carried out .
I must also tell them that , within my group , there are differing views , according to differing national experiences .
I will say the same thing here that I have said in my group : the debate is not whether we say yes or no to federalism .
The debate is how to go about European construction at the point of enlargement .
It is making sure that we do not just build a Europe of the States and a Europe of the people , but , especially , a Europe of the citizens .
We must create a fully democratic institutional fabric .
We know that there are democratic deficits and that they are considerable .
At the moment the challenge in the face of enlargement is to achieve , as the rapporteurs have said , greater efficiency and greater democracy .
The Intergovernmental Conference cannot end with the same disappointment that we had in Amsterdam .
We cannot create an Amsterdam 2 .
We have to create a Treaty which gives rise to genuine European construction in which more than 400 million Europeans can share economic prosperity , a social dimension and a democratic life .
This is the great challenge for the European institutions and for European politics .
My vision of European construction is compatible with the fundamental lines which are laid out in the report which we are discussing today .
It is , of course , necessary to give the Commission the powers it needs and make it responsible to Parliament . This is precisely the issue .
We must clearly define the different democratic powers in the field of European competences and we must know who is making decisions and to whom they are responsible .
Mr President , Parliament does not take a corporate position .
Our minimum demand is that Parliament be treated as an adult which has to request that the Commission take certain responsibilities , but which also has to participate actively in European construction on behalf of the European citizens .
On behalf of the European citizens , we have to ask today not only for that fine-tuning of decision making but also for the incorporation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights into the Treaty . The Charter of Fundamental Rights must give citizens the capacity to demand compliance with these rights in the European courts .
This is the position which we can adopt in our Group , asking for more efficiency and more democracy .
Mr President , in our view the European Parliament ' s proposals for the Intergovernmental Conference , as set out in the Dimitrakopoulos-Leinen report , are a misinterpretation .
What we urgently need today , on the eve of enlargement , is not to deepen the integration of the existing Member States at a faster rate .
It is not to trot out the old federalist recipes of the European Movement yet again .
It is not to propose a super-State again , with its own constitution , uniform rules and majority decisions .
No , what we urgently need today , ladies and gentlemen , is to show some evidence of clear-headedness , to accept that economic and political integration cannot be taken any further and to design new forms of cooperation that are far freer , and that will enable 30 or more States to work together on a basis of mutual respect .
Unfortunately , it would seem that the latest debates within the most well-informed groups of society stop at the doors of this Parliament .
In this matter , as in the case of the Charter of Fundamental Rights , our Parliament seems unable to depart from the federalist line it has been pursuing for many years .
That approach leads to an impasse , to what Mr Tsatsos a moment ago , if I understood him rightly , called a Europe built on sand .
First of all , it takes us away from the concept of Europe as an association of states , an association of national democracies , and puts all the countries , great or small , that are afraid of being marginalised on the defensive .
More generally , the rigid federalist approach reflects a more or less unconscious desire to set up institutional barriers against enlargement , which will once again call in question a whole range of long-standing patterns of behaviour .
We must adopt a more positive approach .
We must promote enlargement by adopting a new form of cooperation that is more differentiated , shows greater respect for national sovereignty , that is based on full recognition of the Luxembourg compromise , as I explained in the minority opinion attached to the Dimitrakopoulos-Leinen report .
Mr President , in Denmark there is a concept known as asset stripping .
Top class lawyers and accountants are being convicted one after the other because they have helped strip companies of assets and then left them with tax liabilities .
Asset stripping is a punishable offence .
The Intergovernmental Conference is designed to strip our constitutions and fundamental laws of assets and leave the voters with a democratic deficit , but constitution stripping of this kind is not punished .
The asset under our constitutions is the right of voters to be heard and to choose representatives who can pass laws on our behalf .
If we are dissatisfied with the laws , we can choose new representatives and obtain new laws .
This is the beating heart of our democracies , a heart which , because of the constitution strippers , will stop beating .
They are taking legislative power from our 15 national parliaments and transferring it to officials and ministers , from voters and elected representatives to the executive and from open assemblies to meetings behind closed doors in Brussels .
Electoral power is being transferred from our constitutions , but is not being transferred to the European Parliament .
We parliamentarians have been side-tracked .
Power lies with the Commission and the Council of Ministers .
The EU is not a parliamentary democracy , and the national parliaments have been still further marginalised .
A number of us in this House have therefore prepared 19 proposals for democratic reform of the EU .
We call the initiative SOS Democracy - " SOS " because it is a matter of urgency and " Democracy " because that is the heart of the problem .
We do not have democracy in today ' s EU .
We should like to have it in tomorrow ' s .
We have different opinions as to how the laws should look .
We have support across the political spectrum from communists to conservatives . We disagree about a lot but agree that our differences should be resolved in democratic parliaments .
The voters in our countries should always have the last word .
We reject any attempt to strip our constitutions of democratic content and we urge the public to get involved in the negotiations concerning the Nice Treaty before it is too late .
Join us in SOS Democracy .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , I am speaking as draftsman of the opinion of this Parliament ' s Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism .
I understand the importance of institutional reforms , but I would also like to express the opinion of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism on the issues which we must tackle in relation to the Intergovernmental Conference .
We would like to make three points .
Firstly , the active recognition of the role , protagonism and participation of the regions in the process of European construction which began 50 years ago .
Secondly , the importance of transport .
To this end , we want an extended Article 70 and we also want it to be supplemented with a provision on the creation of a single European agency for air traffic control .
Lastly , the role of tourism for both the economy and for employment .
We - or at least I personally - accept Amendment No 168 , presented by the chairman of the Committee on Regional Policy on this issue .
.

( FR ) Mr President , Ministers , ladies and gentlemen , after listening carefully to the two rapporteurs , to all the committee representatives and to Mr Gama , the Portuguese Minister , and before listening just as carefully to all the speakers in the further course of the debate , let me explain the views of the Commission which , as you know , is playing an active part in these negotiations , in which I too was involved from the outset , along with your representatives and the representatives of the Member States .
I would like to tell you how much I appreciate the very high quality of the report presented by your two rapporteurs , Giorgos Dimitrakopoulos and Jo Leinen , which we are now debating .
The report is clear and comprehensive .
The Committee on Constitutional Affairs has set out a determined position and I want to pay tribute to its work and that of its chairman , Mr Napolitano .
I have two comments to make on the report .
The first is that , objectively speaking , the positions of your committee , which will probably be shared by the House when you come to the vote , are in many respects very close to the Commission ' s .
Parliament , like the Commission , has sized up the challenge facing the Union with the prospect of an unprecedented increase in the number of Member States which , by the same token , will accentuate their diversity .
Your Parliament is aware that the reform of the institutions is necessary , that it must be tackled seriously and that , if need be , we must look beyond short-term national interests and offer the people a Treaty that is substantial enough to gain their support .
That is what is at stake in these negotiations , which we must bring to a successful conclusion at the end of this year , at the European Council in Nice .
I would stress the ' success ' rather than the ' concluding ' , for they are two different things .
And success is what we need in Nice .
These changes are essential to the success of enlargement .
In my view they are also necessary right now because in many respects the current institutional organisation is showing its limitations .
I am thinking , for example , of the Court of Justice ' s workload and of the log-jams we see in some areas because of the requirement of unanimity in the Council .
Your Parliament has looked in depth at the decision-making system in the Council and at the composition and functioning of the Commission .
Since 26 January you have been well aware of the positions set out by the Commission .
For example , to make things quite clear with regard to the Commission itself , we proposed that each country should certainly have one Commissioner .
But we also proposed two options on that basis .
Either every country will have a national representative within the Commission at the same time , or not all countries will be represented at any one time .
But , if you look at those two options I have briefly described , you will find that the states will be represented on an equal footing , which is not currently the case within the Commission .
On this issue , as on others , we believed it was important , over and above the basic approach , to open up a debate , to take time to consider the pros and cons of the different options , and to decide between gut reactions that would consist of changing as little as possible and the long-term requirements of giving our institutions new impetus .
Negotiations on these issues have scarcely begun .
Whatever solutions are finally adopted , your debates , like ours , will help the Intergovernmental Conference to take more responsible and enlightened decisions .
I note there is broad convergence on the qualified majority issue .
Qualified majority voting should become the general rule for Council decisions , together with the codecision procedure for all matters that come within the legislative sphere .
The Commission itself said just that and recommended a means of achieving these results by identifying the categories of decision where unanimity must or could be retained .
We are well aware that certain Member States have difficulties with some of these questions .
We know there are reservations about the tax system , to give just one example .
What the Commission , what the European Parliament must do is precisely to look beyond these reservations and sincerely , honestly and without any ideological bias consider the coherence and effectiveness of the single market .
That is what we wanted to do with our additional contribution which describes the new area of qualified majority voting in relation to certain aspects of the tax system , certain aspects of social protection , to ensure the smooth operation of the single market .
There is agreement between our positions on other points too , such as the composition of the European Parliament , closer cooperation , the creation of a new European Public Prosecutor ' s office which , as Mrs Theato pointed out , will help us to fight fraud against the Community budget , the Court of Justice and the Court of First Instance .
And that does not surprise me , since the Commission and the European Parliament have always been very close in their thinking on these subjects and are inspired by the same concern for the general interest of Europe .
We will continue along these lines until the negotiations reach their conclusion .
My second comment relates to the active involvement of your Parliament , which is vital to our success .
Because the European Parliament has its own special perspective on things , I want to stress how necessary Parliament ' s commitment is , the commitment of each and everyone of you , first of all during the negotiations - as your representatives in the negotiating teams , Elmar Brok and Professor Tsatsos , are well aware , and indeed their contributions often put the discussions back into perspective - but also during the ministerial discussions .




And I must say I was pleased with the most recent joint discussions that took place with your President , Nicole Fontaine , in Luxembourg the day before yesterday at the initiative of the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Gama .
But I also want to emphasise how important it is for us , outside our official and institutional establishments , to explain our activities and engage in dialogue with the national parliaments and the citizens of every EU country and with the candidate countries .

Ladies and gentlemen , let me conclude by drawing attention to three particular aspects , while also noting that as we speak today a number of questions about the correct scope of the agenda of these negotiations have to some extent now been resolved .
I think that is a good thing .

In saying that , I want to pay tribute to the Portuguese Presidency and in particular to Jame Gama and to Franciscos Seixas da Costa for electing to adopt a pragmatic and objective approach , an approach that is as objective as possible and that consists in starting out from the needs and limitations of the existing system and proposing solutions .
That suggests that we can work on the basis of the Helsinki mandate as long as today ' s presidency has the political will to give an impetus to tomorrow ' s French Presidency .
Although this is a reasonably substantial and difficult agenda , there are still a few subjects that have been left aside for the time being , which we regret .
But it will soon be time for a decision to be taken , and , on behalf of the Commission , I would like to put forward three points for consideration .
The first point concerns European defence .
Since the Cologne Council , and in particular the Helsinki Council , the necessary structures are being set up , on an interim basis , within the Council ' s General Secretariat .
As provided for by the Treaty of Amsterdam , the Union is now preparing to carry out the Petersberg tasks and missions , i.e. humanitarian and evacuation missions , peace-keeping , crisis-management and , where necessary , peace-making missions .
Discussions are under way on relations between the European Union and Nato .
The European Union Defence Ministers met on 28 February .
The first working documents have now been drafted on civil crisis management .
So we can see some progress and certainly a political will to move forward .
My friend and fellow Commissioner , Chris Patten , can confirm this assessment of the situation as regards these questions .
In a few weeks ' time , the European Council in Feira will have to decide whether the Treaty should be amended with a view to building on the guidelines of the Helsinki European Council .
Our group of representatives has not considered these questions yet , but let me share a few ideas with you .
Ladies and gentlemen , after matters relating to justice and the police , a security and defence policy is without doubt the last major common policy we have to establish .
The existing Treaty , as amended at Amsterdam , has enabled us to make significant progress .
We can see that today .
But can we resolve everything purely within the framework of that Treaty ?
Let us leave aside , for today , the question of future of the WEU Treaty with the collective defence commitment it contains and the different statutes of the EU Member States and of Nato and WEU member countries .
Looking only at the Petersberg tasks , I do not think the European Council has given enough thought to the organisation within the Union of a political authority that will give instructions to the chain of command that is being set up .
It may be that , before it concludes , the Intergovernmental Conference will have to consider the structures and appropriateness of the existing Treaty .
I do not have all the answers to this question but I think it needs to be asked , and to be asked in the context of the Conference .
I think it would be premature to close this file at Feira .
Instead , President Gama , I hope the presidency will give an even stronger political impetus on the question of defence .
My second point concerns the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights and the EU ' s democratic values .
The negotiating body is making good progress , or so we are told by Antonio Vitorino who is representing the Commission in it .
The interest that is being shown in this draft Charter and the support for its incorporation in the Treaty confirm what I regard as the need to reaffirm , over and over again , the fundamental values of the EU , to set down once and for all the principles shared by all the citizens of Europe .
It is the same need that inspired your Parliament ' s report drafted by Mr Duff and Mr Voggenhuber .
One could say that these principles are self-evident .
But , as we know , what seems self-evident sometimes still needs reasserting , for all the existing Member States and for those that want to join us , because democracy and respect for citizens ' rights are never won once and for all , but need to be fought for and defended again and again .
Your Parliament has considered these questions , as it has considered the existing Treaty provisions that would penalise any violation of the fundamental principles of the Union .
The Commission is prepared for this debate , which I believe is a necessary one , provided we keep it clear of any polemics .
My third and final point concerns the reorganisation of the Treaties .
The report before you discusses the constitutionalisation of the Treaties or , as we sometimes rather more modestly term it , the reorganisation of the Treaties .
That is a question of terminology .
Let me say a few words on this .
The Commission , as you know , has asked the Robert Schuman Institute in Florence to carry out a feasibility study on separating the Treaties into two parts : the essential provisions on the one hand and the applied provisions on the other .
This work is making good progress and I hope to be able to tell you the outcome soon .
But just as a mountain grows larger the closer you approach it , let me stress that this exercise involves major technical and legal difficulties .

The Treaties are not complicated in the sense of deliberately wanting to discourage the reader ; they are complicated because the expression of the common resolve of 6 , 9 , 10 , 12 or 15 Member States , over the efforts of 40 years , is not a linear operation , nor is it always as logical and simple as might be imagined after the fact , unless you start again from scratch .
But who would seriously suggest that ?
We have to start out from what we have .
We must seek the best while remaining within the realm of the possible .
Then , if this reorganisation of the Treaties proves possible and convincing - as I personally believe it will - it will be time to examine the procedures for amending these restructured texts .
But the Commission wants to proceed one step at a time and for the time being we are sticking to the pragmatic and meticulous job of reorganisation .
I hope to present the results in May .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me conclude by repeating that I and President Romano Prodi are prepared to continue and intensify these joint discussions so that , together with the Council , indeed all together , we will succeed in achieving a genuine reform at the end of this year .
As the Conference progresses , I believe it will become ever more necessary for us to take concerted joint action .
( Applause )
Mr President , I would first of all like to express my appreciation for the sterling work carried out by Mr Dimitrakopoulos and Mr Leinen .
I believe that this is one of the best reports which have so far been produced in the framework of IGCs over recent years .
I am making this statement as former rapporteur on the Maastricht Treaty .
By the way , Maastricht is not a strange city , Mrs Frassoni , it is a very exciting city where the Dutch-Flemish , German and French cultures all flow into one .
Just try one of the pavement cafés and you will see what I mean .
I will repeat this to Mrs Frassoni in Italian some time .
Mr President , it is rather a shame that so many amendments have been tabled as this might affect the quality and balance of the report .
The large groups should , therefore , restrict themselves to the absolutely necessary amendments during the vote .
This seems the best way to retain the good work which the rapporteurs have put in .
As far as our Group is concerned , the resolution needs to be amended on a number of points .
For example , we do not agree with the proposal in the resolution to restrict the number of Commissioners to 20 and to introduce a rota system for the smaller countries .
One Commissioner per Member State seems a much better solution to us .
In order to boost citizens ' confidence in the European Commission , it is vital that each Member State should have a Commission Member .
Our Group , too , has therefore tabled amendments to this effect .
Next is the number of MEPs .
The resolution argues in favour of the possibility of European lists .
This is a sound idea , but if we want 10 % of the European members on European lists , then this should not , of course , result in additional MEPs on top of the 700 which have been agreed upon .
It is important that we retain a maximum of 700 , with or without the European list .
Parliament is already vast , the buildings are already packed and the whole thing has to remain workable .
The third point concerns the issue of unanimity .
We believe that in an enlarged Union , decision-making should not always be blocked by an excessive right of veto .
Unanimity should , therefore , be restricted to the bare essentials . These are constitutional issues such as the deployment of military troops and issues pertaining to territorial integrity .
All other decisions should be taken by qualified majority with weighted voting , as is proposed , and - this is vitally important - with colegislative powers exercised by Parliament .
We would also thank the Commission for this support .
I would like to end by commenting on the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
According to our Group , it is of paramount importance that this Charter be included in the Treaty .
Work to this effect is being carried out , and we sincerely hope that a text can be produced which everyone can agree to incorporate into the Treaty .
This is a key issue for the citizens of Europe .
Mr President , firstly , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , I would like to express my support for the Dimitrakopoulos / Leinen report and , furthermore , thank the Portuguese Presidency for their positive attitude towards the incorporation of Parliament into the Intergovernmental Conference .
This report is of great value and I therefore believe we should support it today by a majority in this Parliament , because this is an opportunity for a completely open debate on the great issues still facing us in Europe .
This debate is going on between political and national groups in different Member States .
Please allow me to make a correction , Mr President : there are no large and small countries here .
Here we must consider ourselves to be small . In the past , the countries in Europe which considered themselves to be large tried to impose their hegemony by force .
Here were are all amongst small countries , especially given the challenge of globalisation .
I believe this should be an important element in our coexistence .
In European Parliament debates , political groups , citizens of different countries and diverse interests and prejudices come into play and this allows us to be aware of when we touch a nerve and of when it is necessary for us to take special care in what we do .
Therefore , this is an important debate and I believe the Council should take account of the position we take .
Secondly , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , I believe we should also try to introduce some vision and some idealism into this debate .
I have always been against the idea that we had to deal with the ' leftovers ' from Amsterdam .
Leftovers are thrown in the bin .
These are clear and fundamental challenges , which refer to and are linked to the membership of the Commission , the power of the President , fair contributions by the Member States and such important questions as closer cooperation , majority voting and - a vital issue - the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
I say this particularly in view of the crisis which we have seen in a Member State as a result of the presence of a party whose fundamental values are contrary to the community of values which we hold here .
A final consideration : Commissioner Barnier has said that , before the end of the Conference , we must resolve certain problems relating to the chain of command .
Mr President , in relation to the appeal to public opinion which we are making , I believe we must clearly affirm the principles of democracy and transparency and also the chain of command .
We must not allow a situation where , while we are discussing this , a kind of Loch Ness monster reappears every month in the press .
I understand the journalists , but we cannot allow a situation where crises are created by certain anonymous officials , who are frustrated mandarins , and certain ambassadors , who seem to behave like a Praetorian Guard , and who do not hesitate to make anonymous declarations in the press .
Here , the only risk involved in democracy is the risk taken in elections .
This is the risk taken by Minister Gama , Commissioner Barnier and by all of us .
However , here in the gossip shops of Brussels we create a situation and certain centres of power which do not correspond to the principles of democracy and transparency , which are precisely the principles which we have to strengthen in this Intergovernmental Conference .
I believe that it is important for all of the institutions to confront this issue responsibly .
If not , the Intergovernmental Conference will not have been a success for our future .
Mr President , the EU is faced with enormous challenges .
In just a few years ' time , the Union is to be enlarged to include almost double the number of Member States .
The euro is to be introduced .
We are to have a security policy worthy of the name , implement administrative reforms and , hopefully , win back some of the confidence our citizens have lost in the European project .
The Intergovernmental Conference should prepare the EU for these changes .
It provides us with the opportunity to adapt our work to the new Member States and to the new tasks we have before us .
It is a question of finding a balance between democracy and efficiency and of maintaining the historic balance between small and large countries .
These are the questions which remain following the conclusion of the Treaty of Amsterdam .
It is important in these discussions not to become lost in technical details and lose sight of the goal - that of making the EU more open , more efficient and more intelligible .
We must all make sacrifices in order to achieve this goal .
Unfortunately , governments appear to have lost sight of this goal .
The Intergovernmental Conference is making only limited progress , which is not the fault of the Portuguese Presidency .
Probably what will happen is what usually happens : at five minutes to midnight on the last day , a compromise will be reached with which no-one is entirely satisfied .
The talk is already of the next Intergovernmental Conference where the major questions will then be solved .
We have heard this before .
There is starting to be a surfeit of half-baked intergovernmental conferences .
Our citizens have higher expectations than that , and we do not have much time .
That is why we have to take the opportunity now .
The EU must be changed in the way we Liberals have demanded , that is to say in the direction of transparency , public control , more explicit accountability , a clearer distribution of competences and a common constitution .
Quite simply , the EU must become more liberal .
The report includes many of our amendments , and I support these with few exceptions .
The challenges faced by the EU are exciting and historic .
They should inspire us all to roll up our shirt sleeves .
We are in a position to create something unique : democratic , competitive and peaceful cooperation throughout the continent .
Instead , however , of awakening hope and enthusiasm , present developments appear , rather , to be giving rise to anxiety among governments .
One might well ask what has become of political leadership and vision .
Mr President , if the changes to the Treaty proposed in the resolution we are debating are implemented , the European Union will take an absolutely crucial step on the way to becoming a federal state and one , moreover , in which the national parliaments will lose control over almost all crucial areas of policy .
In addition to the massive increase in supranational forms of decision-making , the proposal contains quite a few qualitative changes in the direction of federalism , among these the proposal to remove the national right of veto in the course of changes to large parts of the current Treaty and , also , the demands for a single EU constituency in the elections for the European Parliament .
I am convinced that this transformation of the EU into a federal state is a blind alley in every way .
The EU ' s major problem today is not a lack of centralised power but a shortage of real democracy .
What the Union needs in place of more supranationalism is democratic reform leading to a dramatic reduction in the Commission ' s political power , to the legislative process in the Council ' s being made public and to the national parliaments ' being given decisive influence .
Through the Treaty changes proposed in the resolution , the EU would become a Union wholly dominated by the big Member States .
The power wielded by the major countries would be increased dramatically through the introduction of a system of " double simple majority " voting in the Council of Ministers .
Their power would also be increased through the increase in their representation in the European Parliament .
In an EU which has been enlarged by a further twelve States and in which seven hundred seats in Parliament have been distributed as proposed in the resolution , Sweden would have thirteen seats , Finland seven and Ireland five .
This would mean that , in many Member States , important political powers would not be represented at EU level .
This also shows how weak the democratic basis of such a Parliament would be .
Compared with other federal states , the " EU state " would , on this model , be unusually centralised and offer little protection to small constituent States .
A comparison might be made with the United States in which the one chamber in a two-chamber system has proportional representation , while representation in the second chamber is the same for all constituent States .
In the EU , the big countries would instead dominate both chambers on the basis of the proposal we are now debating .
For anyone who wants to change anything regarding monetary union or EMU , it is now , when the Treaty is being changed , that the opportunity exists .
Many adherents of EMU on the Left have , of course , argued in favour of altering the nature of monetary union in such a way that the Central Bank is placed under democratic control and that the goals of economic policy are not merely monetary .
It is noticeable that they are now completely silent and that it is now only the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left which is demanding the democratisation of monetary union .
As you have perhaps noted , I am going to vote against the present resolution .
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , I support the enlargement of the European Union because I know it will consolidate the new democracies in eastern and central Europe .
I know it will also increase the size of the European Union as a trading block which in time will ensure that the Union as an economic entity becomes more competitive .
I know that reform within the existing European institutions must take place .
However , any changes within the internal decision-making procedures must be balanced and fair .
We do not want to see a two-tier European Union in which larger Member States dictate the pace at the expense of the smaller Member States .
For example , the report which we are debating today recommends a rotation system for the composition of the European Commission .
This will mean that the automatic entitlement of smaller Member States to have one Member of the Commission will be downgraded .
I do not believe that this is a particularly sensible proposal .
380 million citizens of the Union have an affinity with the Commission .
Certainly , from an Irish perspective , Irish people recognise the importance of the Commission as an institutional body within the European Union .
It is still the institution that controls the operations of competition policy , the common agricultural policy , the common fisheries policy and the common transport policy .
The Union must draw nearer to the citizens of the Union .
We should also remember that some Member States , including my country , must hold a referendum on any Treaty changes that arise at the forthcoming IGC .
The loss of an automatic right to nominate a Commissioner would certainly be a very difficult , if not impossible , proposal to sell to an Irish electorate in this referendum .
I would now like to return to the issue of extending the qualified majority voting system at European Council level .
The Council represents the interests of the 15 Member State governments within the institutional framework of the Union and currently , under existing EU Treaties , unanimous agreement of the 15 Member States is required for any tax changes sought within the Union .
The report we are discussing today seeks to extend qualified majority voting to all legislative activities except those of a constitutional nature .
I believe that national Member States should retain the right of veto on taxation matters .
The Irish taxation system is innovative in many ways and has contributed to our present growth rates .
I do not believe that the extension of qualified majority voting to taxation matters at European Council level is a particularly welcome development .
Mr President , a biblical parable teaches the reader to build his house on a rock .
After all , a house built on sand has no solid foundations .
This parable was meant as a reference to faith and its foundations .
Nonetheless , I was reminded of this parable during the IGC discussion .
The relentless attempts to turn Europe into a political unity seem to be built on quicksand .
Indeed , the citizens of Europe do not feel European and this will not change overnight .
Still , the discussion on the EU ' s future is peppered with concepts such as European citizenship .
This does not exist by any stretch of the imagination and is simply quicksand !
In the IGC discussion or the present report for that matter , the end goal of European cooperation is not taken into consideration .
What do we want to achieve as a European Union ?
I would be keen to hear the Council ' s and Commission ' s opinion on this .
If there is a well-considered vision on the foundation of European cooperation , the European House will be on more solid ground and will be able to brave the bad weather .
I share the minority view of Mr Berthu , a member of the Union for a Europe of Nations Group , as it has been included in this report .
This document does include a solid foundation for the Union , namely a cooperative of independent states , in which the national democracies enjoy the highest level of legitimacy .
Regarding the enlargement issue , the fact that Member States joining the EU can become fully-fledged Members of the Union should be central .
" Degrading " acceding countries to second-class members does not do them justice and has unwanted political consequences .
Instead of the idea of different speeds , I support the idea of carrying out only the core tasks , that is to say in cross-border policy areas , at European level .
Another specific point I would like to raise concerns the European Commission .
This high official college should in future not have more or fewer than 20 members .
If necessary , combinations of countries can alternate in appointing a Euro Commissioner .
I support the policy of granting the European Parliament codecision in all cases in which the Council decides by qualified majority .
This must , however , go hand in hand with sound scrutiny by the national parliaments of their " own " ministers in the Council .
President , Commissioner , we are faced with a fundamental difficulty , in the exercise in which we are involved , in maintaining the balance between enlarging the EU and reforming the institutions to make that enlargement possible .
British Conservatives cannot accept the report , based on the long list of ancillary items which are not on the agenda of the IGC .
We are concerned by the proposals for constitutionalisation of the Union , by the proposals to incorporate the Charter of Fundamental Rights into the Treaty , by the progressive diminishing of the distinction between the first and second pillars , by the proposal that the Council should adopt broad guidelines of economic , employment and social convergence policies by qualified majority .
These are just some examples of the complex and controversial issues which are raised .
We are overloading the wish list of the IGC .
The great danger , if all these extra items were to be adopted on the agenda , is that the deadline of December 2000 would inevitably be missed .
Where would that leave the candidate countries like Poland and Hungary , whose government leaders have already expressed concern over the timetable ?
We believe the IGC should concentrate on the essential institutional reforms .
It should ensure that it meets the deadline , to enable the first wave of enlargement to include Central and Eastern European countries by 2004 , and to continue any further necessary reforms with the full inclusion of our new partners .
If the EU delays enlargement too long , it may make it more difficult , or impossible , for some candidate countries to join within the envisaged timetable .
The President-in-Office addressed some of these concerns in his speech .
Commissioner Barnier in his speech said that the intention is to succeed with the reforms , not necessarily to conclude them .
Some people say that this is the last opportunity for reform .
I do not think that is a very fair reflection on the extraordinary reforms that many of the candidate countries have made in the last 9 and 10 years since they were within the Warsaw Pact or formerly part of the Soviet Union .
Our priority is enlargement .
We should not confuse or reverse our priorities .
Mr President , my group welcomes this report .
It sends a clear message to the IGC to be ambitious , to think long-term and not short-term , to think of how a Union with nearly double the number of Member States we have now can actually function effectively and to take this opportunity to change the Treaties , because future IGCs with nearly 30 states around the table will find it even more difficult than it is now to agree on reforms .
The report puts forward ambitious proposals , as one would expect of the European Parliament .
If adjusted by the amendments by my group , it will be a well-balanced set of proposals , well-balanced notably on the delicate question of the equilibrium between large and smaller Member States .
On the size of the Commission , for instance , the formulas that are likely to be adopted tomorrow will refer either to one Commissioner per Member State or to a smaller number , a fixed number of Commissioners .
The Commission cannot go on expanding indefinitely .
In the second case , it will be a rotating system , so that every Member State , large and small , has equal opportunities of seeing one of its nationals serve in the Commission .
On the question of the size of the European Parliament , we have also found a point of equilibrium , based on to a minimum number of Members for each Member State .
Every state will , of course , have to make a sacrifice following enlargement , but a minimum number will be guaranteed , with digressive proportionality thereafter .
So the report is balanced and I think can be welcomed .
It is ambitious .
Some people are saying : ' The IGC will never agree to this point or to that point ' .
But we are not in this Parliament trying to guess the outcome of the IGC ; we are trying to encourage it to move in a particular direction , in a more ambitious direction , to make sure that we actually have a Union capable of functioning effectively when we enlarge to nearly 30 Member States .
That is essential for our future .
Mr President , the aim of the IGC is to reconcile enlargement with deepening .
In particular , we need to review the interinstitutional balance , representation within the Commission and the other institutions , the weighting of votes and the areas covered by qualified majority voting .
Unanimity voting must apply to decisions of a constitutional and fundamental nature .
Closer cooperation must make it possible to manage diversity and avoid getting bogged down , without calling the fundamental structure of the Union into question .
The report by our fellow Members , whom I want to congratulate , has been substantially improved over the course of the discussions .
Nonetheless , the outlined reform will hit the small Member States hardest .
That applies in particular to the provisions on the composition and operation of the institutions .
A Parliament in which the ceiling of four seats per Member State , which does not allow for a balanced representation of the political forces , is unacceptable .
The same is true of a Council in which the qualified majority rules have to be readjusted and whose proposed method of operation will inevitably lead to deadlock and inconsistency , and of a Commission in which the rule must be one member per Member State .

Lastly , let me bring up the question of the seat of Parliament and call for the promise made to be respected .
I am always surprised to see our Parliament , which sets itself up as the committed champion of respect for minority rights when it comes to others , go against this approach when it comes to deciding on the institutional architecture of our own House .
Mr President , we , for our part , welcome the enlargement of Europe and will participate in the discussion of how to prepare for it .
The Scottish National Party , which I represent , is committed in its manifesto and its general policy to the idea of Europe as a confederation of peoples , countries and regions , not as a sovereign federal union in its own right .
That is something which the parties of European Free Alliance have in common and our votes will be cast in that light .
I want to draw attention particularly to Amendment No 138 , in its interaction with paragraph 32 of the Dimitrakopoulos-Leinen report .
Regarding its proposal for all-Europe lists of candidates , we in Scotland - a small nation within a large Member State - are seriously concerned about the practical disappearance of Scotland as a distinct entity within the Union This would also apply to Euskadi , Flanders , Galicia , Andalusia and Wales .
The reduction in Members of the European Parliament that we would face , coupled with the arrival of new Member States which are smaller in population than Scotland or Wales and which would be fully represented in all the institutions of the Union , will certainly increase the pressure for and our people ' s commitment to the idea of our own independence in this great European confederation .
As it is now voting time , the debate will be adjourned and will resume at 3 p.m.

VOTE
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Recommendation for second reading , in the form of a letter , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European and Council Decision on the application of aerial-survey and remote-sensing techniques to the agricultural statistics for 1999-2003 ( 13300 / 1 / 1999 - C5-0065 / 2000 - 1998 / 0296 ( COD ) )
( The President declared the common position approved )
Simplified procedure without report :
Proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Council Directive 95 / 50 / EC on uniform procedures for checks on the transport of dangerous goods by road ( COM ( 00 ) 0106 - C5-0129 / 2000 - 2000 / 0044 ( COD ) ) ( Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism )
( Parliament approved the Commission proposal )
Proposal for a decision of the European Parliament , the Council , the Commission , the Court of Justice , the Court of Auditors , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions on the organisation and operation of the Office for Official Publications of the European Communities ( EC , ECSC , Euratom ) ( C5-0080 / 2000 - 2000 / 2043 ( ACI ) ) ( Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport )
( Parliament approved the Commission proposal )
Recommendation for second reading ( A5-0071 / 2000 ) , drawn up on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council directive on action to be taken against the emission of gaseous and particulate pollutants by engines intended to power agricultural or forestry tractors and amending Council Directive 74 / 150 / EEC ( 10323 / 1 / 1999 - C5-0225 / 1999 - 1998 / 0247 ( COD ) ( rapporteur : Mr Fitzsimons )
( The President declared the common position approved )
Report ( A5-0102 / 2000 ) by Mr Lehne , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the initiative of the Republic of Finland with a view to the adoption of a Council decision concerning arrangements for cooperation between financial intelligence units of the Member States in respect of exchanging information ( 11636 / 1999 - C5-0330 / 1999 - 1999 / 0824 ( CNS ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Recommendation for second reading ( A5-0083 / 2000 ) , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the common position of the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council directive on the deliberate release into the environment of genetically modified organisms and repealing Directive 90 / 220 / EEC ( 11216 / 1 / 1999 - C5-0012 / 2000 - 1998 / 0072 ( COD ) ) ( rapporteur : Mr Bowe )
Wallström , Commission .
Mr President , as I explained during the debate yesterday , the Commission is able to accept fully Amendments Nos 9 , 17 , 19 , 29 and 47 .
The Commission can also accept Amendments Nos 1 to 4 , 8 , 11 , 24 , 35 to 38 , 46 , 48 , 49 and 52 in principle , as far as they clarify the intention of the Commission to establish an efficient , transparent and balanced regulatory framework for GMOs .
Some of these amendments need only to be brought into line with the legal wording of the text of the directive and the overall legislative framework .
For other amendments , for instance those amendments concerning antibiotic-resistant marker genes , the principle is politically acceptable but the proposed text as such does not seem to be appropriate .
The Commission is unable to accept Amendments Nos 5 to 7 , 10 , 12 to 16 , 18 , 20 to 23 , 25 to 28 , 30 to 34 , 39 to 45 , 50 and 51 .
More specifically concerning Amendments Nos 22 , 23 and 25 , the Commission cannot accept them as they stand but is willing to consider how due account can be taken of the concerns they reflect .
Mr President , I have a question for the Commission , so as to make it quite clear to my fellow delegates what we are voting about .
I have the Council ' s common position of 9 December 1999 before me .
It says in the document passed to us by the Council that this common position was adopted unanimously .
If I remember correctly , we were still under the Finnish Council Presidency in December 1999 , with a Green Environment Minister .
Political Union took place in June 1999 , under the German Council Presidency , also with a green Environment Minister .
However , I am a little confused because the Greens in this House are maintaining that the common position is so weak that it is imperative that we make a huge number of improvements to it .
That is why I wanted to put the question again as to whether we are really voting on the common position that all the Environment Ministers subscribed to , or whether we are mistaken ?
( Laughter , Applause )
Thank you , Mr Liese .
May I remind you that the debate is closed .
Nevertheless I will give the floor to the Commission if it wishes to clarify the matter further .
It is that very common position .
Mr President , since Mr Liese has addressed a question to us , I will take the liberty of answering him .
The Green Group is not dependent on the positions of the Green ministers represented in the Environment Council .
We have freedom of choice , and I would hope the same applies to all the political groups here present .
But I wanted to speak specifically on the vote on Amendment No 37 .
I think it is quite logical to vote on Amendment No 11 first , before Amendment No 37 , because Amendment No 11 goes further than Amendment No 37 .
It proposes a total ban on antibiotic-resistant marker genes , which is not the case in Amendment No 37 , which relates only to Part C of the directive . So I believe it would be more logical to vote first on the amendment that departs furthest from the original position .
Mr Lannoye , the rapporteur discussed this question with the competent services yesterday .
He does not seem to agree with you .
In fact he believes that the wording of Amendment No 11 is such as to suggest a different voting order from the one you recommend . I can only regret that .
After the vote on Amendments Nos 38 and 49 : President .
We will now adjourn the vote and resume after the formal sitting .
( The sitting was suspended at 12 noon for the formal sitting and resumed at 12.35 p.m. )

Mr President , I understand perfectly that it is an honour for us to receive a distinguished guest of state .
However , I would ask you , when the Bureau next meets , to address the question as to whether it is a constructive use of time to interrupt a vote that we need a qualified majority for and for which there are only seven or eight proposed amendments .
I would urge you to address this matter in the Bureau .
I am happy to put this question to the Bureau , Mrs Roth-Behrendt , but I was bound by decisions outside my control .
Mr President , just before the formal sitting you interrupted this vote very suddenly .
It rather surprised me , and I am sure many other Members of the House , who during the formal sitting expressed their surprise at the way in which the vote was interrupted .
We have just seen the first vote after the formal sitting fail to secure a qualified majority by only a handful of votes .
Does that not demonstrate what we were talking about and the point Mrs Roth-Behrendt has raised ?
When we have qualified majority votes they should not be interrupted in any way by the formal sitting .
There were eight votes to go .
I can inform you , on the basis of my experience , that you could have completed that in three minutes .
It is ridiculous that we are now proceeding with qualified majority votes when Members have not been given a reasonable amount of time to come back into the Chamber .
I hope you could address that issue , Mr President .
I quite understand your feelings , Mr Bowe . To tell the truth , I agree with you .
But I also had to respect the protocol which , once again , unfortunately often takes precedence over our proceedings .
That said , it is true that your comment makes good sense and I think the Bureau will have to give it the fullest consideration .
Mr President , I have a question about the method applied here .
It seems to me that , normally , when the sitting resumes and we resume the vote after a formal sitting , a bell sounds to warn our colleagues that the sitting and the vote are resuming .
I did not hear that bell and I would ask you to confirm the method used in such cases , for this probably adversely affected the result of the vote in this Chamber .
In principle , Mrs Lienemann , the bell sounds when the sitting has been adjourned in order to call Members back .
Some Members had left the Chamber , others remained .
I had in fact announced that the voting would resume immediately after the formal sitting .
Moreover this was indicated in the Minutes and on the agenda .
But I too am sometimes faced with imponderables .
Let me assure you that all your comments will be passed on to the Bureau .
You yourself are a member of the Bureau .
I think that by taking concerted action we will manage to improve the system .
( Mixed reactions )
Mr President , if the problem about sounding the bell is that the sitting has to resume first , the solution is quite simple .
I propose to the President that we suspend the sitting for two minutes .
For it is unacceptable ...
... that for reasons purely of protocol the number of Members in the Chamber has decreased by about 60 , which makes it extremely difficult to adopt amendments that will affect the health of European consumers for generations to come .
( Applause )
Mr President , an error has slipped into paragraphs 15 , 17 and 18 of this joint resolution of the European Union and Africa .
In paragraph 15 , instead of saying " the OAU " it should say " the African States " .
In section 17 , instead of " the OAU " it should say " Africa " .
In section 18 , " members of the OAU " should be replaced by " Africans " .
( Parliament agreed to vote on the oral amendment )
( Parliament adopted the resolution ) EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE
Resolution on the additionality principle
Mr President , I would like to give the following explanation of the vote that I cast in the debate concerning additionality .
I would like particularly to underline the point in the motion that Parliament fully endorses the Commission ' s statement that the spirit of additionality , as well as the letter of the law , represents a key consideration and is vital to ensuring that programmes have a maximum impact on the ground .
In that light it is absolutely unacceptable that the current policy allows Member States , after submission of region-based plans , to reallocate funds internally yet still formally comply with the additionality principle while defying its spirit .
This matter urgently calls for review by the Commission .
Since the debate - yesterday in fact - I have received a very courteous and helpful letter from Mr Barnier indicating that the Commission is moving our way on this .
I am very glad about that .
I should like to congratulate my colleague , Mrs Evans , for setting up this marvellous debate and getting this superb result today .
Mr President , I am delighted this resolution has been adopted by Parliament in recognition of the problem that exists with additionality .
I represent Wales which , due to the practices of the UK Government , has not received , and will not receive , what the EU intends to be spent on combating poverty over and above normal government spending , even with Objective I status in the current programme period .
As Commissioner Barnier has stated , it is as important to comply with the spirit of additionality as with the letter of the law .
The Commissioner also endorsed the statement by Commissioner Liikanen that in future the Commission would be particularly attentive to the spending figures put forward by the Member States when there is evidence of reduced expenditure in a given region or regions .
I trust now that the Member States will comply with the wishes of Parliament and the Commission in this matter to ensure that the effective targeting of structural funds at the poorest regions is not undermined .
- The EPLP delegation voted in favour of the compromise resolution on additionality because we believe that the principle of additionality is one of the core fundamental pillars of the structural funds reforms , for which I was Parliament ' s rapporteur .
However , I believe that parts of this resolution , rather than bringing clarity to the rules , will only serve to confuse the general public and in particular funding operators .
Paragraph A continues to confuse the principle of additionality with the separate but equally important principle of co-financing .
Paragraph G is inaccurate .
There is no regulatory requirement to check additionality on an annual basis , but as stated in the regulation , simplification requires three checks on additionality during the programming period .
It is inappropriate for Members to try with this resolution to rewrite regulations which were agreed unanimously by this Parliament and will be up for review in 2006 .
More disappointing is the naked party political games which British Members Mr Davies , Mr Bradbourn and Mrs Evans have attempted in this resolution .
This will not serve the best interests of our poorest communities , with deliberate misinformation and hijacking this debate for narrow party political advantage .
Our real goal must be to plan and give our support to the successful implementation of these funds to improve the life prospects of people in our poorest regions .
My party is committed to this goal and will work with other parties in a constructive and positive way to achieve this .
Agricultural statistics for the period 1993-2003
Mr President , of course , it is important , if not essential , for the European Union to be engaged in statistics .
However , this undertaking can sometimes be extremely harmful for certain States in our Union , take , for example , the milk quotas which have been so detrimental for so many areas of Europe .
In my opinion , we must ensure that these statistics are calculated , and are calculated appropriately , but , most importantly , I would like to take the opportunity presented by this explanation of vote on statistics to invite Parliament , the Commission and the Council to avoid what so frequently occurs as a result of the application of statistics to milk quotas and agricultural products , for example , according to which a certain amount may or may not be produced - namely , the waste of resources due to the destruction of excess produce .
Checks on the transport of dangerous goods by road
Mr President , I voted for this resolution because , clearly , the transport of dangerous goods is constantly in need of regulation .
We must do everything possible to reduce the number of vehicles carrying dangerous goods along the roads of Europe to a minimum .
I would argue that rail , sea and air transport should be favoured instead , and , in particular , we should favour employing the elderly to drive dangerous goods vehicles and work in related activities .
Young people lack experience and are certainly at greater risk than the elderly .
The experience of workers who have been performing this activity for a substantial period of time should be recognised , and employment of the elderly in all the most hazardous activities should be promoted .
Recommendation for second reading : Bowe ( A5-0083 / 2000 )
Mr President , I feel that we should not be too alarmist in these matters , and that , with regard to genetically modified organisms , we should not hold back scientific progress with an excessive amount of regulations .
In any case , no one has ever succeeded in blocking the advance of science .
I have heard on the grapevine that a gene is being discovered which prolongs human life , and I am a little concerned that we may be placing too many restrictions on science and the use of genetically modified organisms .
When this gene is discovered , it would be a shame if Parliament decided not to allow the movement of genetically modified organisms , ourselves , in fact , when , at last , we could live longer in better health .
For this reason , in the interests of the elderly , I would call for less stringent regulation of GMOs .
Mr President , I want to give an oral explanation of vote because what has happened , once again , is not very good news for our Parliament .
In fact consumers , associations and all those concerned with the environment , with health , with the expected risks due to GMOs released into the environment , were expecting the European Parliament to send out a strong signal .
Once again we have simply kowtowed to the lobby of the advocates of GMOs on the pretext that science will help to make the world a better place .
We know full well that as yet there is no toxicology study that evaluates the consequences of releasing GMOs into the environment .
So we can only regret that those amendments that went much further , that indeed allowed us to anticipate the implications of GMOs for nature , were not accepted .
Mr President , I therefore condemn the kind of compromise reached between the major political groups , which goes against what the consumers and associations expected of us , as well as all those who trusted the European Parliament and who expect our Members to adopt firm positions .
- The European Parliament will vote on 12 April , to adopt a new directive on the deliberate release of genetically modified organisms ( GMOs ) .
There are major issues at stake .
The time has come to make those who engage in the deliberate release of genetically modified organisms legally responsible for damage to human health and the environment .
They should be liable for any damage caused by such releases and they should be required to take out liability insurance just as every driver has to take out liability insurance in case he kills or injures another human being .
The argument has been made that this issue should instead be covered by horizontal legislation .
It is worth noting , however , that we have heard this argument since discussions about Directive 90 / 220 / EEC first started in 1989 .
At that time , the Commission promised that liability for environmental damage caused by GMOs would be covered by horizontal legislation , but we have been waiting for more than 10 years for that promise to be fulfilled .
We must adopt an immediate and categorical ban on the use of antibiotic resistant genes .
Many scientists and organisations , such as the Pasteur Institute and the British Medical Association , have called for a ban on the use of antibiotic-resistant marker genes , which do not perform any relevant function on the plants and are therefore completely superfluous .
In the common position antibiotic-resistant genes would just " be phased out " in the future , and only if " they may have any adverse effects on human health and the environment " .
This would mean that antibiotic-resistant products that have already been authorised would remain .
There are many less damaging forms of marker genes available and it is EU policy to prohibit all unnecessary use of antibiotics if there is a risk for human or animal health .
The directive should take a clear stand and insist that the use of these marker genes is stopped now .
The pharmaceutical industry wants a total exemption from the directive .
The Environment Committee adopted two contradictory amendments , one for a total exemption and one tightening up the common position line of a conditional exemption with all the normal environmental risk provisions .
It is unacceptable that the industry could be allowed on exemption unless the environmental risk provisions apply .
- ( FR ) I am extremely disappointed at the way the second-reading vote on the amendments to the draft directive on procedures for authorising genetically modified organisms ( GMOs ) went .
Admittedly , we have known since first reading that the principle of banning GMOs , or at least having a moratorium to allow for more in-depth studies , was rejected .
But the least we could have expected was for Parliament now to decide to take serious steps to protect the consumer .
Nothing of the kind has happened , however .
The European Parliament has just given way on three vital issues , in circumstances I consider shameful :
On banning the release of GMOs containing antibiotic-resistant genes : Amendments Nos 11 and 37 which called for such GMOs not to be released into the environment were rejected .
Instead we have adopted an amendment that simply calls for particular consideration to be given to this problem in order to identify and phase out by 2005 antibiotic resistance markers in GMOs which may have adverse effects on human health and the environment ;
On the risk of unintentional gene -transfers to other organisms : Amendment No 12 , which called for measures to be taken to prevent such unintentional transfers , was not adopted .
Instead , Parliament adopted Amendment No 38 , which is much more vague and simply calls for an assessment of the various forms of risk that might be involved in such transfers ;
On the liability and insurance obligations of persons deliberately releasing GMOs : to our great indignation , Parliament rejected Amendment No 33 which called for persons legally responsible for releasing these GMOs to assume total liability for any damage they caused to human health or the environment and which required them to take out adequate insurance to compensate for possible damage .
Instead , it adopted much weaker amendments that express the hope that , in the future , general legislation will be adopted in relation to environmental liability and that call on the Commission to submit a proposal on the impact of biotechnology on all areas over which the European Union has jurisdiction .
Alas , as we already know from the White Paper it prepared on the subject , the Commission is not in favour of compulsory insurance in this area .
We are particularly disgusted that Amendment No 33 was rejected , for if we want to authorise the marketing of products containing GMOs , we should at least ensure that those who sell them assume liability .
The pressure groups in the biotechnology industry explain that there is no risk , while at the same time saying that compulsory insurance is impossible because the risk is not insurable .
That tells us something .
I have never seen an insurer refuse to insure a non-existent risk .
One obscure aspect of this business is that the French Government which , according to the most recent information , includes ecologists , had officially expressed reservations about this Amendment No 33 .
Once again the biotechnology industry pressure groups have done their job at every level , out of sight of the citizens .

I warmly congratulate Mr Bowe on his report on the deliberate release into the environment of GMOs .
This subject , which has given rise to much debate , is a very topical one , given that yesterday two European regulations entered into force which require manufacturers to label " food and food ingredients " containing more than 1 % of GMOs , together with " genetically modified additives and flavourings " , although without setting out any threshold value in this case .
As a consumer , I am very pleased about this compulsory labelling because it will allow us to make an informed choice , although I would have preferred stricter rules that required a very clear indication on the outside packaging !
Yet this is a positive first step , since it has led several large firms to stop putting GMOs into their products .
Coming back to the issue under discussion today , this is a proposal to amend Directive 90 / 220 / EEC , which covers both the deliberate release of GMOs for experimental purposes and their deliberate release with a view to putting the products concerned on the market .
In the light of the progress of scientific research in this field , it seemed vital to clarify the scope of this legislation in order to give due protection to consumer health as also to the environment .
The proposals of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy set out a strict and transparent framework , thus responding fully to consumer concerns .
The purpose of the three main amendments I support is as follows :
to prevent any accidental contamination of fields by cross-pollination between GMO and non-GMO crops .
To that end , we must require either minimum distances between fields in which GMO crops are grown and those reserved for traditional crops , or that GMO crops are confined to special greenhouses because of the inherent risk of genetic pollution ;
to prevent any risk of antibiotic resistance developing as a result of the transfer of the resistant gene from one species to another .
So we must ban the release of all GMOs containing an antibiotic-resistant marker gene ;
to impose a strict liability system on producers .
Like the rapporteur , I am convinced that the person legally responsible for releasing a GMO into the environment must assume full civil liability for any damage to human health or the environment .
This principle of responsibility , together with that of GMO traceability and , in particular , the precautionary principle , will enable us to limit the risks as far as possible !
Given the uncertainties that remain in this area , we must be as prudent as we can !
Let me conclude by repeating and emphasising that we must listen to what the people of Europe expect of us !
Public opinion has in fact expressed its reservations about the development of ' Frankenstein foods ' on several occasions and its desire for healthy and natural food .
So we must be the spokespeople of this desire to preserve high-quality food in the European Union !
It is good that the Council common position already incorporates some of the amendments approved by the European Parliament . However , as proposed by the rapporteur , the amendments approved at first reading but not accepted by the Council must now be included .
Following the approval of the Biosafety Protocol in Montreal in January 2000 , we must take further steps to protect the rights of consumers and to re-establish their confidence .
We therefore support the amendments which aim to include in the directive the ban on the release of GMOs containing antibiotic resistance markers , even for the purposes of research , and the requirement imposed on the Commission and Member States that no GMO and / or products thereof should leave the territory of the European Union without the prior informed consent of the importing country .
We also support the defence of total environmental liability as it is unacceptable not to force companies in the biotechnology sector to take the necessary measures to protect human health and minimise environmental risks .
Finally , when consenting to a deliberate release , Member States and the Commission must ensure that measures are taken to prevent gene-transfer from GMOs to other organisms in the environment .
- I welcome Mr Bowe ' s report as a balanced and considered approach to the important subject of the release into the environment of GMOs .
The three key issues covered in Mr Bowe ' s report are : environmental liability , antibiotics and gene transfer .
On environmental liability I tend to take the Commission ' s view that this is best dealt with through horizontal legislation .
On antibiotics I would be in favour of a ban on the use in GMOs of genes conferring antibiotic resistance .
As far as gene transfer is concerned I believe measures must be foreseen in the new Directive to control the release of GMOs which can outcross with other plants .
A strong Directive which deals with concerns about the environment and the health risks of GMOs could go a long way to ensure we realise the potential benefits from GMOs and avoid the pitfalls .
Genetically modified organisms , or GMOs , mean that industry and , ultimately , human beings themselves are , in the name of health , medicine , larger harvests , insect-resistant crops and other supposed forms of future progress and improvements to human existence , embarking upon a path towards an unknown destination .
The path may one day prove to have led to something which is the total opposite of all the promises which were given when the journey was begun .
I want to issue this warning today .
The European Union needs new , tighter regulations in place of the first and still current directives concerning GMOs from 1991 .
Since 1998 , the Commission ' s proposals have been under discussion .
Further delays would be a mistake .
As a Swedish Christian Democrat Member of the European Parliament , I want to state that it must never be the GMO industry and economic interests which are allowed to govern legislation and regulations .
The representatives of these have , on repeated occasions , expressed the view that Europe has " fallen behind " the GMO industry in , above all , the United States and China , that the GMO industry cannot be " developed " as " freely " in Europe and that opportunities for new jobs and businesses " are being lost " in the EU ' s fifteen Member States .
Our political decisions must instead be guided by the concept of stewardship and not by manipulation of the genetic code .
Our task is to hand the earth and the environment over to future generations in as good a state as possible .
We must be able to show that , on the basis of stewardship and the precautionary principle , human beings have a desire to forgo what might appear to be short-term " gains " in favour of higher and significantly more long-term values such as a concern for creation and for genetic diversity .
In purely practical terms , this means regulations which guarantee a minimised risk of the spread of GMOs , a halt to the use of antibiotic resistance markers , an increase in independent research into the risks presented by GMOs , liability for damages based on the principle that those who release GMOs into the environment with deleterious effects upon health or the environment should be held strictly liable , long-term evaluations of the socio-economic and environmental consequences of the release of GMOs into the environment , permanent labelling of GMO products , compliance with all current regulations , such as the Biosafety Protocol , and an open application and decision-making process in which the public are entitled to express an opinion and in which each application is dealt with separately and no simplified application procedures are approved .
- ( SV ) It is an important report which Parliament has voted on today .
There are many uncertainties surrounding the use of genetically modified organisms , and there is good reason for being very careful .
On important points , the Council has wished to introduce risk assessment , together with evaluation of the use of genetically modified organisms .
The Directive guarantees a high level of protection .
Where most of the points are concerned , I have been able to agree with the amendments tabled by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
Where other points are concerned , however , other measures can justifiably be demanded . In the case of genes expressing resistance to antibiotics , the Council ' s position makes continued research possible under strict conditions based upon environmental considerations and respect for the consumer .
Nothing is so enduring as the accidental .
I therefore consider it very important to devise general regulations governing liability for environmental damage .
Dealing separately with the GMO sector may lead to major differences in the regulations governing liability in different areas .
When it comes to investigating the costs , together with the benefit to the public finances , of releasing genetically modified organisms into the environment , I have voted in favour of Amendment No 8 in order to guarantee continued discussion of how such an investigation ought to be carried out .
I do not , however , believe that investigations of that kind can be carried out annually .
The EU ought not , therefore , to become inundated with reports on the matter .
- Madam President , I wholeheartedly applaud the efforts of my Labour colleague , David Bowe , to put forward measures to control the release of GMOs into the environment .
With such fast-changing science and a host of possible unknown effects , it is important to protect Europe ' s people and our environment .
Strict controls on plants to prevent the transfer of genes from GMOs to other species are crucial .
This will ensure that other species are protected .
We must put safety first and make sure that GMOs do not enter the food chain unseen by the back door .
Furthermore , those responsible for the release of GMOs should bear full financial liability for any damage to human health and the environment .
Industry should pay and face the consequences of its actions , not the man-on-the-street .
Europe should stand up for the rights of the citizen and force industry to take responsibility .
Of course , the health and well-being of our citizens is of paramount importance .
I say no to the release of GMOs resistant to antibiotics .
We must not put our people or our animals at unnecessary risk .
Labour Euro MPs have been at the forefront of protecting our citizens and our environment .
We have consistently backed proposals to ensure that the use of GMOs and products derived from GMOs are strictly controlled within the EU .
David Bowe ' s report is yet further proof of Europe greening up its act and putting the safety of our citizens first .
Papayannakis report ( A5-0088 / 2000 )
Mr President , I voted for the measure on the labelling of beef .
At last , we are going to be told the place of birth and residence of the cattle , and , doubtless , whether they were called Daisy or Buttercup .
Likewise , however , it would be as well if everyday folk , human beings , pensioners even , were not treated as mere numbers ; it would be as well if , rather than just being a file on a desk , they were to become a person with a name , a surname and a life story .
All too often , the governments of our 15 States think of citizens , particularly pensioners and the elderly , as numbers , people without an identity , a life story or a date of birth .
Let us place photographs of our citizens inside all the bureaucratic files with which the States fill our offices .
It is a good thing that a system for the identification of bovine animals and the It is right that this should enter into force as soon as possible but not , however , before September given the codecision procedure which is being used .
Through this system , consumers can obtain information about the origin of the meat which they buy and the background of the animal can be checked .
Due to this improved link between producer and consumer , potential risks to public health can be detected at an early stage and avoided much more effectively .
It is essential that identical labelling rules are applied to beef imported from third countries .
If not all the information required by Community regulations is available , it is vital that a specific label is attached to the product clearly indicating its non-EC origin .
The European Parliament report also proposes , to ensure consumer protection , that operators or organisations producing and marketing minced beef , beef trimmings or cut beef should also be subject to the compulsory labelling system . They should not benefit from the exceptions proposed by the Commission as this would be equivalent to automatically exempting between 30 % and 50 % of beef from the labelling obligation .
- I welcome Mr Papayannakis ' report on proposals for an EU-wide compulsory identification system for cows and the labelling of beef and beef products .
The main aim of the new regulation is to enable consumers to trace the source of the meat they buy right back to the animal .
This system should enable any potential threats to human health to be tackled early and effectively .
I support the rapporteur in stressing that the same rules must be applied to imported beef from non-EU countries and , in cases where not all information is available , a clear indication to that effect should be provided .
Mr Papayannakis is right to insist that labels mention antibiotics and stimulants that have been administered and to oppose derogation from the regulation for minced beef , beef trimmings or cut beef .
Properly applied this regulation will go a long way to enhance the reputation , quality and safety of EU beef - good news for consumers and producers !
- ( FR ) By way of introduction , let me point out that Directive 79 / 112 clearly sets out the purpose of food labelling , by stating that the prime concern of all rules on food labelling should be to inform and protect the consumer .
Consumers need to have confidence in the food they eat .
In this case , the aim is not simply to change our tastes and our traditions in regard to chocolate , but to deal properly at last with the consequences of " mad cow " disease .
It is quite astounding that , given the gravity of the situation , today , so many years after the crisis , we still do not have an effective system of traceability in place .
We do not propose to repeat the debate we had in December 1999 , but the Commission would have been well-advised to scrupulously monitor the application of that regulation ; so once again it committed a serious political mistake .
Let us look back for a moment at the embargo on beef .
Although one swallow does not make a summer , in this case the French Government gave precedence to reason and caution over the ideology of the single market .
Knowing the options that exist in matters European , we can gauge what that must have cost it .
The reason why France chose this option is that the Community institutions are not always able , at this point in time , to ensure real traceability of food products .
Our consumer information and protection system is totally inadequate : for example , there is no way a citizen of the Union can know whether ravioli imported from another Member State contains any British beef .
Should the general public trust a Commission that does not ensure the compulsory traceability of beef yet lifts the embargo ?
I did not find it acceptable for the Commission to teach lessons to France , which , for its part , knows that the impact of the voluntary rules it adopted effectively helped restore consumer confidence .
Indeed we also defended that point of view by tabling amendments in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy and the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
We note with satisfaction that some of the amendments we tabled in the Committee on Agriculture and the Committee on the Environment were adopted .
The Committee on the Environment amended important points of the Commission proposal .
It is high time we set up a reliable and transparent system .
During this vote , we supported the rapid and rigorous application of traceability , with a view to ensuring unfailing traceability and clear and transparent information , and we are satisfied with the results .
We hope that today ' s vote will not lead to new and shameful calls for an extension or a derogation a few months hence .
- May I support the efforts of Mr Papayannakis to endorse proposals for an EU-wide compulsory identification system for cows and the labelling of beef and beef products .
Following the hullabaloo of food scares in recent times , most notably Mad Cow Disease , it is vital that we take measures to ensure that this type of food hazard does not happen again .
Food safety is a top priority and we must work hard towards alleviating the fears of consumers .
These new proposals enable consumers to trace the source of the meat they buy right back to the animal .
This should allow for any possible health threats to be tackled early and effectively .
From September 2000 , beef labelling must show the point of slaughter of the animal , and from 2003 , the origin of the animal including where it was born , reared and slaughtered must be added .
Public confidence in food safety has fallen tremendously in the past .
We must , of course , put safety first , and also make moves towards rebuilding public confidence .
British farmers particularly recognise that clear labelling is the best way of reassuring worried consumers that the beef they buy is safe .
This House should do its utmost to ensure that public health and safety is high on the agenda .
Pushing for clear labelling is the only way to convince our customers that food safety is top of our list .
Lisbon European Council
Mr President , I have taken the floor , for the last time today , to explain the way I voted on the conclusions of the Lisbon Summit .
I am not very happy : I would have preferred our 15 heads of government to have been more effective , more decisive , more energetic and more courageous .
With regard to social security , I would have preferred it if the decision had , at last , been taken to create a single European pension for the Union .
When the European citizens grow old , all the governments abuse them .
They are told off for living too long , whereas the real problem is that their contributions have been wasted .
The European citizens call upon the Union to set up a single European pension and thus show itself to be more capable , a better administrator and less careless with money than the individual governments .
- ( FR ) The Lisbon Summit was supposed to focus on a social Europe .
In fact , a new wave of neo-liberalism swept through Lisbon and gave the EU its marching orders in the global economic war .
Far from focussing on social and democratic rights , indeed looking more to the US social model , the summit once again sang the praises of the law of profit , workforce flexibility and all-out competition , with new forms of privatisation and liberalisation .
In short , everything should be quoted on the stock exchange .
And this was done with the complicity of all the left-wing governments present in Lisbon .
To sugar the pill , the EU is promising us quasi-general access to the Internet and cutting-edge vocational training .
To crown it all , it is actually dangling the idea of full employment , i.e. the creation of 20 to 30 million new jobs , before our noses .
These splendid promises mean only one thing : a huge rise in insecure jobs , casual work and low wages , with the constant threat of redundancy and , on top of that , a scheme for an inegalitarian overhaul of the social protection system .
Employers , for their part , will once again enjoy quite indecent subsidies .
A new economy , but we are being served up the same old recipes again .
- The Portuguese presidency is to be congratulated for calling a summit to agree new strategic goals for the Union in tackling unemployment , economic reform and social cohesion in light of the new knowledge-based economy .
The Council is right to say that the shift to a digital , knowledge-based economy , prompted by new goals and services , will be a powerful engine for growth , competitiveness and jobs .
In addition , it will be capable of improving citizens ' quality of life and the environment .
However , it is equally true that without active intervention this shift will widen the gap between the haves and have-nots .
The Council is therefore to be applauded for acknowledging the importance of promoting social inclusion , for emphasising the role of education and training for living and working in the knowledge society ; for highlighting the need for more and better jobs ; and for stating that social protection must underpin the transformation of the knowledge economy .
I understand the presidency ' s conclusions as confirming the goal that every section of society should have the opportunity to benefit from new technology .
The Lisbon Summit created enormous expectations .
Some saw this as the ' Employment Summit ' , others as the ' Summit for the Society of Innovation and Knowledge ' .
In the end , it turned out to be the ' Internet Summit ' , as it was in this area that some of the most promising promises were made , if you will forgive the repetition of terms .
If only these promises could be fulfilled .
We share these expectations but we should also like to be able to congratulate the practical results achieved .
On this score , only the future will tell .
Yet we already regret certain weaknesses .
Furthermore , the mainly socialist European leaders who met at this summit could not resist the bewitching rhetoric of promising results for which they are not really responsible , yet did not make any promises on the issue which is their responsibility , namely the actual means to achieve these results .
We should also like to have seen more practical emphasis on two basic points . These are the reduction in tax and the obligation to pay employment contributions and the effective deregulation and removal of red tape , thereby stimulating entrepreneurial initiative and promoting growth .
The desire to defend the ' European social model ' is admirable . Yet this defence cannot be achieved at the expense of economic dynamism and , ultimately , the very future and quality of this social model .
These thoughts are reflected in our votes and the amendments tabled .
- ( EL ) The Lisbon Summit , which can only euphemistically be termed " an Employment Summit " despite the clamorous declarations that went with it , achieved no more than to take another step towards changing employment into employability , redefining the concept ' working person ' and destabilising labour relations and rights , to serve the celebrated ' New Economy ' in the best possible way for big business , this being the new name for the old , familiar but still more unrestrained and harsh economic and social liberalism .
Masquerading with the greatest cynicism under the grandiose title of ' modernising the European social model by investing in people ' , are the demands of big business for greater profitability as a means of ' supporting employment ' . The competitiveness of enterprises is being increased by cutting labour costs , the labour market is being fully liberalised and made more flexible , atypical forms of employment are being promoted , social security systems are under review and any remnant of the welfare state is being provocatively squeezed .
That is not ' investing in people ' as the Summit meeting would have it .
That is the estrangement of people to the benefit of the market , the subjugation of working people to the demands and criteria of monetary credit , and the subjugation of the social state to the indexes and criteria of nominal convergence and EMU .
What the Lisbon economic and social policy guidelines are promoting , what is in practice being prepared for working people and ' served up ' under a misnamed ' modernisation ' - intended to ' sugar the pill ' , deceive working people and reduce public reaction against the anti-labour and anti-grass roots economic and social policy of the EU - is a minimum level of poverty and not a minimum level of prosperity .
The ' New Economy ' is actively preparing the creation of an extensive stratum of ' employed poor ' , with miserly wages , restricted security and welfare rights , who will be obliged to change jobs according to the dictates of the unaccountable market and the laws of the lawless interests of big business .
The EU does not seem interested in fighting unemployment and promoting and supporting stable and full employment .
On the contrary , it is preparing working people , and this indeed at a fast rate , to live in a situation of complete and permanent insecurity .
Besides , the Presidency ' s conclusions boldly state that the aim is ' improved employability ' and both the information society and education are dragged along in chains to serve that rationale as tools to support part-time work , tele-employment and piecework employment .
Prosperity is destined for big business , to which splendid fields of glory are being opened since , in order to satisfy its demand for a ' fully operational internal market ' and greater competitiveness against the USA , the pressures of international competition are being fully transferred to the labour market , liberalisation is being speeded up and the so-termed ' structural changes ' ( privatisations , market liberalisation ) in vital sectors such as energy , telecommunications , postal services , transport , water supply and others are being promoted .
Instead of being controlled , restructuring , mergers and company relocations leading to tens of thousands of job losses are being made even easier .
Public and social investments are dwindling , equal opportunity and the fight against all forms of discrimination related to access to employment , and labour relations are being undermined , and priority is being given to whatever serves the aim of the ' economic productivity of labour ' for big business , in other words low wages , lack of social protection , flexible and temporary employment , and the persistent exclusion of women , young people and people with special needs from the labour market .
The more than 60 million people who are victims of long-term unemployment , mass poverty and social exclusion , and all the working people in Europe too , cannot react ' adaptively ' , ' supportively ' , ' obediently ' or ' cooperatively ' to such choices .
You will find them in front of you , unsubdued , uncompromising and unyielding , fighting for and demanding full and steady employment and a system of social policy that includes insurance , health , pensions , protection for the unemployed , real equality of opportunity , quality education and substantive professional training .
The only thing in the Lisbon conclusions one could agree with is that ' people are Europe ' s main asset ' , except for the fact that they are not disposed to be ' liquidated ' in the international money markets and to sacrifice themselves so that the monopolies can inflate their profits .
That asset is , and will prove to be , valuable in the struggle for a social , democratic and supportive Europe , a Europe of peace , progress and socialism .
EU-Africa Summit in Cairo
Mr President , I voted against the motion for a resolution on the EU-Africa Summit for several reasons .
The first was because the respective conclusions do not contain any significant reference to the issue of protecting human rights in Africa or to the development of independent legal systems . The second reason was specifically because there is no mention in the text of last week ' s events in Angola which involved yet another brutal attack on the freedom of expression and freedom of the press , values which are so dear to the European Union .
Two journalists and human rights activists - Rafael Marques and Aguiar dos Santos - were sentenced by a court in Luanda to imprisonment and fines for simply having criticised , in a press article , the Angolan President , José Eduardo dos Santos .
As defendants , their rights to a defence , which are fundamental in any rule of law , were violated , particularly by the absence during the trial of Rafael Marques ' lawyer and by them not being permitted to prove the veracity of the facts as the judge argued that the case concerned the figure of the President of the Republic .
The international community and the political leaders of Europe must react against this climate of intolerance and constant disregard for human rights in Angola . On this first occasion for the discussion of EU-Africa relations in this House , I must therefore once again strongly protest about this attack on the freedom of expression by the Angolan authorities .
Finally , having taken advantage of this opportunity to highlight these events , I must remind you that this Parliament recently approved a resolution on freedom of expression and press freedom in Angola which condemned the abuses occurring in that country . I therefore ask the Council and its presidency , and also our President , to use all the means at their disposal to put pressure on the Angolan authorities to re-establish the rule of law , freedom and peace in Angola .
This is the only way to end the suffering of a people who are as entitled as anyone to human dignity and happiness .
- ( FR ) The solemn declaration of the first EU-Africa summit in Cairo opens by stating , and I quote : " Over the centuries , ties have existed between Africa and Europe ... developed on the basis of shared values of strengthening representative and participatory democracy " .
Given that this secular past was a story of slavery , massacres , forced labour , plundering , colonial conquests and oppression , during which the rich European countries bled that continent dry , we can only wonder what is the most shameful aspect : the pride of the representatives of the imperialist countries or the baseness of the local Heads of State who agreed to co-sign such a declaration , on the pretence that they were doing so in the name of their peoples .

We express our solidarity with these African peoples who have paid a heavy price to our ruling classes ; and it is not even enough for us to cancel a debt that has already been largely repaid .
Genuine cooperation with Africa could only begin if we return to the people of that continent what was stolen from them over a century of colonisation and is still being stolen from them today .
Genuine cooperation on an equal footing can only be established between Europe and Africa if they are no longer in thrall to industrial and banking groups that grow rich on exploiting the working classes of the two continents .
In view of these circumstances , we voted against the joint resolution that welcomes the Cairo summit , while voting for the only amendment that contains concrete proposals .
- ( FR ) This Cairo summit is the first meeting at the level of the EU and the African continent as a whole .
Yet the EU persists in wanting to divide Africa between the Mediterranean area and black Africa .
During this neocolonial transition period , the EU is seeking to impose a system of neoliberal relations dominated by liberalisation and structural adjustments .
In fact the only purpose of the famous equal partnership is to remind the Africans that they are indebted to international law and must bow to the panoply of neo-liberal instruments .
The various conflicts in Africa were discussed , but no support is being given because of the rivalries between the great Western powers that are either sharing out or contesting spheres of influence .

As for the question of Aids , although its urgency is recognised , and aside from a moralising approach , the fine speeches cannot mask the cold reality of the figures , which reflect the fall in EU development aid to Africa now that priority is being given to Central and Eastern Europe .
Although the Africans have managed to wrest a few promises of debt cancellation from a few EU countries , the EU remains opposed to the idea of a global cancellation of the third world debt , which means the people are starving daily .
Like the EU-Africa civil society Forum in March , which brought together more than 80 NGOs , we declare our opposition to the structural adjustment programmes and our continued support for the debt-cancellation campaigns .
That brings us to the end of the explanations of vote .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.25 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Madam President , I did ask to speak this morning when my intervention would have been more appropriate . However , as this was not possible , I will speak now .
I regret that the President-in-Office was this morning struck down by an Austrian malady and was absent from this Chamber . As a result of his indisposition , he was also absent when we voted on two issues of particular interest to the Portuguese presidency , namely the Lisbon summit and the EU-Africa Summit .
As a Portuguese person and as an MEP , I regret that the Portuguese presidency has confused the position which it took as a government in its bilateral relations with Austria with the responsibilities which it must assume and fulfil when holding the Council presidency .
As we were all here , apart from one political group which was also absent from a certain point , I must regret that the Portuguese presidency chose to align itself with a political group which has the most recent totalitarian memories in this House .
In a fair and respectful manner , I must also criticise the behaviour of our President .
I have the highest respect for her but she must also respect us .
Frankly this does not appear to be the case .
Our President exceeded the rules of protocol . She must realise that being President of the European Parliament does not make her the leader of the majority .
She represents this institution and must act and speak in this House with respect for all the different positions expressed here .
She is not the leader of the majority and I must therefore register my protest .
Mr Ribeiro e Castro , your views will certainly be conveyed to the Council and to the President .
IGC ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the debate on the report ( A5-0086 / 2000 ) by Mr Dimitrakopoulos and Mr Leinen , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on the European Parliament ' s proposals for the Intergovernmental Conference ( 14094 / 1999 - C5-0341 / 1999 - 1999 / 0825 ( CNS ) ) .
Madam President , tomorrow I am going to vote for the Dimitrakopoulos / Leinen report .
The Committee for Constitutional Affairs has done a good job and has taken a progressive , courageous position on certain areas of reform of the Treaties .
However , if I were asked to give my opinion on the overall status of the situation in Europe , I would have to say that I am somewhat confused and concerned .
There is no point in trying to deny anything . Certain facts which have become clear in the last few days , some of which have been the subject of furious political debate in recent weeks , show that , in actual fact , much of the confusion and fear that has been expressed and many of the objections raised are well-founded .
In connection with this , a few days ago , Le Figaro published a revealing article by Mr Schmidt and Mr Giscard d ' Estaing , the founders of the European monetary serpent , which frankly and explicitly repeated an observation previously made by Jacques Delors , to the effect that if the institutions do not undergo thorough reform , the European Community will rapidly be reduced to a free trade area .
Personally , I find some of the decisions adopted extremely excessive , if not rash , such as , for example , the proposal to open the Community to Turkey - a country which I respect and which it is right to respect , despite its differences from the European Community in terms of history , culture and politics and the concept of the State as well , quite apart from the issue of human rights - and these decisions are evidence of an organisation which is becoming increasingly more economic than political .
There are two alternatives : either the founding countries of the Community change direction , or else , slowly but surely , we will be forced to abandon all hope .
There is no longer even any question of the creation of a different State ; it is history which must change course .
The Europe which we Europeanists dream of is a Europe of States , and it should therefore be no cause for concern to anyone who , and rightly so , believes strongly in national identity .
Nobody wants to eliminate the States : however , all these different national situations in the different States , which have reached the point where they are incapable of overcoming the challenges of the world today , must be adapted and tuned to something greater .
I should now like to touch on the vicious attacks on President Prodi , not only from the press but also within the political sphere .
There is no point in denying anything in this case either .
I am not passing judgement on President Prodi now , for it would not be appropriate to do so at this time , but I do feel that these attacks are evidence of strong criticism of a Commission line , a line which has been progressive and open . It has sometimes been a little on the optimistic side , but it certainly represents progress .
Madam President , the fact that I am addressing Commissioner Barnier in this Chamber , with whom I have often had the opportunity for discussion in smaller meetings , gives me a positive feeling about tomorrow ' s debate , but my view of the medium- and long-term progress of European development is pessimistic .
I feel that Parliament will be required to take courageous , decisive action in matters much more important than a resolution , if , as I fear , the agenda is not extended , and if , in the end , as the current state of affairs would suggest , an excess of caution results in a Conference which makes nothing more than cosmetic changes to the Treaties and avoids any substantial modifications .
Madam President , as far as the budget is concerned , it is becoming increasingly essential that we bring the Treaty up to date with the procedures .
The integration of the financial perspectives into the Treaty will thereby be a medium-term financial plan which will be agreed between Parliament and the Council .
This integration will create much more stability , as well as the legal certainty which Mr Colom i Naval , the permanent rapporteur for the financial perspectives , spoke of this morning .
Let us remember that the financial perspectives procedure has brought budgetary stability to the European Union .
Nevertheless , Parliament believes that the integration of the financial perspectives into the Treaty will mean that , as well as stability , there will be sufficient flexibility to allow for a review of those perspectives when necessary .
If we do not do this , we will run the risk of confusing the financial perspectives with the annual budgets .
This confusion will lead to conflict year after year .
With regard to the classification of expenditure , which this House has also long wanted to see , we must find an institutional point of balance which combines the European Parliament ' s requests for a greater degree of codecision in budgetary matters with the defence of the privileged nature of certain expenditure which forms the basis of the European Union ' s economic and social cohesion .
The European Parliament wants the Community budget to be financed by own resources rather than by contributions from the Member States .
The fiscal and budgetary autonomy of the European Union rests on this , as does , to a certain extent , its political autonomy .
However , let us remember that , if what we want is an autonomous financial system for the Union , we must at the same time create a fair tax system .
Progressiveness cannot only be based on expenditure .
Sooner or later we will have to be sufficiently progressive in terms of own resources as a basis for this fair tax system .
Madam President , we are usually very quick to criticise the Commission or the Council when they do not attend our debates , but this time , ironically , the finger seems to be pointing the other way .
At the very least , the two rapporteurs should have been present during the debate on their reports .
I am aware that these days are extremely tiring for all concerned , but duty comes before everything else .
I listened to Mr Segni ' s speech .
Somewhat aided by the fact that he was speaking in Italian , I realised that he was not speaking on behalf of the Union for a Europe of Nations Group , whose views are completely different from those he expressed and which I share .
We are on the brink of an historic occasion where the risks are great , but so are the opportunities .
We must be aware that this historic occasion provides us with the opportunity to enlarge a community of values and not merely orchestrate the geographical and territorial enlargement of an advanced economy which has raised the standard of living of our communities .
This is the real challenge .
Enlargement is thus our opportunity to change our operating rules and ensure that they are based on greater transparency and stronger guarantees of the rights of citizenship , and also streamline our decision-making .
The basic requirement we uphold is the need to confine unanimity to constitutional issues and to use qualified majority voting for all other matters .
In the very short space of time remaining , I would like to refer to paragraph 51 , which puts forward the idea of our coming together with the national parliaments to examine the possibility of holding an Inter-Parliamentary Conference on the future strategies of the Union .
Clearly , a substantial amount of responsibility would fall to our President and to the French Presidency .
I am convinced that this opportunity for representatives of the national parliaments of both the Union countries and the candidate countries to meet and discuss future strategies and the implications of the Intergovernmental Conference is extremely valuable and must not be passed up .
Madam President , why is the gulf between the European Parliament and the European governments so wide ?
There is an excellent resolution on the table which refers to the many necessary reforms .
Indeed , majority decision-making as a rule and reinforcement of the Commission and the European Parliament are essential in order for the enlarged Union to function .
Cooperation should be more flexible and each Member State must retain a Commissioner .
Unfortunately , the many sound proposals from Parliament are at odds with the willingness of the governments to extend the IGC agenda and reach compromises .
If the European governments do not change their attitudes soon , a treaty will be drawn up in Nice which guarantees to cripple the Union once it has been enlarged .
Over the past few years , many European government leaders have presented their own people with the view that the European Union is becoming too powerful and too bureaucratic and is taking away too much national sovereignty .
They have contributed to a climate of Euroscepticism where there is no room for compromise .
At the same time , the same politicians have decided in favour of a substantial enlargement , necessitating reforms which were declared taboo in the first place .
As such , many European politicians are hostage to their own rhetoric .
If the European government leaders are serious about new countries joining , they must display the necessary political courage and agree to far-reaching reforms .
We are the representatives of the people .
If the governments manage to narrow the gulf between themselves and Parliament , they will ultimately be able to narrow the gulf between themselves and their own people and , at the end of the day , this is what matters .
Madam President , aside from the letter of the report , I want to draw attention to a few of the numbers contained in it .
First number : 700 .
Limiting the number of Members of the European Parliament to 700 would not be a cause for concern were it not that it would render our Parliament less representative .
By marginalising small countries , while at the same time allowing high electoral thresholds to be set up in the largest ones , this sordid electoral mechanism would prevent whole sections of European society from being represented any more in this Chamber .
We must reaffirm that it is our Parliament ' s prime and absolute task to represent the people and the peoples of Europe in all their diversity .
Second number : two thirds .
Two thirds of the vote is the majority required for our Parliament to censure the Commission .
This very high threshold of two thirds is a sad and unique case .
For what European government can boast of being so safe from any real parliamentary control , of having such impunity ?
We must create a formal symmetry .
If a simple majority is good enough for the investment of the Commission , then the same majority should suffice for a vote of no confidence .
The people ' s representatives have the power to undo anything they have done .
That is the rule everywhere , and it must be the rule here too .
Third and last number : 2009 .
The report proposes the year 2009 as the date for electing MEPs from transnational lists .
Now this is a case of either or : either our Parliament decides this measure is not a good one , which would mean abandoning it - even in 2009 - or , like the Greens , it must admit that such lists are vital if we want to create real families of thought in Europe , in which case this important political debate can begin by the time of the 2004 elections .
Otherwise we would be being neither lucid nor ambitious enough .
Nor does this report , which , without being bad , does not match up to the issues at stake , seem very lucid or ambitious .
In changing size , the European Union will change in nature .
So our continent will have to rethink its rules rather than simply tidy them up .
This timid IGC 2000 can in no way represent an end result , but only the first step towards a constitution .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we should go back to basics and ask ourselves what makes the European Union different .
Over the centuries many attempts were made by some countries to dominate others .
Ideas may have varied according to the times and individual countries ' interests , but the system stayed the same , with power for some and subjugation for others .
We suffered centuries of war and even destruction and ruin on several occasions .
Many times we had to start over and it was the last time this happened that the European idea came into being .
So what is different ?
The answer is everything .
We have a system based on mutual freedom for everyone , instead of supremacy for some .
We have a framework agreed between nations and not one imposed on the nations .
We therefore have a permanent contract between free and sovereign states which are all equal .
Instead of changing majorities , we have the rules of a stable contract in which we are all minorities .
This is the secret of the unequalled peace and progress which we have enjoyed , based firstly on a common culture of human rights , democracy , the rule of law and free markets and , secondly , on strict mutual respect with no trampling over other countries .
The instruments which we use are procedural rules , unanimity or at least broad convergence , and substantive rules , concrete harmonisation policies and the promotion of economic and social cohesion .
The price is patience , which is a small price to pay for such great results !
We need to be patient with each other and in terms of time so that Europe can continue along the same lines . We particularly need to resist the age-old temptation of wanting to impose ourselves on others , to break this contract between equals , for this has never led to union .
By cherishing the idea of union in Europe we are being realistic , not imposing a rose-tinted fantasy .
It would be wrong to strip away the rules of the game which have brought us so much success to date .
In my opinion , the motion for a resolution is a dangerous anti-Europe deviation , which completely alters the balance .
This would be a disaster for my own country , Portugal , as for other smaller or medium-sized Member States .
For Europe in general it would mean a crisis or breakdown .
We cannot have a Europe in which less rules over more , which gets annoyed but does not listen and which aims to replace a Treaty between states with a constitution imposed on the states .
We want an open Europe , not one tied in a straitjacket .
Finally , I must mention the idea of transnational European parties .
As a Conservative Christian Democrat , I stand as a witness against this .
My party , the Popular Party or CDS-PP , founded the PPE .
Some years ago we were expelled from the PPE because we advocated a referendum on Maastricht .
It is now our former Austrian companions from the Christian Democratic Union who are in difficulty because of elections in their country .
What a frightening idea of democracy !
We need to be careful , for federalism is so dazzling that it destroys with its hands those concepts which it asserts with its own mouth .
This is because it covets power and ignores partnership and we cannot go down this road .
Madam President , the IGC should prepare the EU for the reorganisation needed to bring about the complete process of enlargement that is in hand .
The most important consideration regarding enlargement in the Dimitrakopoulos / Leinen report is increased flexibility .
Only differentiation within the EU can create the preconditions necessary for enlargement on such a massive scale .
It is important that the report proposes that closer cooperation should be facilitated .
The Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party has recommended that the principle of flexibility should also be realised in the form of greater scope for cooperation for those countries that cannot or do not want to accept the Union ' s statutes in their entirety .
This would facilitate and speed up enlargement of the Union .
In making its review the Group of the Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party states that flexibility might lead to a larger concentric Europe , composed of a federal core and a less integrated outer circle .
At this stage it is not necessary to adopt a precise position on how the Union should be differentiated .
It is enough for now that we create an institutional framework in which it is possible to deepen and expand the Union in practical terms .
I hope that Amendment No 154 , which the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party has tabled regarding increased flexibility , will be adopted .
Madam President , the European Union is starting the necessary process of enlargement , initially involving thirteen new Member States , without defining what the Union is and even without knowing the size of its future territory . This is causing a situation of uncertainty which could lead to the dilution of its political character into a union of national governments without the means to solve the internal problems of social cohesion and territorial balance or to take its place in the world according to its full political and economic weight .
As a Member for Galicia and a European citizen , I must express my disapproval of this legislative initiative from the Commission . This disapproval does not relate so much to the issues dealt with in this initiative as to its fundamental failings which this House still has time to remedy .
How can this Parliament , which represents all European citizens , rule out its own full legislative initiative ?
How can we , in the same context , not accept that the Commission President must be elected from among MEPs ?
Why is the exercise before the Union of the powers of the national authorities , federal states and Autonomous Communities not recognised ?
How can we deny the establishment of a European employment policy linked to the Structural Funds policy ?
These questions are useful to highlight some of the grave deficiencies in the legislative proposal on reforming the Treaties .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , what are the issues at stake in this Intergovernmental Conference ?
Manifestly , the first and main issue is the quality of the decision-making process in the Union .
Here we attach the utmost importance to extending the scope of qualified majority voting .
If we were certain that tomorrow every decision could be taken by a qualified majority in the European Union , we would not have raised the question of closer cooperation .
But we have to acknowledge that undoubtedly we will also need this instrument .
That is what this Parliament said when it first stated its position and I think that in a way we have helped persuade the community of Heads of State and Government to listen to our refrain .
Of course we can only be delighted at this .
But today I want to address those MEPs who see , behind this closer cooperation , the risk of too far-reaching consultation between the large countries .
It seems to me that at present it is in the interest of all the members of the Union that any closer cooperation within the Union should be established on a basis of respect for the Union ' s legal system and institutions .
To that end , let us authorise closer cooperation when one third of the Member States takes part or is involved , and let us authorise this closer cooperation by a qualified majority , after obtaining Parliament ' s assent .
Tomorrow we will certainly have to consider the question of the democratic scrutiny of this closer cooperation , an area where our Parliament will have to play a major role .
So I understand why the Intergovernmental Conference will look into these questions and I am glad the discussions are thus going to the heart of the matter .
But you will find these same questions coming up again in other discussions you will be holding during the Intergovernmental Conference .
Let me make one more point before concluding , Madam President .
I want to sound the alarm about the progress in drafting the Charter of Fundamental Rights we want to see incorporated in the Treaty .
It is most important to incorporate that Charter .
At a time when the values of the Union are at times being overturned or seem undermined , that Charter is coming at just the right moment ; but it will be meaningful only if it is incorporated in the Treaty and has real substance , based on the Cologne mandate , the entire Cologne mandate , i.e. only if it includes economic and social rights .
Madam President , this is a strange , uncomfortable and schizophrenic report .
Parts of it are clearly crafted as helpful suggestions to the IGC ; other parts form a list of pious hopes and hopeful wishes which are certain to be rejected by the Conference .
How much of this schizoid quality reflects the positions of the two rapporteurs is hard to estimate .
If so , I am sure that I can attribute the better parts to my friend and colleague Mr Dimitrakopoulos and the more unusual parts to Mr Leinen .

However , the majority of my Conservative colleagues have voted to reject the report and will vote accordingly in this House .
The Conservative delegation regards many of the ideas in the report as centralising , syndicalist , unnecessary and backward-looking .
Instead of examining new , flexible and radical approaches to an enlarged Union in the global market , the message of this report is : carry on regardless down the road from Maastricht and Amsterdam !
Nevertheless , in rejecting this report the Conservative delegation shows it too has a schizophrenic quality , since it therefore rejects the excellent amendment by Mr Duff , to give a legal opt-out to Member States , and that of my friend Mr Perry and others , to enable Parliament to put public money where its mouth is by saving wasteful expenditure entailed in the absurdity of these Strasbourg sessions .
That is the nature of democracy and democratic decisions .
They too are often strange , uncomfortable and schizophrenic , but they remain the best we have all the same .
Madam President , the report by the two rapporteurs is very ambitious , very ahead of the times , but it has two major defects , which ought to be corrected by the vote in plenary .
Firstly , to generalise the system of dual simple majority voting is not the panacea of the future integration of Europe .
A principle of that kind could induce public opinion in the Member States and the national parliaments to reject that system for the most sensitive issues which are in fact exceptions to the general rule .
It would be better to seek a compromise acceptable to all , as in the past .
It is a question of legitimacy and acceptability .
Secondly , Member States with a large population get more than their fair share .
The underlying principle of " one man - one vote " is unacceptable .
It conflicts with Article 190 of the Treaty which provides that the number of elected Members must ensure the appropriate representation of the peoples of the States brought together in the Community .
It is a question of equality and solidarity .
Finally , there is no serious argument to back up the thesis we keep being served up , namely that a Commission of more than 20 members would not work .
Equally , in the case of the Commission , let us avoid making numbers into an absolute principle .
On the contrary , if we want decisions proposed on the Commission ' s initiative to gain wide support in all the Member States , it is vital for them all to be represented .
The important vote we will be holding tomorrow will , I hope , enable the European Parliament to put an end to this ambiguity and to make some adjustments .
Only a more politically realistic proposal will have a chance of being taken into consideration .
IGC 2000 is not the end of the story .
Madam President , at a time when the future of the European Union depends more than ever on the balance and smooth functioning of our institutions , I want to begin by thanking the two rapporteurs , Giorgos Dimitrakopoulos and Jo Leinen , for the high quality of their work .
We all agree today that we must adopt institutional and political reforms prior to any enlargement of the Union .
That is the challenge we have to meet at a moment when many of our fellow-citizens are beginning to feel doubts and see few political prospects .
Today the European Union which the founding fathers conceived , achieved and then bequeathed to us must evolve and change .
Europe is at a crossroads .
Either we content ourselves in future with being merely a free trade area , or we seek to construct a political Europe .
But let us make no mistake : if we choose to sit on the fence , we are likely to see the worst scenario .
A Europe with a single currency , but without its attributes of political power , would revert to being merely a geographical area , which would give free rein to national rivalries .
The time has come for Europe to be a power capable of genuine political expression , of sustaining a social project and framing a common foreign and defence policy .
It is up to us , the elected representatives of the people of Europe , to work towards improving the efficiency and democracy of our institutions .
But Europe will only be democratic if the people themselves determine the principles and rules of its organisation .
I am happy that the Dimitrakopoulos report takes this aspiration into account in the framework of a constitutional process aimed at simplifying and clarifying the Community treaties .
But I think we need to go further ; we need a constitution , i.e. a basic law , so that Europe can assert itself as a genuine democratic society .
Thus the reform of the institutions is not only the condition for enlargement , it is also the condition for the survival of Europe .
Commissioner , I hope the representatives of the Member States will embark on real reforms and take the measure of the issues at stake in the Intergovernmental Conference , so as to make this century into the century of Europe .
Madam President , I would first of all like to thank both rapporteurs .
Long before the IGC was launched , the Dutch social democratic delegation had already taken an active interest in the IGC .
We have held large public debates in the Netherlands and have done a great deal of groundwork .
After all , the IGC should prepare the Union for enlargement , and this enlargement will require the current Member States to make sacrifices .
These sacrifices , however , are small , given the historic opportunity of unifying the East and the West in a secure Europe characterised by peace .
In addition , it should , of course , bring Europe closer to its citizens , because the distance between Brussels and our citizens is still far too great .
The IGC should therefore make up the democratic shortfall .
For this purpose , it is essential to extend majority decision-making to all legislation , except for constitutional matters , and have codecision power for Parliament , as well as the well-known double formula in the Council decision-making process .
Simply reducing a democratic deficit is not sufficient to improve contact with the citizen .
This is why we have specifically committed ourselves to a better and institutionalised social dialogue with non-governmental organisations , since they look after many of the citizens ' interests .
This is provided for in Amendment No 162 .
Another subject which is close to our hearts is that of making closer cooperation more flexible .
It is clear that the de facto veto , currently inherent in this procedure , must go .
Once enlargement has taken place , closer cooperation could do a great service to a Union containing a still greater diversity of Member States within its borders .
In our opinion , the report does not go far enough regarding another point , namely that relating to individual responsibility which must be granted by Commissioners .
We firmly believe that it must be possible for Parliament to issue a strong warning to a Commissioner who loses the confidence of Parliament .
In our opinion , such a procedure does more justice to a democratic balance between the institutions than the Prodi procedure , but unfortunately , the majority of MEPs considered this step a bridge too far .
Madam President , with regard to our Euro-Commissioner , we would ideally like to have one Commissioner per country .
We would accept a rota system for all states at a pinch , because we support the compromise made by the socialist group .
We think that , ultimately , our compromise has struck a sound balance between small and large Member States .
We hope that this will receive support from this Parliament .
Madam President , enlargement is important for the people of Europe .
We must therefore find a way of cooperating throughout Europe .
The accession negotiations are now under way .
It is therefore important that it should be possible to conclude the Intergovernmental Conference before the end of the year .
Both large and small States must be able to exercise influence in the future EU .
We must strike a balance .
This is necessary if our citizens are to have confidence in European cooperation .
If the composition of the European Parliament is to be adjusted , I therefore advocate a proportional , degressive reduction in the number of Members .
All present Member States must be included and make their contribution .
At the same time , the smallest States must be guaranteed a certain number of Members within the framework of the seven hundred seats we have set as a ceiling .
When it comes to votes in the Council , we must find a method of distributing votes which does not need to be renegotiated at each subsequent enlargement .
I therefore recommend a system which takes account of differences in the size of the population .
It is important that each country should have a Member in the Commission .
The Commissioners work for the whole of the Union and are , in fact , important if consensus is to be achieved between the Member States .
The Commission must therefore be able to draw upon knowledge and experience from all the Member States .
EU cooperation is , in the first place , a civil European project and ought to be distinguished from anything of a military nature .
The Member States do have different backgrounds where military alliances and neutrality are concerned .
In Cologne and Helsinki , great progress was made in terms of preparing ourselves for preventative crisis and conflict management .
It is therefore important that the Treaty should reflect the difference between civil and military cooperation .
A European military alliance should not , therefore , be created within the framework of the EU ' s institutions but between individual States .
Military support of a kind which places States under an obligation to each other has no place in the EU ' s Treaties .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , enlargement is the most crucial European issue as far as we are concerned .
It is now also at the top of the agenda prior to the Swedish Presidency .
We do not , however , want to see European cooperation cease or degenerate into bickering , which would be a risk if 30 countries could constantly use their vetoes .
Development of the Union can only seriously be accorded priority through also , at the same time , welcoming qualified majority voting in the majority of areas but excluding , for example , the area of new treaties .
We also want to see majority decision-making in regard to Article 289 , because it would then be possible , where the European Parliament ' s headquarters and meetings are concerned , to establish rules which would prevent the waste of human resources and tax revenue .
Swedish taxpayers , who also pay net amounts into the European Union , are in fact at a loss to understand the madness of travelling backwards and forwards with thousands of cases every month .
Perhaps it would be more efficient to have the offices in a pan-European caravan than to waste all these man-months , as we now do , upon plane journeys .
We have every respect for symbols of peace , but the billions spent on gadding off to Strasbourg could , of course , be spent instead on our neighbours in the East , who perhaps have more use for these " peace billions " than we do .
Finally , I want to thank the rapporteurs for a very good report and to express my hope that the Citizens ' Charter will usher in the new Treaty .
I also want to end by expressing special thanks to Commissioner Barnier for being present throughout the debate and for his commitment to these issues .
In fact , he gives me hope and inspiration on many occasions when I think that the Member States are being both negative and unreasonable on a whole range of issues with which , as European citizens , we really have problems .
I would thank you , Commissioner Barnier , for your efforts which in fact help me to take an optimistic view of Europe ' s future development .
Madam President , we have a very challenging task before us .
We have to find answers to the challenge of enlargement , but the Union at its present size also needs to re-establish the rules of the game and the decision-making process .
We have to strike a balance between efficiency , democracy and Member State equality .
Above all , we have to be able to restore confidence of our citizens in decision making in the European Union .
This will come about by increasing genuine transparency and by developing the way administration actually serves the people .
The Commission must be given support while it puts the changes into effect , but the Council and Parliament must also themselves be able to work to strengthen confidence among our citizens .
Both an enlarged Union , and one that is the present size , must ensure that decision making is mainly in the form of qualified majority decisions .
We have seen that matters of taxation , for example , have become stumbling blocks .
It is hard to understand why we cannot introduce a reasonable tax on capital in Europe .
At present , capital is like a dog off its leash .
We all have a lot to gain and protect in a common Europe .
We also have to cling to the notion of European solidarity for as long as possible in changing circumstances .
I cannot accept the idea that closer cooperation can be achieved on the strength of the vote of one third of the Member States .
In my opinion , we need more than that .
The Commission should also be as thorough as possible in the way it drafts topics for debate , and this is why in future there should also be a Commission Member representing each Member State .
The balance between the small and the large Member States must also be preserved in the Council so that double majority voting can never be acceptable under any circumstances .
Madam President , the constitutional questions we are debating today are highly controversial , as the vote in committee clearly shows .
In fact 12 Members voted for and 12 voted against .
Of the latter , 8 voted against and 4 abstained .
That is not something to be proud of .
But I find it reassuring that so many Members agreed that the length of the shopping list of proposals contained in the report ' s 52 paragraphs and 58 sub-paragraphs is exaggerated and that , as things stand , there is a risk that the Intergovernmental Conference will not take it seriously .
But unlike Talleyrand , I cannot console myself with the idea that what is exaggerated is by the same token insignificant .
I want to dissociate myself from demands such as that we should cut my country ' s delegation in the European Parliament by one third .
I know that by head of population the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg has more representatives here than the large countries , but that is a primitive and premature method of calculation .
With 6 Members it is materially impossible to follow up all the dossiers that are crucial to our country .
Moreover , we cannot sit on all the committees .
It is easier to divide up the work and to specialise in a large delegation : even if the largest delegation , comprising 99 Members , was reduced by a third , they would still be able to share out the work .
For the time being , it is enough to propose that the seats in the European Parliament should be allotted on the basis of a degressive proportional system , with a minimum number of seats per Member State , while of course respecting Article 190 of the Treaty .
The idea of European lists is premature , if not hare-brained .
There can be no question of a majority of MEPs deciding the location of the seat of this Parliament here , against the views of the others : we must respect the Edinburgh compromise .
In the case of a qualified-majority Council decision , it is inconceivable to provide for a simple majority of Member States .
We must have a majority of two thirds of the Member States , even if that means providing at the same time for a simple majority of Member States representing a majority of the total EU population .
There can be no question of restricting unanimous Council voting to decisions of a constitutional nature . We must also retain majority voting for fundamental questions , such as own resources , taxation and so forth .
I hope the idea of not allocating one Commissioner to each Member State is well and truly dead .
Finally , if we really need closer cooperation , it must involve at least half of the Member States , otherwise we risk ending up with something like the French Directory .
This document contains other incongruities too , especially in relation to the budget , which fortunately have no chance of success in the Council and even less chance of being ratified by national parliaments that have any self-respect .
I will not vote for this shopping list unless it is amended along the lines I have just set out .
Madam President , I wonder which of these is more serious : what the Council has done by means of an intergovernmental method , once again , to reform the Treaties and an extraordinarily limited agenda for this IGC , bearing in mind the challenges facing us , or the report that we are going to adopt tomorrow in this House .
I believe that our report is more serious .
How can it be argued that this report is less serious when it proposes exactly what we need ?
It speaks of constitutionalising the European Union , it proposes suitable changes for its institutions , it requests an extension of policies and , above all , through its proposals , it tries to put the Union in a position to confront such important challenges as , firstly , globalisation and , secondly , the new economy which we have just discussed in Lisbon .
I do not believe that the proposals which we make in this report are extravagant .
They are consistent with what this Parliament has always demanded : more democracy and efficiency for the European Union .
Furthermore , in this respect , I believe that the effort of the rapporteurs in drawing up the original draft and seeking a compromise through the amendments will lead to a position which should be taken into account by this Parliament and by the national governments .
Madam President , I would also like to welcome the efforts of the Portuguese Presidency at the moment , and ask certain governments - I am not going to say which ones - to be a little bit more generous when it comes to European construction .
Madam President , enlargement and its strategic , political and economic consequences for the European Union cannot remain issues undiscussed by the public or viewed exclusively from the national perspective .
This is why the debate caused by the presentation of the European Parliament ' s position on this promising Intergovernmental Conference is vital in understanding this new phase of European construction which is both risky and open to question .
We are pleased that this contribution from Parliament stresses , as the main themes and guiding principles , the democratisation , efficiency and greater supervision of the European institutions , exactly where the respective deficits have been most felt and where the risks of disintegration , caused by the significant increase in the number of Member States , were greatest .
Although the majority of the proposals aim to enable and reinforce the joint progress and the integration process in this new and complex framework , and these are to be applauded , there are others which are not so great . I am specifically referring to the European lists for this Parliament or to the rules on decisions by qualified majority or on closer cooperation , for example , in which a fairer balance between the Member States , more in accordance with the representation and legitimacy of the respective bodies , could be attempted .
We fortunately have the opportunity to improve these points tomorrow in plenary .
As for the countries which were for years subjected to forced and authoritarian integration and which are now knocking on our door , attracted by the success of our joint experiment , we must receive them with our house in order and operating properly . There must also be no doubt about everyone ' s participation in the search for the best solutions for all and about the primacy of the values of justice , democracy and solidarity within these countries .
I warmly congratulate the rapporteurs on their work .
President-in-Office , Commissioner Barnier , I must start my intervention with the same question as Mr Carnero González .
I wonder why , as a committed Europhile , I find myself disagreeing in this debate with many other committed Europhiles and specifically the rapporteurs .
In my opinion , the grounding of the European project in the dual legitimacy of a union of peoples and a union of States is not reflected in the end result of this report ' s proposals .
At a time when the European Parliament should be achieving a consensus which could act as an important reference , politically speaking , for the Intergovernmental Conference , our position is cause for regret .
We hope that certain amendments will be approved tomorrow . These are essential to guarantee a balance between small and large Member States and even between the dual legitimacy of a union of peoples and a union of States .
We therefore hope to have reason to vote for this report tomorrow . We will if this House approves a set of just six or seven amendments which we feel are essential to ensure that this issue is considered not from a position of national egoism but from one which defends the coherence and solidarity of the European project .
My second point is directed at the President-in-Office .
We were puzzled about what Mr Gama said , in his initial intervention , on the current state of the work in the IGC .
We are well aware of the Portuguese presidency ' s determination . I would therefore like to encourage the presidency to continue working to ensure that the Member States understand how vital it is that more questions are decided by qualified majority and that there is greater flexibility in EU decision-making .
I would also encourage you to ensure that the IGC agenda is extended to questions which we regard as essential , such as the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
We hope that this can be included in the Treaty as , if so , not only would we be making a significant contribution to the EU ' s future but we would also bring ourselves closer to the people at this politically important time . We must now reaffirm once again the community of values which will be enshrined by this Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Congratulations , Mr President-in-Office .
Madam President , with your permission I should like to use this brief opportunity at the end of this debate to respond to something which was raised in a point of order at the start of this sitting . I consider this to be the Council ' s legitimate right .
Comments were made about the Council ' s absence during the address by the Austrian President to this Parliament .
I must say firstly , to clarify matters , that the Council presidency was not supposed to be present nor was this Parliament ' s understanding .
We did not have any indication from the President of this House that we should attend for what was purely a parliamentary matter .
Secondly , I must say that , on questions of political responsibility , the Council refuses to be given lessons and be subjected to pressure by something that has much more to do with the internal chicanery of Portuguese national politics than properly with matters of substance .
In my opinion , this House has ended up being used as a kind of platform for political provocation and we will not accept this situation .
There is a clear boundary around the work of the Portuguese presidency with regard to the functioning of the institutions and the role of Austria in these institutions .
This was totally obvious from my intervention in this House when this issue was first debated .
Within the European Union we have met all the requirements allowing Austria to act and participate fully in the European institutions and in their own functioning as a country .
We are therefore not confusing any of our positions and we refuse , due to a mere internal political provocation , to consider in this debate issues which have nothing to do with the European Parliament and the European institutions .
Moving on now to the Dimitrakopoulos-Leinen report , I must say firstly that I have the greatest respect for the work carried out by the two rapporteurs . This is a report of great depth and vision but , conceivably , it might not be the subject of consensus in Council , which would allow it to represent a step forward in the enlargement of the Union .
However , I must repeat that I have great respect for the work carried out as it provides a certain vision of Europe and of what European ambition must be . I wonder , like everyone else - and we will probably have the opportunity to consider this in more detail during the debate within the IGC - whether the conditions exist within this framework to achieve the ambition expressed in this report , particularly by the deadline .
I wonder whether we can close an IGC such as we all want , by the end of this year , with such a high level of ambition in terms of reform .
This point is very important .
This House must also consider , in voting on this report , whether or not the set of proposals which it contains is sufficiently realistic about what can be approved by the end of this Conference .
This is regardless of the excellent quality of the proposals , as I have said , and the vision of the future which they provide .
We must realise that the European Union , being governed as it is by rules of efficiency , democracy and transparency , must always consider , as stated by Mr Poos , the problem of whether public opinion will systematically accept all the reforms to be made .
There are fifteen parliaments to which we must answer and which must ratify this Conference . If one of these fifteen does not ratify the IGC , then we will be faced with a European crisis .
I hope that the people will realise that the work we are doing in the IGC is serious , realistic and responsible . We do not want this to become a fatuous exercise which may tomorrow have a negative effect on the whole reason for its existence , namely the expectation that the EU will modernise and reform in order to make it compatible with the future enlargement which may know no bounds .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , at the end of this debate , after listening to each and every parliamentary speaker with the attention they deserved and before the extremely important votes you will be holding tomorrow on the various proposals , I want once again to thank the two rapporteurs , Jo Leinen , who is present here , and Mr Dimitrakopoulos , for the extremely thorough and useful job they have done .
As I pointed out this morning , they have sought the greatest possible convergence between the Commission and the European Parliament , in order to imbue these negotiations with the political impetus they need .
Following on from what Mr Seixas da Costa said , let me also say , and I can testify to this , that these negotiations conducted under the Portuguese Presidency have indeed , as the Portuguese Minister just said , been conducted with great authority , realism and pragmatism .
From that point of view , as I had hoped , the Portuguese Presidency has proved itself to be in no way an interim or secondary presidency .
It has an extremely important role to play and it really is playing it , in order to make the necessary progress before handing over to the French Presidency .
And from that point of view , I want to thank the Council .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I just want to make three comments at the conclusion of this debate .
Firstly , many speakers discussed the question of the equilibrium between what are termed the large and the small states .
We are well aware that this equilibrium is both necessary and difficult to achieve .
It is necessary because , since 1957 , all the states are recognised as equal , as having equal sovereignty ; but at the same time it is difficult to achieve because they do not all have the same size of population and because , out of respect for democracy , we must by one means or another take account of the fact that the number of citizens differs from country to country .
What I mean to say is that for its part the Commission has sought to establish this equilibrium in the proposals it put forward on 26 January , and which it has defended week after week , as indeed it did on the double majority question .
One way of achieving an equilibrium is for qualified-majority voting always to secure the support of at least a majority of states and half the population .
We even went a little further on an issue which has given rise to much comment and at times to anxiety , namely the Commission .
We have gone beyond the search for an equilibrium and proposed an egalitarian solution in relation to the composition of the Commission .
And to those who are worried , let me say again that I have seen no sign of any proposal that any Member State should not have a Commissioner .
What we proposed , let me repeat , is one Commissioner per Member State , but with two options .
I would like you to consider these options carefully , and indeed we have the time to carefully consider the consequences of these options between now and the end of the year .
The first option is one Commissioner per Member State on a permanent basis , all sitting at the same time , but with a Commission which will one day have 30 or 35 Commissioners , which will inevitably mean a hierarchy within the College .
The second option is a Commission with one Commissioner per Member State , but not all sitting at the same time , which would mean the Commission would remain more collegiate by nature .
That , ladies and gentlemen , remains our aim : to establish an equilibrium between the small and the large states .
In that regard , I share the concerns expressed by a number of speakers .
Second concern : the role of the European Parliament as the driving force , as referred to by Jo Leinen .
As I said this morning , I really believe that we , and you , ladies and gentlemen , during your term of office , must spend some time explaining these European issues not just in your constituencies , your countries , but everywhere else too , to all the citizens , and as often as possible .
Opportunities must also be created to convince and speak to the national parliaments .
President Napolitano proposed the idea of an interparliamentary conference .
At his invitation I myself took part in a meeting between the national parliaments and the European Parliament , where I found a great deal of interest expressed .
The Commission will be prepared to take part in any exercise aimed at enhancing this dialogue and this mutual understanding between the national parliaments , which we need in order to ratify a genuine reform , and the European Parliament .
Lastly , I heard Mr Poos say earlier that this IGC 2000 was not the end of the story .

Of course we know that history will not stop at the end of the year 2000 and that there will be further institutional changes .
But let me state quite emphatically and formally that , after the end of the year , we will not be returning to some of the important issues under consideration during these negotiations .
These issues are : the composition of the Commission , the scope of qualified-majority voting , the composition of the Court of Auditors and the Court of Justice and the voting system .
One way or another , these questions will be settled at the end of the year and they will be settled for the long term , the very long term .

So we must take the time to reflect carefully about what we are doing .
There is no way that later , when we have 20 , 25 or 30 Member States , we will be able to do what we did not manage to do either in Amsterdam or today , this year , for lack of political will .
So I hope that together , working with the Council , we will manage to give a sufficiently strong political impetus so that in the final analysis , at the end of this year , we succeed with these negotiations , rather than merely concluding them , and that together we demonstrate a collective political courage that goes beyond considerations based merely on caution or national interests .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Famine in Ethiopia
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on the famine in Ethiopia .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we can all remember the pictures of the famine in Ethiopia in the 1980s . We can also remember the drought in Africa in the 1990s , which affected around ten countries .
Yet we must also remember that we managed to get nearly four million tonnes of food to sub-Saharan Africa thanks to action by the international community .
This was partly in response to media coverage , which is playing an increasingly important role .
We must realise that , notwithstanding the crisis situations which now exist , the international community has taken objective action in response .
This has probably not been adequate and not what we would have liked it to be , but at least the international community has adopted an objective attitude .
Within the international community , either individually or through the European Union as a whole , the European countries have made an important contribution . We must remember this , now that the crisis in Ethiopia is occurring again due to drought .
The European Union is keen to ensure that this situation does not worsen and is trying to mobilise all possible means to lessen its effects .
Certain instruments are currently working effectively at both EU level and in the role played by the EU within international organisations .
This intervention is very important in tackling the problem of nearly 16 million people currently at risk throughout this area .
Commissioner Patten will explain , at the appropriate moment in this debate , the actions which the Commission has planned or has been developing .
These actions are very important and have been implemented in time . The decisions were also taken at the right time .
Both the Directorate-General for Development and ECHO have already sent enough food to satisfy the most urgent needs .
At this precise moment , the Executive Director of the World Food Programme is in Addis Ababa for discussions with the Ethiopian Government on this issue , which involves technical and practical problems in transporting the food .
We cannot separate from this issue the current political and military position in Ethiopia .
We must be aware that this situation , which is in itself extremely serious due to the drought , is currently being made worse precisely because of political and military circumstances which are hindering the distribution of aid .
In particular , means of transport may be lacking because they are being used for purposes other than those for which they are intended .
As I said , the European Union has been monitoring this situation .
In the General Affairs Council the day before yesterday the Commission presented a report on the current situation in the Horn of Africa and specifically tackled one point of the humanitarian situation .
However , these concerns are the centre of attention not only for the Commission but also for the Council .
A meeting was held yesterday in Brussels of a group of experts specifically to analyse the best ways of tackling this situation .
There were representatives from ECHO , the Directorate-General for Development and the Member States of the European Union . This meeting was preceded by one with the Ethiopian Ambassador to ensure the most effective coordination of the aid and support which the European Union can mobilise , both overall and in terms of that from individual Member States .
To conclude , the situation in the Horn of Africa , in both political and humanitarian terms , is at the centre of our concerns .
On Monday in the General Affairs Council we had a debate on this subject at which the Council ' s Special Envoy was present . He gave a presentation on the situation and its gravity .
The European Union approved in this same Council a set of recommendations which are to be added to all the political actions which the Union has been developing , particularly since last year , following the severest onslaught in the conflict between Eritrea and Ethiopia .
We are monitoring this issue .
Unfortunately , sometimes we cannot react as rapidly as we would like to the various situations of humanitarian need and shortage .
However , we are watching this issue and we hope that the attention raised by this debate may itself also help to mobilise public opinion on such a serious problem .
I am grateful for the opportunity to speak in this debate - grateful but sad that the debate is necessary at all .
I am standing in for my colleague , Commissioner Nielson , who would have liked to have been able to respond himself .
For me there is an awful sense of déja vu - or perhaps I should say déja entendu - about this debate today .
Over a decade ago , from 1986 to 1989 , I was my country ' s development minister .
I know that there are a number of honourable Members in this House who have done the same job for their own countries .
I was speaking in similar debates then , tackling similar crises in the Horn of Africa .
I am afraid the story is grimly familiar : there are military conflicts , there is environmental degradation , there is drought , and sometimes there have been - and this was especially true in the past - extremely ill-judged policies .
It is a lethal mix .
It is capable of producing hunger and misery on a massive scale .
We face the same old frustrations , as I said in the Chamber yesterday .
Despite all the problems we will , in the end get help to the starving , never quite as fast as we would like , but faster than used to be the case .
So we improve our capacity to deal with the humanitarian problems in spite of the difficulties .
But alas we are still incapable of preventing the humanitarian problems arising in the first place - very often problems with largely political causes .
That is the frustration .
Let me set out for honourable Members what we are doing to alleviate the present crisis .
There are currently two Commission teams in Ethiopia : one from ECHO and one from the Food Security Unit of our Directorate-General for Development .
They will be making recommendations on our future efforts .
The Ethiopian Government has asked for 821 000 tonnes of food aid , 25 % more than in recent years .
This amount is nearly covered by existing pledges by the international community .
The Commission has programmed the delivery of 283 000 tonnes and we are about to take decisions on delivering an additional quantity of up to 260 000 tonnes .
Let me also correct an inaccuracy that is circulating as a result of an Oxfam statement which claimed that the Commission provided only 50 000 tonnes to Ethiopia last year .
The real figure is more than three times that .
The deliveries this year come on top of a quarter of a century in which the Commission has been involved in providing food assistance to Ethiopia .
During that time nearly 40 % of our total aid to Ethiopia has been in food assistance or food security programmes : some EUR 875 million ' s worth , EUR 250 million in the last four years alone .
That is the background .
It is important to be aware of it .
There have been a number of allegations about an inadequate European response to the crisis .
There is an admirable letter in the London newspaper , The Independent , by the honourable Member , Mrs Kinnock , who knows a very great deal about the Horn of Africa , in which she sets out the real facts .
I hope that letter gets wider circulation .
One of the things that she said in her letter - and I guess she speaks with almost more authority on this subject than anyone else - is : " The European Union , together with Member States , remains the biggest donor of food aid to Ethiopia " .
She then argues : " This is not ' visible ' since it is directed through the government , the World Food Programme , the Red Cross , NGOs and others . "
It is important to remember that point .
What matters most is not to rake over these old controversies .
What matters most is what we are doing right now to get help to the starving .
I want to remind Parliament that total Commission food aid , now being off-loaded , shipped or procured , amounts to over 282 million metric tonnes .
An EC food aid shipment of 30 000 tonnes channelled through the World Food Programme arrived in Djibouti port last weekend .
A further shipment of over 16 000 tonnes through EuronAid is due to arrive on Sunday .
This will be followed by further shipments through Djibouti and Berbera in view of the limited port-handling capacity .
Total shipments from all donors expected to be offloaded between now and July amount to 504 000 metric tonnes .
This quantity should be sufficient to meet immediate needs .
Total donor pledges , as I said earlier , are over 800 000 metric tonnes .
So that is what we are doing .
We will continue to devote our full attention to this crisis until it is over , and our people in ECHO on the ground will continue to work tirelessly to get help to where it is needed .
We are facing a major problem posed by the lack of adequate port facilities for food-aid deliveries , not least because of the non-availability of the Eritrean ports at Assab and Massawa , which means that only Djibouti and to a lesser extent Berbera can be used .
Djibouti is expected to be congested with the arrival of 600 000 metric tonnes over the next three months .
We are looking urgently for alternatives , including better use of the Port of Berbera through rapid improvements to the road from Berbera into Ethiopia .
We are also considering using the Port of Sudan .
Road improvements are under way on the Sudanese side and roads on the Ethiopian side are reported to be quite good .
As my friend said in opening this debate , of course there are problems because of the conflict zone and I just want to repeat what I said at the outset .
I have had to speak in too many debates like this dealing with the consequences of crises like this , in the Great Lakes , in Ethiopia , in the Sudan and now in Ethiopia again .
I repeat , we are better at delivering assistance now than we were a decade ago , but it is intensely frustrating that all the assistance should be required in the first place .
It is intensely frustrating that as millions starve , governments spend small fortunes on guns and weaponry to wage war against each other when the only war they should be waging is a war against starvation , a war for food security , a war against poverty and environmental degradation , a war in which we are morally bound to help them .
It follows therefore that as we combat the hunger , we should also lend our full support to those who fight for peace .
We give our whole-hearted backing to the efforts of all of those , including the OAU and the European Presidency ' s Special Envoy , Ambassador Serri , who worked for a peaceful settlement to regional conflicts .
They will have our unstinting assistance .
I am afraid that I should add that experience suggests that they need our prayers as well .
Madam President , I wish to begin by welcoming Commissioner Patten ' s statement , which sets out the truth about our European assistance .
Once again , we see the scenes on our TV screens of starving children in Ethiopia and we remember the horrors of the last famine in the Horn of Africa .
Once again , we have pop stars and celebrities criticising the institutions of Europe and national governments for doing too little too late .
It is amazing how quickly some people become experts when a situation like this arises and they can see some publicity , without knowing more of the background to the overall position .
Somalia is war-torn into small fiefdoms , which makes it extremely difficult for anyone - institutions or NGOs - to deliver food aid to the starving people .
Who does one negotiate with in such a situation ?
Ethiopia is engaged in a border dispute with Eritrea , which means most of the manpower is tied up on a war front and much-needed food is being diverted in both countries to feed soldiers rather than starving children .
Of course we must do everything in our power to alleviate famine .
However , where countries are at war , all our aid must be humanitarian and channelled through NGO organisations to ensure that aid goes to the starving people and not to the war front .
We must watch the situation in Eritrea and balance humanitarian aid there , if required .
We desperately want these two countries to sign a peace agreement through the efforts of the OAU so that we can resume full development aid to both countries .
I recently spent a week in both Ethiopia and Eritrea .
I visited refugee camps in both countries and saw for myself the hardship and the poverty people are suffering .
It is not true to say that Ethiopia has not been crying for help for food aid over the past two years , but the war situation has blurred the vision of many looking on .
When I was there they were pleading for help .
I saw children with serious malnutrition and in need of health care , as well as food and proper shelter .
I saw families living in caves , the walls running with water , and listened to the hacking coughs of children racked with fever .
It looks bad on TV ; it is a hundred times worse when you stand amongst it , when people are in such dire situations .
However , I saw food aid being delivered in Eritrea by German NGOs to a camp of 16 000 people , spread over 7 kilometres in case of bombing raids .
I watched two strong men lifting 50-kg bags on to women ' s backs and saw them stagger off to their plastic shelters kilometres away .
I saw children aged eight walking eight kilometres out and eight kilometres back to get water .
They were the lucky ones : they were the ones with food .
We never seem to learn a lesson from the past .
It should not be TV cameras and pop stars who alert us to starvation and drought : there should be a proper monitoring system in the sensitive areas of the African continent .
Perhaps this could be built into Commissioner Patten ' s rapid reaction unit we heard of yesterday .
We must have action and we must have action decisively and urgently .
Madam President , I gladly concur with the previous speakers , Mr Patten and Mr Corrie .
We all witnessed the fight against hunger ten years ago .
We subsequently visited many projects and saw many things , such as very expert local farmers who were involved in reconstruction projects both in Eritrea and Ethiopia .
I find Ethiopia ' s criticism hard to take : Europe undertakes too little , you need to send food . Meanwhile the logistical capacity , such as lorries , roads and money , is used to wage a regional war .
The least both parties could do is to impose an absolute freeze on military activity .
If we talk about distributing food fast to the right places , then these lorries are needed , and these lorries were the force behind the movement which now leads Ethiopia and the movement which leads Eritrea .
Both have a great deal of logistical experience , expertise and know-how .
If they really channel their energies - and want to channel their energies - into what is available at this stage , if they want to make their ports and roads available , their capacity would be enormous .
According to them , we are entirely to blame .
But there is huge responsibility on the part of Ethiopia and Eritrea , and they should not try to throw it back at us using a cheap marketing trick .
They are jointly responsible .
Put a freeze on the military trade , try to reach a peace agreement and meanwhile , deploy your military lorry capacity and manpower where they are needed .
My second point concerns food .
There is enormous pressure to send food fast , and I mean fast .
Experience has taught us that things can go very far wrong depending on how food is distributed , and it could well end up sitting in the warehouses .
I would suggest looking at all the options - this will certainly be done by the monitoring clubs of the EU now in Ethiopia .
Is there anything for sale locally in the region ?
We were right to turn our food aid policy round . We should not send our surpluses there but examine whether anything can be bought locally .
After all , anything we can get and arrange there will help their economy and will prevent the local situation from being distorted .
Because , ultimately , that is what causes the structural hardship which accompanies these wars .
I hope that the early warning facility , which involved a great many experts , will also be built into our ability to receive signals at an earlier stage .
It is not easy .
Everyone knows that , but it could be an enormous bonus in removing the image of inadequacy when we handle such situations .
Ethiopia and Eritrea bear the ultimate responsibility .
I give my full backing to any action undertaken by the Commission on this score .
Mr President , Commissioner Patten wonders why Africa ' s fateful history keeps repeating itself - with good reason .
Millions of people are again threatened with starvation .
This is not just caused by extreme drought .
The blame lies mainly with the unusually irresponsible leaders who prioritise the fight for a dry piece of land over the suffering of their own people .
Surely it is absolutely appalling that the governments of poverty-stricken countries such as Ethiopia and Eritrea buy arms on a massive scale instead of building up sufficient food reserves .
The blinkered Ethiopian government , in particular , contributes through its obstinacy to the suffering of its own people .
How else can you explain the fact that Ethiopia rejected the offer to use the ports of Massawa and Assab ?
As a result , aid is now unable to reach a large part of its own population .
The Organisation of African Unity and the European Union must exert maximum pressure on the governments of Ethiopia and Eritrea to settle their dispute in Algiers , and aid workers must gain safe access to the population without delay .
An Ethiopian Minister has said that the international community does not spring into action until the skeletons appear on television .
He failed to mention that these macabre images are not only due to a lack of rain but mainly to a lack of proper leadership .
I am pleased that Commissioner Patten has addressed the criticism to the effect that European aid is inadequate .
Despite this , I would like to ask him what lessons he has learnt from how Europe responded this time round .
It is difficult not to despair in the face of the misery in the Horn of Africa .
We should nonetheless not lose hope .
Nature can only destroy where people fail .
After all , war and mismanagement are down to people .
Africa ' s fateful history does not have to repeat itself , provided that people ' s lives take priority over the feuds among its shameless leaders .
Mr President , Commissioner , it is terrible and disappointing for mankind that every now and again we hear these cries of pain from Africa begging for food and water , in the 21st century .
Why do we still allow this to happen ?
Do we not have a conscience ?
Every day the European Union provides less funding , less aid , in global terms , to the poor countries of Africa .
So how can we be surprised at this situation ?
How can it be that we have warehouses full of surplus food which we are obliged to destroy when it rots away pointlessly or when it does not meet the conditions for consumption which we demand ?
There are reasons to justify this , but none of them justifies the death of a single person from starvation .
It is not true that we show solidarity .
No .
All we do is try to put the fire out with occasional aid , without a clear or decisive policy for prevention although we know perfectly well that famine in Africa , and in the third world in general , happens periodically .
I hope that these thousands of tonnes of food aid provided do not silence the media and that they continue to report on the tragedy in Africa .
I am not saying anything new .
It has been said a million times and it will be said again , but today I am speaking from the heart and I feel Africa ' s pain as if it were my own .
When will we have a Marshall Plan for Africa ?
To this end , I propose that there be set up a prestigious and independent committee of international experts to assess the situation together with the international organisations and to implement a series of urgent proposals and initiatives for food and health aid , acting immediately , planning for the future and putting all our humanitarian weaponry into the hands of the non-governmental organisations .
Mr President , the situation in the Horn of Africa , and particularly in Ethiopia , is reaching a level of drama rarely exceeded . It requires from the international community , and particularly the European Union , a corresponding level of attention and aid in order to prevent an unparalleled human catastrophe .
Action is already being taken , like the food aid which the European Union is providing , as mentioned just now by Commissioner Patten .
Yet we cannot relax .
We also have to overcome all the difficulties on the ground in getting food and medicine to the starving and dying people and children , and as quickly as possible .
We must therefore firmly stress to the governments in the region , bearing in mind the political and military situation , that they must allow and ensure rapid movement and access by the international organisations to the areas where these people are gathered . They must also guarantee that this aid reaches those for whom it is really intended .
It is essential that these international organisations , such as the World Health Organisation , UNICEF and the FAO in particular , act together and with all the speed and efficiency which the situation demands . They must deliver the food and medical aid but they must also take steps to re-establish the primary sector which is decisive in this type of economy , in order to guarantee a sustainable and medium-term solution .
This may be achieved by sending technicians and experts who can set up projects in this area .
The gravity of the situation and the need for our solidarity with these people to result in exceptional and priority action lead me finally to ask the Commission , and particularly Commissioners Patten and Nielson , to keep us regularly and closely informed about how the situation is developing and especially the measures which they intend to use or are developing to ease this situation .
Mr President , the Ethiopian government has blamed the international community for not being sufficiently alert in its aid efforts to feed its hungry population .
The donors , including the European Union , are said not to have kept their promises .
I share the Commissioner ' s view that the reproach made by Addis Ababa is misplaced to say the least .
Misplaced because this statement is made by a government which has been embroiled in an absurd war over borders with its neighbour , Eritrea , for two years now .
Hundreds of millions of dollars , desperately needed for social provisions and increasing food production , have already been pumped into the war machine and , at the time when the Ethiopian Minister for Foreign Affairs was heaping abuse on the international community , reports were circulating that his government had bought a military aircraft from the Russian Republic .
It is high time that the Ethiopian government faced up to its responsibility and made every effort to end the war with Eritrea .
It could then focus its attention on the economic and social development of the country and so be able to prevent famines such as these .
But also , and I would like to make this quite clear , the aid industry should stop blaming the international community unilaterally and , in this way , stop providing the local regime with an alibi .
Emergency aid is absolutely necessary and must be increased , but development aid to both warring governments must be combined with accepting and implementing the OAU peace agreement .
As a token of goodwill , the Ethiopian leader could in the meantime begin by accepting the offer of a humanitarian corridor from his Eritrean colleague , or could the pride and ego of one man get in the way once again of the interests of millions of his people ?
Mr President , famine and Ethiopia : these are two words sadly etched in our memories .
In the Horn of Africa , which has become the site of every conceivable scourge , 16 million victims of famine , of which 8 million are in Ethiopia , are awaiting aid .
In Ogaden , the most hard-hit region in south-east Ethiopia , there has been no rain for three years , to the point that the notion of dry seasons and wet seasons is now devoid of all meaning .

So of course we have to react , and do so quickly , and unfortunately we know all too well that the price of our procrastination and delays is paid in human lives .
At the same time , let me thank the Council and the Commission for what they have already done and for the information they gave us a short while ago .
Of course the 800 000 tonnes of emergency aid promised by the international community must be delivered as soon as possible .
But at the same time , the countries in the region must do their utmost to facilitate this delivery : by opening up the ports , supply routes and infrastructures .
Nonetheless , in a region torn apart by a rearguard conflict , this crisis leaves a particularly bitter taste , because every penny paid to buy a gun , to buy ammunition , aggravates an already precarious economic , social and nutritional situation .
We must demand that Eritrea and Ethiopia freeze their military activities so that all the assets , all the logistical and human capabilities of these countries are put at the service of their peoples .
The sound of guns has for far too long drowned out the cries of the hungry .
That is why we must appeal to the reason of the Ethiopian and Eritrean leaders and call on them to put an end to the conflict , to reach rapid agreement on the technical arrangements for a ceasefire under the OAU peace plan .
But at this moment , of course , we must simply listen to the appeals of the suffering people .
Mr President , misery and death in Ethiopia were on our screens four years ago .
The cameramen left but misery and death did not leave Ethiopia .
Starvation and death continue today .
The population of Ethiopia pray for rain .
Sadly they see only a rain of bullets .
People crave water , food and medicine .
Sadly all they see is their land and their homes blown to pieces by the tanks and planes our governments supply to the Ethiopian and Eritrean politicians .
These politicians are hungry for power : politicians who argue over territorial boundaries whilst their people die .
These politicians fly their national flags on their parliaments and presidential palaces , but sadly the only flag their people see is the flag of death .
Famine , disease and death remain the hallmarks of these countries .
Hunger for power must not be allowed to override the hunger for life .
Mr Patten has listed a number of measures the EU has taken to help .
Such help has been received with gratitude , but let us put it into perspective .
Sixteen million people are starving today ; 15 000 tonnes have been delivered .
I accept the difficulties of the logistics but that means less than a kilo per person .
No time limit is given , in other words it is a kilo that has to last forever .
These measures are palliative .
They only relieve the symptoms ; they do not cure the disease .
The EU must take the lead in curing this serious problem and the only way to do it is firstly to stop arms reaching all the warring parties and make sure we use our influence with those who supply them ; and secondly teach these people how to grow food and harvest , store , package and process it so that they can be independent and self-reliant , not beggars for life .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today ' s debate was very important as a way of demonstrating the commitment and attention which this House gives to humanitarian issues , particularly the one discussed today .
Commissioner Patten ' s words made clear not only an objective awareness of the work already carried out but also an absolute awareness that this situation is intolerable and that the European Commission will be determined on this issue , that it will take specific action and also closely monitor future developments .
As for the Council , I should like to say that there is great interest in ensuring that situations of this kind can be permanently followed and monitored in close coordination with the Commission .
It is important that an objective awareness is created within the European Union that humanitarian issues must be dealt with in an increasingly committed manner and that the European Union and its Member States must , within the relevant international organisations , ensure priority attention for these issues .
The summit between the European Union and the African countries was held just a few days ago .
Its extensive agenda offered an opportunity for what we hope is the first in a series of organised dialogues between Europe and the African countries . Specifically we want to try and establish a more integrated and coordinated vision of all the issues now affecting the African continent about which we are concerned .
This must be made clear . These issues do matter to the European continent for a whole range of reasons , even ones which relate to the very safety and stability desired for the European continent .
Dialogue with the African authorities is essential , as is dialogue with the sub-regional authorities .
It is vital to guarantee coherent action in preventing conflicts and creating rapid intervention mechanisms for these situations . Without this collective and organised dialogue , there can be no hope .
The problems cannot be solved through ad hoc actions and one-off interventions .
If we cannot organise the international community within the global international organisations and within the more regional organisations , we will not have any response to all the crises which are systematically affecting the weakest countries in particular .
The European Union has , in this respect , a particular responsibility the tradition addressing this type of problem could almost be said to be part of its civilisation . The EU has an awareness and a responsibility which today ' s debate has clearly demonstrated .
Thank you very much Minister .
I would like to inform you that pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure , I have received five motions for resolutions .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday .
Stabilisation and association process for countries of South-Eastern Europe
The next item is the report ( A5-0069 / 2000 ) by Mr Lagendijk , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on the communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on the stabilisation and association process for countries of South-Eastern Europe ( COM ( 1999 ) 235 - C5-0124 / 1999 / 2126 ( COS ) )
Mr President , in the time allocated to me , I would mainly like to focus on the Funding Conference of the Stability Pact which has just been held , because it is more beneficial , in my view , to focus attention on this than on the text of my report which , of course , was written for the Conference .
I would like to make a general comment regarding the Conference .
It is safe to say that it was a huge success , not only in financial terms but also due to the fact that the emphasis was most definitely on projects which link up the different regions . In fact , this was one of the central themes of the report and the main thrust of the Stability Pact .
Indeed , regional development is one of the Stability Pact ' s key points .
It was good to see all-round commitment most definitely present at all the desks at the Conference .
It was also a success - and I do not simply say this to flatter the Commissioner - because it was clear that the European Union or the European Commission took the lead at long last . In my opinion , it had been taking a back seat for a little too long .
This concludes my general comments on the Funding Conference .
Further to this Conference , I would like to single out five key points from my report .
First of all , the funding .
Everyone was waiting with bated breath for the moment when the Commissioner would produce the amount .
He finally came up with EUR 530 million .
That was very smart creative accounting , I must say , because , of that EUR 530 million , 50 % was old , pre-2000 money from the Obnova and Phare programmes and 30 % was taken from the same programmes for the year 2000 .
In the final analysis , therefore , there was little new money in it .
This is not a reproach to the Commission but an observation , and one which will , of course , create even more bad feeling , bearing in mind that another EUR 5.5 billion is still to be found . This is an amount which was quoted by the European Investment Bank at one time , which was later taken over by Commission President Prodi and in respect of which it is still completely unclear , to me in any case , how this is to be raised in the coming year .
I would , therefore , like to ask the Commissioner how the first year , the year 2001 , is likely to take shape ?
How are the preparations for the Stability Pact budget coming along ?
What is his reaction to the ever increasing protests , both in terms of loudness and number , coming , for example , from the Council or the Member States , to the effect that those 5.5 billion intended for the western Balkans , by way of pre-accession aid for Bulgaria and Romania , have been pitched far too high and that , in terms of absorption capacity , for example , a much lower amount would be far more realistic ?
I am in favour of retaining the figure of 5.5 billion for the time being .
I am only very curious as to how the Commission hopes to raise all this money .
A request had also been made to spread the projects and planning for this Conference over all the desks : democracy , reconstruction and safety , in the knowledge that , at the end of the day , a bridge is more expensive than a training centre or mine-clearance programme .
Unfortunately , I have to note that , looking at all the figures after the Conference , the emphasis has been shifted quite considerably towards reconstruction .
Of 4.2 billion , 80 % has been set aside for reconstruction , 17 % for democracy and only 3 % for safety .
I would call on the Commission , and Europe has more or less pledged to use the same scale , to take the 3 to 4 % really seriously and expand it .
I would just remind you of a tragic report in the paper this morning about three children who stepped onto a mine near Sarajevo yesterday and were killed .
A mine-clearance programme is part of safety , is of key importance and should not be overlooked .
Thirdly , I would like to comment on the appeal in the report , backed by the General Affairs Council , to lift trade restrictions for the countries asymmetrically and , if necessary , unilaterally , the underlying idea being that , in time , trade will be just as important as subsidies .
What is the progress here ?
What does the Commission intend to do to lift these unilateral trade restrictions in the short term ?
Fourthly , the NGOs .
Regrettably , very little attention has been paid to the role of NGOs , especially the local NGOs , both in terms of preparation and implementation . This is all the more unfortunate if one considers the level of knowledge regarding the Stability Pact in the region .
I am convinced that it is vital to introduce local NGOs in order to improve the quality of the programmes but also to raise the awareness of the Stability Pact , and the exact plans , in that region .
Finally , the distribution of tasks .
Who will ensure that all these tasks are carried out promptly and efficiently ?
I would like to give the Commissioner a word of advice .
Last week , he was accused of wanting to saw the legs from under Commission President Prodi ' s chair .
If you are having a go at chair legs , could you take those of Mr Solana ' s chair ?
In my view , he has been given a leading role in the Balkans for no good reason .
It would seem far more logical to give this leading role to the European Commission , notably Commissioner Patten , to implement this Stability Pact promptly and efficiently .
.
( PT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I must start by congratulating the rapporteur , Mr Lagendijk , on his excellent and important report . The debate caused by this could not have come at a better time .
As you know , the Special European Council held in Lisbon reiterated the strategic priority for the European Union of ensuring peace and stability in South-Eastern Europe and , as such , this is an issue which is on the EU ' s immediate agenda and permanently on our political agenda .
The European Union is by far the body which has contributed the most aid to this region .
Between 1991 and 1999 , the total aid from the EU to South-Eastern Europe , including that from the EU as a whole and the Member States individually , was in excess of EUR 19.3 billion .
The EU is furthermore the main trading partner of all the countries in this region . It has allowed valuable trade concessions and , as you know , several thousand soldiers , police officers and civilian workers from the EU are active in the region , particularly in Kosovo .
We read with great interest the rapporteur ' s conclusions on the stabilisation and association process for South-Eastern Europe .
The assessment of the solidity and possible deficiencies of this process certainly provides points for discussion and I will try to comment on some of these .
The Lisbon European Council confirmed that our overall objective remains the greatest possible integration of the countries in the region within Europe ' s political and economic system .
The Stabilisation and Association Agreements constitute a central point of this policy .
As the rapporteur quite rightly notes , these new agreements will not enter into force immediately as we firstly have to prepare , negotiate and conclude each one .
As a result , the rapporteur concludes that it will be necessary to create a type of medium-term stabilisation and regional development programme .
I am not necessarily convinced that this is the most appropriate way of tackling the problem .
The general stabilisation process for the area cannot , by any stretch of the imagination , be reduced to just agreements .
Clearly these are , shall we say , the most visible and most well-known feature of this process , but other important instruments are required such as preferential trade agreements , direct aid from the European Union and political dialogue .
Most of the countries already benefit from trade preferences and the Lisbon Special European Council confirmed that the Stabilisation and Association Agreements should be preceded by greater asymmetric trade liberalisation thereby specifically favouring these countries in their bilateral trade with EU countries .
The idea underlying the stabilisation and association process is sufficiently broad and flexible to ensure a constant project in this area .
With regard to the agreements , the fact that it is taking some time to prepare these should not , in our opinion , jeopardise the whole stabilisation process .
This has not been the EU ' s experience in equivalent regional processes in the past .
As with other comprehensive agreements , we therefore hope to be able to establish interim agreements covering the period between the signature and ratification of these agreements , bearing in mind that normally almost twenty months pass between these two events .
It is also worthwhile to remember that we already have contractual relations in the form of trade and cooperation agreements with Albania and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
The new agreements , which will be more comprehensive and also more demanding on our partners given that they include elements of political conditionality which obviously form part of the Union ' s current approach in this area , will specifically replace the existing agreements in these two cases . They will concentrate much more on regional cooperation than the current agreements and will include provisions on cooperation in the area of justice and home affairs , an area which is of great importance to the Europe of the future .
Negotiations have already begun with the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia on the Stabilisation and Association Agreement .
The Albanian Government recently indicated its reaction to the viability study on the opening of negotiations , which was prepared by the European Commission , and the Council will very shortly analyse this report .
Following internal political changes , the European Commission is also to prepare a viability study for Croatia which the Council hopes to be able to analyse immediately before or after the summer .
Bearing in mind the request made by the local authorities , Bosnia-Herzegovina was sent a guide whose use will help towards preparing a viability study on negotiations for an agreement of the same type .
This work is moving forward at a good pace given , of course , that in this specific case , we must be careful and not create excessive expectations , as the reality of the situation there does not allow us to be overly optimistic in this respect .
I should like to refer briefly to the new regulation .
As we agree with the European Parliament about the need to create a uniform legal basis for support to the region , the Council is waiting for a Commission proposal on a Council regulation which will replace the support granted to the region by the Phare and Obnova programmes . The recommendations to be made will form a valuable contribution to the debates which we will start within the Council on this issue .
I note in particular that the report highlights that the reconstruction of the region must not be regarded as merely physical and economic but must also be aimed at the social infrastructure , civil society and the public institutions .
These are the main objectives of our reconstruction strategy for the area which does not just involve a merely physical dimension but also an overall stabilisation dimension .
The rapporteur also refers briefly to the Stability Pact on which we have been cooperating with these five countries and with the countries involved in the enlargement process .
The recent regional financing conference which was organised jointly by the European Commission and the World Bank , in close cooperation with the Special Coordinator for the Stability Pact , gave significant impetus to the Pact ' s objective of reviving the reform processes and stimulating regional cooperation . It proved that the Stability Pact mechanism has already gained a certain maturity and can and must advance .
We believe that reciprocal commitment is the key to the Pact ' s success and I feel that this point was made very clear in the recent discussions at the Commission and World Bank conference .
The commitment of the countries in the region to implement institutional policy reforms and to create an environment allowing economic progress is a fundamental element in this Pact .
In return , the international community is supporting the reform commitments and the donors and financial institutions have promised or mobilised a total of EUR 2.4 billion .
Of this amount , the European Union alone , that is , the Commission and Member States combined , have promised or mobilised EUR 1.08 billion .
The international community has financed in particular a quick-start package of EUR 1.8 billion announced at the conference and has made available the necessary financing to accelerate the preparation and implementation of projects and initiatives in the short-term package .
However , the conference was only one initial step in a long process .
The European Union is committed to acting as leader and guaranteeing the coherent management of this whole support process .
It has also pledged to closely monitor and support the regional reform processes in a way which corresponds to the efforts made by each country so that these can be rewarded with advances in the development of new instruments . This will allow economic and social development and progress in line with European standards .
With the exception of Belgrade , all the governments in the region have stated that they will start on the road to reform .
I must clarify , however , that the Council considers that , without Serbia , our common efforts will be incomplete .
A democratic and cooperative Serbia , at peace with its neighbours , will be welcomed within the European family . We must be aware that overall stability in this region can never be complete when one country in the region represents a factor of instability .
This message about Serbia must be received by the respective civil society . Our support for Montenegro and for the stabilisation efforts being made in this country by the respective government must also be reconfirmed .
To conclude , we also note that the rapporteur intends that the mandate of the European Reconstruction Agency should not be limited to Kosovo .
In the meeting of 20 March , the Council invited the Commission to work on a proposal and to present this to the Council with a view to including Montenegro in the Agency ' s mandate .
Discussions are also ongoing about the possible extension of the EIB ' s activities .
Finally , the Council has invited the Secretary-General and High Representative , under the authority of the Council presidency and in full cooperation with the Commission , to ensure the coherence of the policies for the Western Balkans .
At the last General Affairs Council , an initial commentary was given on these ideas which specifically stem from the presentation given by Commissioner Patten and Mr Solana .
We are sure that in future meetings of the General Affairs Council this issue will be followed with close attention and by effective steps towards its realisation .
Mr President , the report on the stabilisation and association process for the countries in eastern Europe we are debating today attempts , and I believe successfully so , to formulate a stable political framework with which to address the Balkan tragedy .
Now is not the time to pass judgement past events and situations .
Today , let us take it that with this report we are taking a step towards the future and creating the platform for a first successful substantive European Union policy , in a way the first successful action of the CFSP .
Here , however , we must pay attention to certain issues .
So what are these issues ?
It is an open secret that interests are being expressed in the Balkans by many sides and many people , who often do not have common strategic aims .
In all circumstances this must be stopped by non-negotiable political answers given in every direction .
So what are they ?
Firstly : absolute compliance with the UN ' s decisions on the area .
Secondly : the boundaries of the states in the area are non-negotiable , even if it proves necessary in critical cases to adopt flexible forms of administrative autonomy and greater decentralisation .
I note that if there are some who think solutions will emerge either by creating new states or by redistribution between states , they are making a tragic mistake .
That would lead to continued and lasting tension with no foreseeable end .
A domino effect .
Without exaggeration , at the beginning of the 21st century we would have a new thirty-year war , 10 years of which , in any case , we have unfortunately lived through .
Thirdly : our policy must concern the peoples , and only them .
That is what is also in Europe ' s interests .
Fourthly : the issue of economic and institutional reconstruction is an urgent priority .
Positive results will emerge through development , democracy and prosperity .
For the first time you are passing judgement on a complex problem at the very periphery of the European Union .
The EU ' s political credibility and competence must prove successful .
It is a bet which must be won .
I hope that the strong convergence of support for the Lagendijk report achieved in the Committee on Foreign Affairs will find the same response in Parliament , and thereby express the desire of us all for a positive and stable outcome .
Mr President , I would thank the rapporteur for a report that the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party can fully support .
I should like to take up a subject mentioned neither in the Commission ' s announcement nor in the report and so run the risk of its being said that I am operating at too low a level .
The subject I want to bring up is that of women ' s involvement in the reconstruction programme , and I wish to do so because women and children have always been the major victims when it comes to conflicts , civil wars and wars generally .
Assaults upon women , rape , killing and torture are daily fare and have been so for many years recently in the countries of south-eastern Europe .
I think it is absolutely crucial , if cultural understanding is to be promoted and a proper reconstruction programme prepared , that women should be involved - and involved very centrally - in the processes concerned .
I am taking up this matter because not enough - although , fortunately , a little - has in actual fact been done in this area .
It is in fact the case that a gender task force has been established under working party 1 , but this has not happened because of any initiative from above but because of an initiative from below when a number of women have - if I may put it like this - approached the conference table and asked if it were not unreasonable for them , in one way or another , to have a central place in the whole of the reconstruction work . It is a number of quite concrete , down-to-earth things these women have proposed , such as developing a proper programme for women and involving women in the general development plans .
The initiative is also , of course , about getting women to stand at elections at local , regional and national levels . If , however , the initiative is to succeed , these women also need to receive money for the projects concerned .
Otherwise , these will not happen . Moreover , the amount of money involved is small in relation to the other money which , hopefully , will eventually be paid out in this area .
I would therefore ask both the Commissioner and the President-in-Office of the Council to take care to ensure that , where future work is concerned , women are involved in the reconstruction processes .
I do not , in fact , believe that the project will succeed if that does not happen .
Mr President , whatever its positive points , this report is flawed by the demands and requirements set out in the Stability Pact .
In other words , it essentially accepts that the wolf can guard the sheep .
By its very nature , the Stability Pact in Eastern Europe is intrusive , on the pretext that human rights and democracy are being protected .
I will not yet again refer to how the European Union is reacting to the flagrant violations of human rights in Turkey and elsewhere or the strident violations of those rights inside the European Union , i.e. the double standards policy .
For the moment , I will just note that the Pact ' s real aim is to ensure the political and economic dependence of the countries in the area , to plunder their wealth and to overexploit their workforce .
As is also stressed in the report , it is particularly worrying that in the area there will be a test of the European Union ' s - I quote - ' ability to develop an effective civil and military crisis management strategy aimed at conflict prevention ' .
In other words , new interventions are being prepared , even military ones , with the aim of converting the area into a protectorate .
The tragic situation brought on by the criminal intervention of NATO and the European Union in Kosovo and particularly in Yugoslavia is indicative of what is likely to happen .
Besides , respect for borders is not a matter of generalised declarations and wishes , as they occur in the report , but practical respect for the territorial sovereignty and integrity of these countries , in other words precisely the opposite of what the European Union and the USA are doing .
It is clear that those who support this Stability Pact want to frustrate any resistance to their plans , especially when it involves conflict .
They try , either by force or by economic blackmail , to terrorise peoples and subjugate them to the new order .
And the question is this : what principle of international law are they basing their actions on ?
Convinced , then , that the Stability Pact will bring new strife to peoples in the area and reinforce the dominance of the USA and the European Union , we will vote against the report and step up our fight against the Pact and on behalf of peace , friendship and solidarity between the peoples .
Mr President , I would like to make three observations regarding Mr Lagendijk ' s inspiring and excellent report .
Firstly , the Stability Pact for South-Eastern Europe focuses on regional cooperation in the Balkans .
It is precisely this cooperation which the European Union wishes to promote in the best possible way .
Well , this regional cooperation still leaves too much to be desired .
The basic pursuit of common interests is being undermined by a longing for prestige and rivalry among the various nations . In this way , the swift implementation of the innovative Stability Pact is being hampered .
What is needed here is a powerful response from the European Union .
This should go hand in hand with a selfless and more balanced selection of regional aid projects .
Secondly , I consider Paragraph 26 in the Lagendijk report to be a fine idea .
Indeed , the Stability Pact applies just as much across the borders of the region .
As such , the Republic Moldavia definitely deserves the opportunity of being directly involved in the Pact .
After all , the alternative would be that Moldavia would be in danger of finding itself in a kind of political no man ' s land .
What is more : Moldavia is linked with neighbouring Romania both culturally and politically . If Romania falls under the scope of the Stability Pact , so does Moldavia , therefore .
Thirdly , the success of this Stability Pact may well set a positive precedent for the East , with the Pact extended in the direction of the currently very unstable Caucasus .
Am I right in thinking that Russia already subscribes to the Stability Pact for South-Eastern Europe ?
Mr President , I will make three points .
The first is that Mr Lagendijk ' s report has interesting ideas , positive proposals , but I very much fear that it is a naïve report which cannot be implemented in the Balkans by the European Union ' s policy .
When basic factors such as respect of the Balkan borders are missing , when we play games with Montenegro and Kosovo , when this is coupled with the antagonism being shown towards the Milosevic regime , I think we are already undermining every positive effort we should be making .
The European Union must conclude that it should respect the frontiers in the Balkans , and that is something quite different from its attitude towards Milosevic .
The second point I want to stress is that financing part of the reconstruction plans by reducing agricultural expenditure must finally stop .
I think that the donor conference makes this possible , or seems to at least .
The third point I would like to make here is that there are parts of Greece , yes , unfortunately Greece , for example the Prefecture of Pieria , a tourist province in Central Macedonia , which has suffered enormous economic damage because tourists no longer come to that area .
Such issues should be considered by the European Union as well .
Mr President , I am not about to start arguing the toss with Mr Swoboda over where the Balkans begin .
In fact , it was once said that the Balkans begin at the Rennweg in Vienna .
But leaving that aside , the fact remains that this Stability Pact is of course adversely affected by the heterogeneity of its States .
We have first and second wave candidate countries .
We have countries such as Croatia and Macedonia that are about to overtake candidate countries .
We have States such as Bosnia-Herzegovina and Albania in which the State is scarcely functioning , and then the two decisive challenges , namely Yugoslavia , or Serbia , where it is a question of doing everything we can to foster democratisation and develop a long-term strategy for the Europeanisation of Serbia .
Secondly , Kosovo , where we will never achieve success unless elected political structures come into being there , along with a long-term vision of what is to happen to this region , which will never again be a Serbian province .
We cannot afford to hang about over this issue any longer ; otherwise all we will be doing is tinkering about at the edges , as it were .
But that is not the only factor adversely affecting the Stability Pact , it is also suffering from a lack of credibility on the part of the international organisations and also the European Union , which owing to a confusion of competences , wastage , and mismanagement , are displaying traits that would be dismissed as being typical of the Balkans , were it not for the fact that this is happening in our own organisations .
We are losing a great deal in the way of credit and respect in this region , and this respect and credibility are fundamentally even more important than the promises of funding that are made and then not kept .
I truly believe we must put this situation in order in the European Union , primarily by strengthening the Commission ' s role in the matter .
Commissioner , I have a great deal of faith in your work , but I must say that we as a Parliament must also ensure that you are able to give this work more in-depth attention than you have been able to hitherto .
What we need here is cooperation between our two institutions , so as to strengthen the EU and its credibility .
Mr President , I , too , consider this to be a satisfactory , significant report .
I would , however , stress certain points .
We know that the countries of the South-East are a priority , but we must be careful not to give ourselves more priorities than we can handle and not to establish conflicting priorities or we will lose credibility .
I refer to the Mediterranean policy and the Middle East peace process , which are also priorities .
We must be consistent , as I will remind the Council when we come to discuss the budgetary issues .
Secondly , it should be borne in mind that the regional approach is appropriate and important , and that it is important for the European Union to play a guiding role throughout this matter .
I therefore call upon the Commission and the Council to ensure , in the management of this extremely complex process , that the balance is maintained between the regional dimension of the Pact and the bilateral Association and Stabilisation Agreements , or we may end up sending contradictory signals to these countries .
Finally , I would like to mention two other points : the former Yugoslavia and crime .
With regard to the former Yugoslavia , I feel that we must follow the recommendations of the report and gradually reduce the embargo on the civil community until it has been lifted completely , because to continue to enforce it will only serve to postpone the fall of Milosevic .
The sooner we do this , the better .
Apart from anything else , the embargo is affecting other countries in the region , including several candidate countries .
It is causing serious harm .
And who can lift it if Europe does not ?
It appears that even the United States are expecting us to lift the embargo . We must find the courage to take this step .
Lastly , as other Members have reminded us , we must deal with society as well as infrastructures .
It might be interesting to meet with the chairmen of the three Working Tables to discuss these projects ; maybe the Committee on Foreign Affairs could see to this .
Society is important , and that is why we must continue with information and culture projects .
For example , my city , Rome , is organising the young artists ' biannual event in Sarajevo and funding the Sarajevo Concert Hall , precisely to give a sense of the reconstruction of a society within which there is dialogue , but which has dialogue with us as well .
Then there is the issue of crime .
My country , Italy , has a very high organised crime rate .
Puglia , for example , is a region which has to tackle crime organisations with a base in our country as well as elsewhere .
I would include this among the priorities I mentioned before , because investments will also be affected if this level of organised crime is maintained .
Mr President , I arrived in the Chamber this afternoon with an extremely good speech , which I would like to thank my cabinet for most warmly ; but perhaps I can deliver it on another occasion because I would actually like to respond informally to this debate .
Members of the House will have noticed that the High Representative and I produced a report for the Lisbon Council , and I suspect that Mr Lagendijk might have noticed that it bore a striking similarity to his own report .
I am not sure which was chicken and egg , but I feel that in complimenting Mr Lagendijk on the report he will not take it amiss and think that I am really congratulating Mr Solana and myself .
Yet there was a great deal of similarity .
It is fair to say that our work for the Lisbon Council was very much motivated by the strong feeling that unless we can make a success of our efforts in the Balkans , the whole credibility of our attempts to construct a common foreign and security policy will be shattered .
It is enormously important that we rise to the challenge in the Balkans .
A point we made to the heads of government in Lisbon in our report - which was very much reflected in the week that I spent recently in the region - is that the stabilisation and association process has to be at the heart of our strategy .
To put it in a rather more demotic way , in the phrase used by my honourable friend Ms Pack , what it means is designing , helping countries along the road to Europe .
They want to be integrated with the Euro-Atlantic structures ; they want that as an alternative to the traumatic disintegration of the last few years .
We have to make that a real process for them .
There were a lot of references to the Stability Pact conference the other day , which as several people have said was a considerable success .
The offers made by donors exceeded by a comfortable margin the expectations at the beginning of the conference .
There are a couple of points I want to make about it .
One , in response to Mr Lagendijk , it is true that some of the money going into the quick-start projects supported by the European Union was money from the 1998 and 1999 budgets .
There is a simple reason for that , which is that in some cases we had already carried out feasibility studies and made preparations for these quick-start projects .
In my book , new money is money you have not spent already .
Unfortunately , given the fact that our budget is based on commitments and payments , and not just payments unlike the budgets in almost all the Member States , that is a particularly important factor .
Committing money does not always mean spending it , the next year or the year after or even in the next decade .
It is important to be clear about that .
This follows up the point made by Mr Swoboda and it is a point with which I strongly agree .
We are not just talking about infrastructure in terms of hardware , we must also talk about infrastructure in terms of software .
That includes the rule of law , democratisation , the sort of civil society projects to which the honourable gentleman was referring ; and it includes education - a point I will come back to in a moment .
I want to make one or two other points which arose at Lisbon and which we are following up .
First of all , we were charged in the Commission at Lisbon to bring forward a package of proposals on asymmetric trade concessions for the region .
It is worth remembering that the total exports from the Balkans to the European Union represent about 0.6 % of our total imports .
For agricultural products the figure is about 0.16 % .
So this is an area where we could afford to be a little generous .
We are also trying speed up our assistance and make it more effective .
I announced yesterday agreement in the Commission on a rapid reaction facility .
We will be coming forward to Parliament in the next few months with our new regulation for assistance to the West Balkans , which I hope will make it more rapid , more flexible and will , of course , have to include sufficient funding for projects supporting gender issues .
I can think of no single model of successful economic or political development which does not include at its heart sensible programmes to ensure that women can develop their full potential and play a full role in their communities .
One point on education : last winter , despite all the cynicism , our energy for democracy programme in Serbia was extraordinarily successful .
Alas , there are not many occasions when people cheer the European Union in the streets - all too few occasions in the country I know best .
But that happened in some of those cities last winter .
The Mayor of Nis has just written a letter saying that Energy for Democracy was a model of the sort of political support we should be providing in his country .
The winter is over , so there is not the same urgent necessity for oil at the moment .
We are looking at ways to extend that sort of scheme .
What we have been thinking of , among other ideas , is education for democracy : providing schools with equipment , school-books and other facilities , cash to carry out small improvements to classrooms and so on , and with sports equipment - all those sorts of things which can make for a better life for the kids in those towns while they have to wait with their families for the departure - sooner rather than later , I hope - of Mr Milosevic .
I hope we are at last going to see more progress on the cleaning up of the Danube , which is crucial for the region .
We had useful meetings with the Danube Commission last week and I hope that the annual meeting of the Danube Commission this week will see us managing to set all that in motion , with the European Union meeting about 85 % of the cost of the clean-up .
I have spoken before of my concerns about Montenegro .
Following my visit there about a month ago , we have doubled our Obnova support for Montenegro from EUR 10 to 20m .
We are also providing a good deal there in terms of food security and so on .
I very much hope that the European Investment Bank will lend some money within reasonable limits to Montenegro before too long .
Finally , the honourable Member asked about the scale of our financial commitments to the Balkans .
There will be other occasions when I can follow this up in greater detail .
For me one of the real tests is whether all those yards of Council communiqués and all those promises about Marshall plans and so on for the Balkans actually amount to a row of beans !
This year we will be spending about EUR 540m in the western Balkans .
Because of the front-loading of our commitments in Kosovo , next year we will need to spend about EUR 800m in the Balkans .
About EUR 350m of that will go to Kosovo .
It must be said that it does not involve huge increases in expenditure elsewhere but we have to provide support in a country like Croatia where there is a good and decent government trying to do a difficult job in extremely problematic circumstances .
We have to spend money with those stabilisation and association countries which are negotiating seriously with us on the road to Europe .
For me , in public-spending terms , the crucial year is always year one - you are lucky if you get to year two or three .
Year one is actually the big year of expenditure for us .
Overall , at Istanbul , when we were asked how much we thought we could spend in the region , recognising that it was subject to the budgetary authority - I know all the theology of these matters now - we reckoned about EUR 5.5bn.
People say that is a crazy figure .
Well , I am keen that we should no longer be in the position we are in now where , despite the interinstitutional agreement , we are told by a lot of people that we have to find the extra money for Kosovo within the financial envelope agreed before Kosovo became a necessity .
One thing I have insisted on is a realistic figure in our budgeting for reconstruction in Serbia , because I do not want to find myself in two or three years time having to find additional costs for Serbia out of that same budget .
We reckon that applying the same sort of figures applied in Kosovo , we would need about EUR 2.3bn for a serious reconstruction programme in Serbia .
That could only start once Milosevic has gone .
However , in my view it would be thoroughly irresponsible for us to suggest figures to this Parliament or Council which did not include an element of what we think would be realistic for Serbia .
That is based on economists ' figures and our assessment that we need to meet the same sort of a proportion of expenditure on Serbia that we have met in Kosovo .
The rest - EUR 3.2bn - over seven years does not strike me as being outlandishly generous .
That is how we reached the figure of EUR 5.5bn and I have slightly resented the implication in some newspapers that this is a figure we have plucked out of the air and does not make any sense .
I should be delighted to explain it not just in more detail to Parliament but I am looking forward in due course to explaining it in more detail to the General Affairs Council .
Who knows , if I was lucky enough one day , I might even be able to explain it to finance ministers .
I respond to the honourable Member ' s well-intentioned question in that way .
This is not a figure plucked out of the air : it is an attempt to provide an honest assessment of what our rhetoric actually means .
People cannot resent the fact that they do it : they asked us to do it in relation to the Middle East - to give some idea of what the cost of a peace settlement would be for the European Union ' s programmes .
So let us see the cost of it in the Balkans .
If we are going to have an argument about the relationship between rhetoric and reality , let us start here .
My final point : we are clearly talking in the Balkans about building peace and security , not just in our backyard but in our front yard too .
We are talking about building peace and security in an integral part of our European common home .
I hope we can do so in practice with the rhetoric , with the promises , with the optimism that we show in all those rhetorical communiqués .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 11.30 a.m.
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is Question Time ( B5-0216 / 2000 ) . We will examine questions to the Council .
As they deal with the same subject , Questions Nos 1 , 2 and 3 will be taken together .
Question No 1 by ( H-0255 / 00 ) :
Subject : Flagrant violation by Turkey of the rule of law and human rights The leader of the People ' s Democracy Party of Turkey , together with 17 other members of the party ' s leadership , has been sentenced to a three-year and nine months ' term of imprisonment for supporting the hunger strike that took place in solidarity with Abdullah Öcalan when he was handed over to the Turkish secret services in Kenya .
Three mayors of towns in S.E. Turkey , who are supporters of the same party , were also arrested on charges of collaborating with the PKK .
Other Turkish parties besides HADEP have voiced their opposition to the arrests and sentences , arguing that they are a flagrant breach of democracy , freedom of expression and the basic principles of the rule of law .
Will the Council raise the matter of the arrest and conviction of democrats for their opinions , and call for unhindered freedom of expression in Turkey together with freedom of formation and operation for all political parties ?
Question No 2 by ( H-0286 / 00 ) :
Subject : Human rights violations by Turkey In December 1999 Turkey became a candidate country for accession to the European Union .
Article 10 of the conclusions of the Helsinki Council Presidency states that Turkey must fulfil the general accession criteria , and in particular the Copenhagen criteria , if it is to become a Member of the European Union .
In February of this year three Kurdish mayors ( of the towns of Diyarbakir , Siirt and Bingöl ) were arrested on their return to Turkey after they had signed the Aalborg Charter in Hanover in Germany together with 4 colleagues making their towns members of the ' European Sustainable Cities and Towns Campaign ' ; they are still being held in prison .
Since Turkey is guilty of continuous and repeated human rights violations , what does the Council intend to do prevail upon Turkey to meet the EU accession criteria ?
Question No 3 by ( H-0299 / 00 ) :
Subject : Continued muzzling of freedom of expression and violation of the rule of law by Turkey The leader of the People ' s Democracy Party ( HADEP ) of Turkey and 17 other members of the party leadership have been sentenced to prison terms of three years and nine months on charges of supporting the hunger strike organised in support of Abdullah Öcalan when he was handed over to the Turkish secret services in Kenya .
Three mayors of towns in south-eastern Turkey who are close to this party have also been arrested on charges of collaborating with the PKK .
Other Turkish parties apart from HADEP have expressed their opposition to these arrests and sentences , arguing that this move is totally incompatible with democracy , freedom of expression and the basic principles of the rule of law .
Will the Council say whether it intends to raise with the Turkish government the issue of the arrest and sentencing of democrats merely for making statements and to demand , as part of the pre-accession procedure , that Turkey give guarantees regarding unrestricted freedom of expression and allow all political parties to be founded and function without hindrance ?
Mr President , the Council has already raised with the Turkish authorities the issue of the democratic rights of Turks of Kurdish origin , including those mentioned in the question . It will continue to monitor this situation in Turkey as it develops and to act accordingly .
An Association Council meeting was held yesterday between the European Union and Turkey in which this issue was mentioned again . The Turkish authorities were told of the EU ' s concern about this type of issue and of its hope that the Turkish authorities will end what is currently interpreted as a non-compliance with certain basic criteria of respect for human and democratic rights and the protection of minorities .
Turkey was named by the Helsinki European Council as a candidate country for accession to the European Union .
This status places Turkey in absolutely the same position as any other candidate country in terms of both obligations and benefits .
Therefore , Turkey is subject to the same requirements as those imposed on any other candidate country but also naturally has the same rights .
The European Union cannot make a special case of Turkey which must be treated exactly the same as any other candidate country .
Turkey is therefore currently involved in a process in which its situation must be assessed in light of the criteria of the Copenhagen European Council . These criteria are clear enough with regard to respect for the rule of law , democratic guarantees , fundamental freedoms and the protection of minorities .
These are a prerequisite for the opening of any negotiating process .
On the road towards this , a pre-accession strategy must be established between the Commission , on the EU ' s behalf , and Turkey . The preparation of this strategy involves non-governmental organisations , the Member States and the Turkish Government .
This accession partnership will define the priority areas for reform on which the European Union considers that Turkey must concentrate its efforts in order to comply , hopefully in a progressive , capable and complete manner , with the Copenhagen criteria .
Clearly it is in this context that the issues mentioned in the questions will be considered .
Yesterday we heard Mr Verheugen and today the Council ' s representative acknowledging , even in small measure , some of the problems related to respect for human rights in Turkey concerning which , indeed , they expressed their sorrow .
Yet , both yesterday and today they underlined the supposed progress made by the Turkish regime in that area .
And we heard the representative of the Council telling us the same thing today .
The truth , however , is that contrary to what some people are claiming even in Greece , the Helsinki decisions on Turkey have emboldened the Turkish regime .
It is no mere chance that on the next day Turkey ' s leaders declared that Turkey has become a candidate for accession without attached conditions .
It is not by chance that , while they have not complied with any of their commitments , they protest that they have not been given the appropriations provided for under customs union .
They also told us that Turkey intends to take steps .
But we have been hearing that in the Council of Europe for very many years , perhaps more than ten , without anything happening .
If anything , things are worse .
The campaigner for democracy and human rights who was shot was sent to prison again instead of his attackers being punished .
My question , then , is : specifically when does the Turkish regime intend to progress with democratising that country ' s constitution and criminal code , to set free the leaders of HADEP and the Members of Parliament as well as all the political prisoners ? Will the Kurdish issue ever be resolved , will all the political parties be allowed freedom of formation and operation and finally , will Turkey ever withdraw its troops from Cyprus ?

With regard to the comment that Mr Korakas ' question was not a new one , I must say that Turkey ' s application for accession to the European Union subjects it to closer scrutiny of its responsibilities in complying with the basic criteria for accession .
I believe that the Turkish authorities are well aware of this . With regard to defining the pre-accession strategy and the accession partnership , Turkey ' s problems will certainly be paid close attention , particularly in terms of respect for the basic criteria of acting in accordance with European standards .
In the past Turkey was a country in which we regularly and systematically undertook certain ad hoc initiatives according to the development of its internal situation .
But no more !
The internal situation is now becoming a strategic element in the progress made by Turkey towards approximation with the European Union .
In the specific case of Mr Birdal , I was able to meet him in Turkey in January of this year and I told him during this meeting of the EU ' s solidarity with his situation . It is clear in this respect that the EU has already indicated its concern to the Turkish authorities , through the appropriate channels , about his status and in particular his return to prison .
For a long time we have adopted a foreign policy which we allege is based on moral rules .
And not just that .
We have come to believe it ourselves and we claim to represent the world-wide moral conscience .
Already , however , we have reached an impasse , and not just in Turkey .
You see , morality must be applied towards everyone equally , regardless of risks and interests .
But that cannot happen .
You see , Belgrade can be bombed , but not Moscow , Beijing or Ankara .
Let us therefore acknowledge the obvious and return to tried and tested prescriptions .
In other words , let us speak of interests , the balance of powers and policy as the art of the possible .
If we do that we will certainly not be more moral , we will be more sincere and in that case we can all put our time to better use instead of play-acting as we are all doing now .
I am not sure that you have asked a question .
If there is no question , the Council is not obliged to answer , only to listen , as you know , Mr Seixas da Costa .
Mr Theonas wishes to rephrase his question .
I recommend to all of you that you begin with the question before making a declaration .
I have a comment and a specific question : would it not be better for the Council to give more specific answers when it asks for specific questions ?
That was my comment .
Now , the question : if the pre-accession process for Turkey were to last twenty years , would all those who are imprisoned today have to wait those twenty years for the European Union to express interest ?
Secondly , would the Council be prepared , in this whole process , to suspend or cancel obligations of the European Union relating to the pre-accession process as long as the people we are talking about remain in prison ?
And finally , could some action ever be demanded from Turkey which would help resolve the Cyprus issue , granted that this is one of the issues which should be addressed as part of the pre-accession process ?
Firstly , Mr Theonas , I do not agree with the comment that the Council presidency is not explicitly answering the questions raised by Members .
In fact , quite the contrary is true .
The ongoing process of Turkey ' s approximation towards the European Union , which was started with its designation as a candidate in Helsinki , is one of progressive approximation . The Member should realise that this process of progressive approximation is resulting in greater attention being paid than in the past by the European Union to Turkey ' s internal situation and to the way in which this country acts with regard to the requirements imposed by the international community .
It is this point which really must be borne in mind .
Turkey is currently , on its own initiative and therefore as a result of its own political decision , the subject of close scrutiny in terms of compliance with the basic criteria .
This is not to be assessed over the next ten years but rather on a daily basis , usually within the pre-accession strategy process .
If there were a lack of progress on the fundamental issues under observation , the pre-accession process would suffer the respective consequences .
This is very clear to me .
Furthermore , the Helsinki conclusions , regardless of how they may be read , place the issue of Turkey and its relationship with Cyprus in a new perspective , which was in fact welcomed by the Cypriot authorities .
We must draw from this the appropriate conclusions about how the development in the Turkish position on the Cypriot issue may also affect the development of the Turkish position in its approximation towards the European Union .
A comment and question to the Council ' s representative : is the answer he just gave us specific ?
For goodness sake !
Mr Korakas , I must make a confession .
In political life , people are used to reading between the lines .
On such a delicate issue as the interpretation of a serious situation , like the development in the Cypriot situation and Turkey ' s approximation towards the European Union , we must be very careful in our choice of words .
However , I feel that I made it clear that there is a direct link between Turkey ' s approximation process and its position on the Cypriot issue .
I cannot make this any clearer .
Question No 4 by ( H-0294 / 00 ) :
Subject : Blatant persecution and violation of the rights of the Assyrian-Chaldeans in Turkey Tens of thousands of Assyrian-Chaldeans in Turkey living in the south-east of the country have found refuge in Member States of the EU after being persecuted by the Turkish Government which has destroyed many of their homes , closed and raised to the ground their churches and banned the use of their language and teaching in this language .
There is a danger that , owing to the use of force , the remaining places of worship and even the traces of the existence of this minority will be lost for ever .
Will the Council say whether it intends to raise this matter as part of the pre-accession procedure , to call on the Turkish Government to respect the rights of the Assyrian-Chaldean minority in Turkey and , more particularly , to ensure that the Mar Gabriel monastery in Midyat and the Dayr Zafaran monastery in Mardin can continue to operate without hindrance ?
Very briefly , what I said about the development of the situation in Turkey and the necessary changes in terms of respect for the rights of minorities also applies in this case which specifically involves the protection of Christian minorities .
The reinforcement of the political dialogue agreed in Helsinki requires progress to be made towards compliance with these political criteria , particularly on issues of human rights . All the situations which have been brought to the Council ' s attention during the pre-accession process will be tackled .
This particular question involves the problem of non-recognition by the Turkish authorities of the Assyrian-Chaldean community under the terms of the Lausanne Treaty of 1923 .
Under this Treaty , the Turkish Government undertook to ensure full protection for the churches , synagogues , cemeteries and other places of worship of non-Muslim minorities . At this point in time , the claims of the Assyrian-Chaldean community basically relate to the problem of restoring monasteries and the official teaching of Aramaic and the problem connected with the free movement of citizens from this ethnic group who live outside Turkey .
These are clearly administrative issues . They do have a human rights dimension which obviously must be tackled - and we will be vigilant in this respect - but they are essentially administrative .
The Council will be vigilant and the Commission will also raise these issues during the pre-accession negotiations .
Mr President-in-Office , I cannot say your answer is satisfactory .
If the Council were truly concerned about human rights one would have expected a more specific answer .
We are talking here about two very ancient peoples who have been subjected to systematic genocide by the Turkish regime , a genocide perhaps not so impressive as in Armenia , but just as effective .
Several thousand people have become refugees or immigrants to the European Union and only a few tens of thousands remain in the area where they have lived since ancient times .
I would like to ask whether you can be more specific .
Of course , your reference to the Treaty of Lausanne is apt , but beyond that , the European Union also has a responsibility to stress certain things to the Turkish regime concerning the need to respect human rights , whether they stem from the Treaty of Lausanne or in a broader sense .
Is the Council going to take any specific action along those lines ?
Mr Alyssandrakis says that my answer was not positive enough .
It would be useful to remind him of his question .
He asked whether the Council intends to raise this issue during the pre-accession process and to ask the Turkish Government to respect the rights of the Assyrian-Chaldean minority in Turkey and , in particular , to ensure the operation without hindrance of their monasteries . He specifically referred to two monasteries .
I have no idea what more positive answer I could give him than to simply say yes .
It is the Council ' s and the EU ' s intention to raise this issue with the Turkish authorities during the pre-accession process .
Once again , if this is not a clear answer , I have no idea what is .
Question No 5 by ( H-0262 / 00 ) :
Subject : Renewed tension in Kosovo The results of the ' peaceful ' intervention by NATO forces in Kosovo are generally acknowledged to be deplorable .
Instead of the ' multi-ethnic ' Kosovo which had been the UN ' s objective , we have a situation in which the refugees have failed to return , ethnic cleansing has continued , but now directed at the Serb population , partition has taken root and the dispatch of increasing numbers of new military and police forces is considered ' indispensable ' . The current increase in tension is being fuelled by statements by NATO officials and major new military exercises by NATO forces .
Will the Council say what measures it intends to take to safeguard a ' multi-ethnic ' Kosovo as part of the Yugoslav Federation ? What action will it take to defuse the crisis and tension in the region ?
- ( PT ) Mr President , the European Union ' s objective , in accordance with Security Council Resolution 1244 , continues to be the establishment of a democratic and multi-ethnic Kosovo within the internationally recognised borders of the Former Yugoslavia .
The Council accepts the urgent need to find a solution to the continued outbreaks of ethnic violence , particularly against the Serbs , gypsies and other non-Albanian communities in Kosovo .
The Council has been consistently supporting the efforts made by UNMIK and KFOR to prevent further expulsions and to allow the safe return of all those who abandoned their homes .
In response to an urgent appeal from the UN Secretary-General ' s Special Representative , Doctor Bernard Kouchner , and from the High Representative , Mr Solana , the Member States have significantly increased their contributions to the UN ' s international police forces with both financial and technical support and human resources .
Several Member States have also reinforced their own contingents in KFOR .
In the past in this House , we have deeply regretted the failure to meet these commitments , which has clearly hindered the action of the international authorities in Kosovo .
There are now new elements involved and some of these commitments are now being met . This is allowing this issue to be handled differently and more effectively , although we are clearly still a long way from achieving a minimally acceptable solution .
The Council has urged all the political leaders in Kosovo to adopt urgent measures to combat the escalation of violence , to reject expressions of extremism and to support UNMIK and KFOR .
It is very important that the Council manages to further develop the progress already made in the reconciliation between the ethnic groups and that Resolution 1244 can be put into practice .
We are committed to the process of democratisation and coexistence in Kosovo .
Only responsibility-sharing by representatives of the minorities can lead to the construction of a multi-ethnic Kosovo .
We should all ask ourselves whether everyone , particularly within Kosovo itself , is interested in the existence of a multi-ethnic Kosovo .
In this context , the Council repeats its appeal to the Serbian leaders to participate in the joint interim administrative structures .
The Council places great importance on the careful preparation by UNMIK and the OSCE of local elections to be held this year , including the provisions on voting by absentees and the participation of minorities .
We believe it is important to start creating legitimate structures with local authority in Kosovo . This is the only way we can guarantee that the political forces which are currently working in an unorganised manner , outside any institutions , will return to normal political life and end up working in Kosovo within a democratic society .
In terms of supporting this process of democratisation and coexistence , the European Union has been working together with other international partners to re-establish daily life for the whole of Kosovo ' s population , whatever their ethnic background .
In addition to the important bilateral assistance given by the Member States , the European Community has allocated humanitarian aid for 1999 to 2000 to the amount of EUR 429 million for the Kosovar refugees , displaced persons within the country and those returning home .
The aid for reconstruction and the special financial assistance , including the support for UNMIK , will total EUR 437 million between 1999 and 2000 .
This set of actions and the commitment shown by the EU in this respect have been recognised by the international community .
Unfortunately , at times the practical efficiency of these actions is not sufficient to end an unstable situation beset by tensions which we hope will decrease in the future .
Let me first comment that the President-in-Office of the Council is besieged by questions from Greek Members .
I think that expresses the great insecurity felt by a Member State , but I would also say the inadequacy of Community policy to address serious issues . I want to thank him for his answer .
I take note of that position , which I find particularly positive and which we do not often see , namely that the European Union ' s objective is a multi-ethnic and democratic Kosovo within the framework of the internationally recognised borders of the Yugoslav Federation .
I think that is a positive thing and I have taken note of it . I would like to ask a supplementary question regarding in particular those minorities suffering persecution today in a situation of ethnic cleansing in Kosovo , whether they be Serbians , of Turkish origin or gypsies , who are , on the one hand , under such pressure from Albanian extremists and , on the other hand , living in a Serbia still subject to embargo .
Are there any special support and aid programmes planned by the European Union specifically for these people who are living in such misery and desperation ?
Mr Alavanos , I believe it was clear from what I said and in fact you recognised yourself that the general objective of the European Union and the international community is to respect the terms of Security Council Resolution 1244 , particularly on the establishment of a democratic and multi-ethnic Kosovo .
I am not ignoring the major difficulties present on the ground in applying these decisions .
There is no point on this issue using euphemisms or diplomatic language .
The mass return of the Albanians expelled from Kosovo and the tension which has arisen in the meantime , particularly involving Serbian , gypsy and other minorities , have ended up creating a new and different situation . However , we should not only look at the present .
We must consider what happened in the past which was the cause of all this .
Perhaps by looking at the causes of this situation , rather than fixing on the present , we will have a fairer and more objective view of the partial responsibility of the Belgrade Government , particularly with regard to what happened to it subsequently due to its actions in Kosovo .
However , it is true that , for the Serbian minorities who have had to leave the country since the return of the Kosovo Albanians , the conditions have not yet been established to allow them to return . Those still living in Kosovo are having problems coexisting with the Albanian majority .
However , the Member must recognise the clear efforts being made by the international community to protect these minorities and to achieve a safe situation allowing them to coexist with the Albanians .
We cannot ignore the fact that this joint effort also needs the Serbian authorities to be involved in the consultative structures .
This would be one way of making its own actions in Kosovo credible .
Our only objective is to guarantee the continuation of multi-ethnic integration .
We realise that there is a long way to go and probably the situation of the Serbs living outside Kosovo , and who cannot return because it is unsafe , is unfair .
There is no point beating about the bush on this . This situation is unfair .
However , we must realise that the international community is doing its best .
Furthermore , we should always remember what happened before , in order to justify what is happening now .
Mr Alavanos said that until now all the questions we have heard have been Greek .
I would like to say that the Spanish and the Portuguese , as well as other Mediterranean people , are accustomed to speaking with the Greeks .
I believe that Lisbon , the ancient Olisipo , was founded by Ulysses .
The President-in-Office of the Council therefore comes from a country with a long tradition of Greek presence .
Mr President , could I ask the President-in-Office of the Council - all of whose good intentions for a multi-ethnic Kosovo I accept - whether he would not admit that the international community ' s policy there in all its facets - the European Union , the United Nations , KFOR , NATO et al - is really an unmitigated and disastrous failure and getting worse by the day .
What is being done to get the KLA and the Albanian bully-boys , who clearly have no interest in a multi-ethnic Kosovo , under control ?
There just seems to be an ineffectual permissiveness of the situation despite all these wonderful , pious good intentions .
Firstly , to comment on what the President said , I must say that I am very happy to be grilled by the Greek Members . I have some great friends in Greece where I have spent several holidays .
As for the situation you describe , Mr Purvis , I do not believe that the policy is disastrous . This is the only possible policy , as you know , and it is a result of everything that has happened in the region in the last few years and even in the last few decades .
We must realise that the international community ' s position , which is not brilliant in terms of the practical application of these measures , is the only one which can resolve a conflict on which the international community was only called to act due to the total inability to find a solution within the Former Yugoslavia .
It was precisely the situation created in the Former Yugoslavia which caused this reaction .
You refer to the KLA .
Remember that the KLA only exists because the Albanian community in Kosovo was systematically persecuted and totally besieged .
Clearly the need to organise themselves militarily to respond to this threat led to the KLA ' s action .
The problem now facing us is to try and ensure that the structures created outside the democratic process , simply because this did not exist in the Former Yugoslavia , allow an approach of solely political action to be adopted in a democratic Kosovo .
We are still a long way off from finding such an approach , but I believe that the international community ' s action is very positive in this respect .
Mr President , if a mark between 1 and 10 were now to be given for success in pursuing the two objectives of the action programme , namely that Kosovo should be multi-ethnic and that it should remain a part of Yugoslavia , I believe that the President-in-Office of the Council and I can probably agree that the mark concerned would be fairly low . We agree , however , that this is the result of a policy which has been pursued up until now , that is to say a result of what has happened .
My question is this : is the Council giving any consideration to how this policy can be changed in the future , or is the intention to go on using the same tools , that is to say military action and initiatives against troublesome areas in the region ?
What is the basic idea behind setting up a 60 000-strong rapid reaction force when we all agree that a number of other initiatives are presumably required if there is a desire to solve conflicts in Europe and in neighbouring countries ?
Firstly , I regret not having the opportunity to put questions to the Members .
If I did I would ask them what other solution they propose . As a specific example of what military forces can do , I would refer you to the case of Bosnia-Herzegovina .
Just think what the situation was like there for several years . Just think about the international community ' s failure to act faced with this problem and then just look at the situation today .
This is clearly unstable but it is one of peace due to the presence of the military forces . It is clear that there are certain situations in which attempts to deflect ethnic tensions can only be successful by using mechanisms which involve the protection and separation of the waters .
This is very probably what is needed in Kosovo , who knows for how long , but hopefully for the shortest time possible . We should also bear in mind that the international community and particularly the Member States have no specific interest in intervening in Kosovo and in mobilising human and physical resources for an action of this kind .
In fact quite the contrary .
The international community and the European Union in particular were aware that it was their duty and responsibility to react to a totally disgraceful situation in terms of international standards of behaviour .
It was the genocide and siege behaviour of Mr Milosevic with regard to the Albanian community in Kosovo which led to our intervention .
You say that the practical result of this action is not what was wanted .
I would point out , however , that the practical result is that today , with a few exceptions and despite everything , this situation is under control in terms of security .
We have made and are making efforts to achieve greater integration of the minority communities .
A more effective result has not been possible .
We will try to continue exerting pressure in this respect and we believe that renewing in some way the institutional organisation of civil society through independent elections may contribute significantly to this stability .
Question No 6 by ( H-0279 / 00 ) :
Subject : Protection of European undertakings in Kosovo Despite the fact that the Council is unaware of this ( answer to Question E-2425 / 99 ) , the above undertakings have indeed appealed to the EU to protect their interests , as this matter falls within the Council ' s remit .
Given that UNMIK and its head , Bernard Kouchner , do not act of their own accord , but under international supervision in which the Council is also involved , the latter should scrutinise their actions more closely where they affect the interests of European undertakings , if it wishes to avoid raising doubts about its intentions though the answers it gives .
Furthermore , the proper management of the fourth Pillar entails a number of additional obligations for the EU institutions .
Since the Commission , which is unfortunately taking an unconscionable amount of time to reply , is well aware of the actions of the undertakings concerned , and in order to avoid any doubts about whether the Council is responsible for failing to act , will the latter say to what extent it is prepared to act in accordance with the obligations imposed on it by the Treaties and to support the interests of the undertakings in question ?
.
( PT ) Security Council Resolution 1244 gave UNMIK , the interim administration in Kosovo , authority over the territory , including full legislative and executive powers , and control over the legal system . The aim was to establish a transitional administration whose mandate was described in the resolution itself .
This mandate also includes the development of a phased economic recovery plan .
This means that the individual cases mentioned in the Member ' s question should be dealt with directly by the UN Secretary-General ' s Special Representative for Kosovo , who is responsible for the territorial administration of Kosovo , or by the Foreign Minister of the Member State in which the undertakings are established .
The Council assumes general political responsibility for the EU ' s participation in UNMIK which is focussed on reconstruction and economic rehabilitation .
However , neither the European Union as such nor the Council has any competence or direct responsibility with regard to the administration of the territory and the protection of the individual interests of undertakings in the region . These elements are , on the one hand , the responsibility of the United Nations , as the administrator of the territory , and on the other , of the governments of each Member State which may act to protect these undertakings .
I have been waiting about six months for an answer on this .
There is a whole raft of questions and answers and we are becoming schizophrenic over the substance and content of the answers .
What is hiding behind all that ?
Either the services are not doing their job properly and are giving you wrong information , or there is something rotten in the Kingdom of Denmark and there are many who say that there is something peculiar about Mr Kouchner ' s administration .
My question is this : if the services are not doing their job properly , what are you going to do when they leave you high and dry ?
If Mr Kouchner is not doing his job properly , what are you going to do about it ?
And the third question : how can it be that the citizens of the European Union are being called upon to pay for the Stability Pact even though European undertakings established there cannot be protected by the European Union ?
That does not happen anywhere , it is unreasonable .
We should therefore see things as they are , because my impression is that Mr Kouchner is not playing his part properly there .
That is where the problem lies and that is what we should all realise , as European citizens and people interested in developments in the Balkans .
The question raised has never been submitted to the Council of the European Union , particularly by the undertakings which are complaining .
The Council presidency has no knowledge of this issue .
Complaints are submitted to the Member States whose Foreign Ministries are responsible for dealing with this type of question .
It should be borne in mind that the administration in Kosovo does not come under the EU ' s competence but under that of the UN .
There is a specific body responsible for this administration .
Each country is normally obliged to protect the actions of its undertakings within the international sphere .
Each country has structures to protect its citizens and undertakings internationally and for this reason there are specific mechanisms which we all use every day in our international action .
The European Union is not a country .
I do not know under what circumstances the European Union would have to have a global and specific action plan in this respect or why , as a Union , it would have to deal with this issue .
That is unless we reach a point at which national governments prove to be incompetent in protecting their own undertakings .
Mr President , an essential element in the reconstruction of post-war society is always that recovery of the local economy should be as rapid as possible , so that it becomes viable once more .
Local businesses in Kosovo now , however , have one substantial problem : a dearth of qualified and linguistically competent labour , as all those who can speak English , or nearly all , were recruited for reconstruction projects in Kosovo , and local businesses cannot compete with the high salaries being paid .
Many entrepreneurs are naturally very bitter about this consequent stagnation in activity .
Mr President-in-Office , I do not know if you have come up against this problem , but I would nonetheless ask you what you think can be done about it at EU level .
Doctor Bernard Kouchner has at times referred to the difficulty he has in recruiting staff , not only for the country ' s administration but also for the normal structures of economic reconstruction .
It is clear that the cost of recruiting staff is high .
We consider that this type of question comes within the framework of Doctor Kouchner ' s work which , as I have said , is outside the control of the European Union , although we are cooperating on this issue .
The Union as such does not therefore have a specific and direct response to this type of question .
We are ready to listen to and consider the requests made to us by Doctor Kouchner and to give him any possible answer within the commitments assumed by the European Union with regard to the extremely high costs involved in the region .
Mr President , my question is quite specific and is , I believe , of direct concern to the EU .
Is the Council aware that the Serbian government is planning to sell mines and mineral resources in Kosovo to EU companies and to portray this as privatisation ?
Does the Council know that there are problems here associated with ethnic cleansing in one part of Kosovo , in that Serbs are being settled in one area , which is the area that is richest in raw materials , and there is a risk of the area being partitioned in order to safeguard these raw materials ?
Mr Posselt , I have no knowledge of this issue . However , we will consider the information you have given us .
Question No 7 by ( H-0274 / 00 ) :
Subject : Joint efforts to coordinate IT development The Portuguese Presidency has commendably highlighted the need for development of the IT sector in order to promote competitiveness and employment .
Coordination at European level would be conducive to the further development of the IT sector .
What is the Council ' s view of the need for coordination at European level to develop the IT sector and , in that context , of the need to set up a European IT agency ?
Mr Andersson , to answer your question I should like to start by confirming that a coordinated approach at European level to the information technology and telecommunications sectors is essential for the future development of the European Union .
We have already discussed in this House the Special Meeting , which was held in Lisbon on 23 , and 24 March . At this it was clear that improving the Information Society policy is central to achieving the objectives which this meeting set and which involve the issues of employment , social cohesion and reinforcement of Europe ' s competitiveness at world level .
In particular the Special Meeting invited the Council and Commission to prepare an action plan on e-Europe , which will be presented , to the European Council in June .
The idea of launching an agency devoted to information technology was presented at the Lisbon European Council in the document provided by the Swedish Government .
This idea was not followed up but it responds to our concerns and will definitely be considered and developed in the future .
It was discussed , however , particularly in terms of possibly being added to the existing Community mechanisms , which include the Information Society Project Office . This has been producing a range of initiatives during the Portuguese presidency .
On the issue of a possible European telecommunications regulation agency , I would remind you that a study carried out for the Commission in October 1999 concluded that there was no immediate need for such a body . At the same time the Council concluded that regulation should be applied at the closest possible level to that at which the activities to be regulated are carried out .
This too involves the principle of subsidiarity .
I want to thank the Council for its answer .
I was pleased to see that the issue of information technology and its link to growth and employment were so high on the agenda in Lisbon .
What happens in the future is important .
The political task is not , of course , to set up IT companies but to build an infrastructure which stimulates development in this area .
We do , of course , have shortcomings within the EU .
Moreover , there are major differences between the EU ' s Member States and also between different regions within the EU .
Different population groups have varying opportunities and knowledge when it comes to exploiting this technology , and this may lead to great inequality in the future .
I would therefore ask the question : how are we successfully to devise a form of coordination which enables information technology also to be used out in the peripheral areas so that we create greater equality between different regions and between different population groups ?
Is there not a need for a joint authority to coordinate this work ?
Mr Andersson , you have asked me two separate questions .
The first concerns the substantive issue of democratising the Information Society itself , which was at the root of the concerns of the Lisbon European Council . This involves the need to spread throughout European society , precisely in the area where it is less competitive and in order to give added value to the usual elements of its economy , all these new dimensions of the society of innovation and knowledge .
This effort is scheduled to use specific measures contained in the conclusions of the Lisbon European Council , particularly with regard to the Internet and methods of apprenticeship and vocational training . In our opinion , these may be able to form a future action plan , which will be assessed every year at special meetings of the European Council , which will always take place in the spring .
This is the answer to your first question .
Your other question concerns the need to have an organisational structure and an institution to supervise this process and to pay specific attention to the similarity between these types of question within the European Union .
You rightly make the point that on many occasions specifying these measures may create and worsen inequalities .
This is a danger and risk to which we are alert .
In the meantime , the governments have decided that the creation of a new structure and bureaucratic mechanism with high costs is not necessary .
They in fact consider that the structures which currently exist for monitoring this process are sufficient for this purpose .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , as an Austrian I am extremely proud of the fact that the Council Presidency has focussed on development in the IT sector .
I would be interested to know how the President-in-Office of the Council views the sale by auction of UMTS licences .
The proceeds from this sector could create a huge amount of impetus and , above all , boost the Portuguese programme accordingly , if , for example , we were to make the proceeds from the licences that are sold by auction available for research and development , education , training and further education , or for infrastructure .
What do you think to the idea of developing incentivisation programmes for the Member States , so as to enable the proceeds to actually be ploughed back into this sector ?
The conclusions of the Lisbon European Council specify national actions which are therefore the responsibility of the national governments . These are objective commitments which the governments assumed in signing these conclusions and which involve the reorientation of the mechanisms and structures and action plans and programmes which exist within the European Union .
With the exception of the possibility of recourse to the European Investment Bank , there are no new elements in this respect for mobilising financial resources .
This was one of the objective concerns raised during discussions of this issue in Lisbon .
It was decided to try and achieve greater coherence between the current instruments for the simple reason that we believe that , rather than creating new instruments , we should reorganise the current ones .
Having said this , it is necessary , as we have done in the employment and macroeconomic policies , to try and achieve greater coherence between the national actions on the society of innovation and knowledge and to ensure that these actions are subject to a specific plan which each Member State undertakes to implement internally . This will occur in accordance with a set timetable of objectives and using benchmarking processes which allow us to see which are the best practices and to try , based on these , to encourage similar practices in the other Member States .
This process has this national dimension of a commitment on objectives and it is therefore obvious that there are no financial resources for this other than those available in the budget of each country .
In the other dimension , in which recourse to the European Investment Bank is possible , there is a set of actions within the competence of the EU itself , which not only complements previous actions but also ensures greater coherence between the EU ' s programmes and actions in this area .
The Commission has been extremely active in this field and the e-Europe programme presented by the Commission and whose action plan will be approved at the Feira European Council in June provides new guidelines for this area and a new reorientation of Community policies on this issue .
As the author is not present , Question No 8 lapses .
Question No 9 by ( H-0275 / 00 ) :
Subject : Women in the new CFSP decision-making bodies Has the Council provided for any measures for women to be adequately represented in the new CSFP decision-making bodies , or made any recommendations to this effect ?
How many women will there be in the crisis management bodies and the security and conflict-prevention political committee ?
Will the Council be taking due account of the specific contribution women can make to working for peace ?
- ( PT ) The issue raised by the Member is of fundamental importance . It concerns the involvement of women in the common foreign and security policy and the new crisis management structures , such as the security and conflict-prevention political committee .
The Member has asked whether the Council will be taking due account of women ' s particular skills in working for peace . It is quite clear that the contribution of women in working for peace and in other similar respects , particularly in mobilising civil society , is well-known and unquestionable .
We all know , without bothering to be diplomatic about this , that the role and representation of women in the decision-making process , either within the CFSP or generally within other structures , is inadequate .
We all know the efforts made by the international community in this area and we remember the conclusions of the Beijing Declaration of 1995 on this issue .
Next June there will be a Special Session of the UN General Assembly to draw international attention to the need for women to be involved in actions implemented within the Beijing Declaration . In particular , specific measures will be taken to encourage this involvement .
It should be realised that pro-active policies do not work in some areas of the decision-making process .
Greater involvement is needed in political actions , in the training process and in the administrative process in general .
We believe it is impossible to implement just one specific action , for example introducing quotas in the common foreign and security policy structures .
In our opinion , this is not appropriate and the Council has made no proposal in this respect .
However , it is the responsibility of each national government to carry out the necessary reforms of its own system of representation in order to guarantee adequate participation by women .
These issues are now being regulated at European level and recommendations are being made as a result of the Treaty of Amsterdam .
We believe that , as all representation within the European Union is carried out by people from the Member States , it is the latter which are mainly responsible for mobilising as many women as possible who can rise within the decision-making process .
I would like to thank the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Seixas da Costa , very much for his reply , which gives us hope since it demonstrates that the Council understands the problem , is responding politically and perhaps even sympathises with the idea .
Nevertheless , I consider his reply to be basically too retrograde .
The Helsinki and Cologne Summits specifically gave the Portuguese Presidency the job of strengthening this new protection policy .
You have said that you are against quotas but in favour of references .
I would like to ask the Portuguese Presidency : do you not think it would be highly appropriate to include a reference , in the form of a recommendation , in this respect ?
I believe that the role of the European Union should not be to remain behind the United Nations or to be content merely with a reference to what Beijing was about .
The European Union must be progressive .
Women must clearly be involved in political decisions - also decisions with regard to peace - and I ask the Portuguese Presidency to make some reference in this respect .
Mrs Izquierdo Rojo , thank you for the hope which you have placed in the Portuguese presidency . However , I am sure you are aware of the limits of what we can do , particularly in an area such as this .
I have no hesitation in saying this because in my own departments 80 % of the officials are women , even in managerial posts .
It is therefore clear that hope must always be the last resort of political action and that equal opportunities and equal representation of the sexes must be the practical and specific goal in our daily life and actions .
To be totally frank and at the risk of being considered behind the times , I do believe that there are limits to what can be achieved by pro-active political action in this area .
Bearing in mind these limits , it will be rather difficult , when we set out to assess the new common foreign and security policy structures in terms of defence , to say to the Military Committee or the Military Staff that half of their soldiers should be female .
This is because it is up to the Member States whether or not they have female generals or brigadiers .
Mrs Izquierdo Rojo , I cannot raise an issue like this just to appear politically correct . I must always be objectively honest .
Question No 10 by ( H-0276 / 00 ) :
Subject : Participation of research partners from the developing countries in environmental research programmes funded by the EU The key to the development of the developing countries is their ability to participate in development work themselves both as definers of problems and as seekers for solutions .
On the other hand , at EU level this approach is being poorly applied in relation to science and technology projects affecting developing countries .
The EU ' s framework programmes do not extend to the developing countries .
This means that North African partners , for example , are not able to be involved in science and technology projects relating to the environment .
In fact no-one is preventing them from carrying out the research , but there are no funding opportunities , and thus the developing countries have no access to consortia as partners entitled to apply for funding .
Why is this not the case , given that opportunities have been devised for even Russia , for example , to be involved ?
Has the matter been considered from the point of view of the extent to which , for example , desertification in North Africa or the problems of the Mediterranean affect the EU ?
Is the EU prepared to provide greater responsibility in the form of funding to local researchers , so that research activities can combine even after the funding bodies have left , and to ensure that projects can be carried out without the investment of local researchers ?
In 1998 , the European Parliament and the Council adopted the Fifth Framework Programme for Research and Technological Development to run from then until 2002 .
One aspect of this Framework Programme is its four thematic programmes , which define priority areas for research , and its three horizontal programmes .
One of the latter is entitled ' Confirming the international role of Community research ' and is intended to promote scientific and technological cooperation at international level and to help implement Community foreign policy in this area .
The general objectives of this international scientific cooperation are also set out in this Framework Programme and include support for the development of a Euro-Mediterranean partnership and a contribution to the economic , social and scientific development of developing countries .
In December 1998 , the Council also adopted rules on participation by undertakings , research centres and universities and on disseminating research results in order to implement the Fifth Framework Programme .
With regard to the participation of legal entities of third countries and international organisations , all the indirect research activities under the thematic programmes are open to research bodies in Mediterranean non-Community countries and developing countries , in principle without Community financing . The only exception to this involves situations in which Community financing is regarded as absolutely vital to achieve the aims of the activity .
Article 6 of the Framework Programme authorises the participation by entities of third countries in specific research and technological development activities under the horizontal programme on the international role of Community research .
In January last year , the Council adopted the specific programmes for the Fifth Framework Programme which set out the objectives and activities for the various categories of third countries .
With regard to Mediterranean non-Community countries , an indicative allocation of EUR 55 million was established for research and development activities such as integrated coastal management in the Mediterranean , including environmental aspects , water management , natural resource management , conservation and restoration of the cultural heritage , socio-economic modernisation and so on .
With regard to developing countries , an indicative allocation of EUR 210 million was made available for specific activities such as those involving the adoption of innovations , the promotion of a sustainable relationship between population pressure , food safety and the use and management of ecosystems , the improvement of productivity and the prevention of damage to natural resources .
In addition , a grant system was created under a specific programme which allows graduates and doctoral students from developing countries and Mediterranean non-Community countries to work on European projects .
Funds were also allocated for coordination with Community technical assistance programmes , including the MEDA and EDF programmes , and also for Latin America and Asia .
The application of these three decisions is clearly the Commission ' s responsibility , supported by the committees for the relevant programmes .
So far calls for specific proposals aimed at developing and Mediterranean countries have been made with a total budget of EUR 85.5 million .
Mr President-in-Office , I thank you for this reply .
I would , however , like a brief answer that is clearer and more precise .
Do we then have a situation where the developing countries may now apply for funds ?
They were not able to before .
How is the situation different from , for example , that regarding the INTAS and Interreg programmes in Eastern Europe ?
With regard to matters falling within the Commission ' s specific competence , the only promise I can make , in answer to the Member ' s supplementary question and her concerns , is that I will try to obtain a more concise answer which will probably have to be given in writing .
As the author is not present , Question No 11 lapses .
Question No 12 by ( H-0277 / 00 ) :
Subject : Common defence policy at the IGC There is a ' shortlist ' of proposals for the IGC , according to which the Conference will confine itself largely to ' institutional ' issues .
It is generally supposed that Portugal plans to expand the list at the June meeting .
Is this true , and will Portugal then bring the common defence policy onto the agenda for the IGC ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Helsinki European Council authorised the Portuguese presidency to establish the EU ' s interim security and defence structures as from 1 March of this year .
These structures were established on this date . Their activities are currently being developed so that they can assume a more specific and practical form and in particular so that the definitive model which we believe could start to operate next year can be agreed .
In parallel with the work on these practical aspects , a discussion is ongoing within the European Union on determining the mechanisms for participation both by EU Member States which are not members of NATO and by NATO countries which are not EU Member States . This discussion is occurring within the overall context of action on the Petersberg tasks specified in the Treaty of Amsterdam .
The question which has arisen and which has also been raised by the Member - for which I thank you as it is my responsibility to chair the preparatory group of the Intergovernmental Conference - concerns the extent to which this issue may or may not fall within the scope of the IGC .
It will only be placed on the IGC ' s agenda if and when it is confirmed that amendments need to be made to the Treaty on European Union in order to bring these structures into practical operation .
It is still not clear at this stage of our debate within the European Union whether or not amendments to the Treaty will be necessary .
As soon as this becomes clear , we will announce this .
The Portuguese Presidency will present a report to the Feira European Council in June giving an assessment of the state of progress and an opinion on whether or not these issues should be included within the IGC .
If these are to be included , this would only be confirmed during the French Presidency .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , European defence policy is at present being drafted , and different countries are involved in the task .
There are Member States in NATO and there are countries which are not in NATO .
Mr President-in-Office , do you believe that the European Union can frame a defence policy that would be independent of NATO , or will all the new arrangements be in harmony with NATO ' s basic structures ?
Mr Seppänen , your question indicates that you are clearly confused , unless there has been an interpreting error .
We are not talking about defence policy but about crisis management for which powers are now included within the Treaties . The issue in question is not therefore a European defence policy or the creation of a European army .
The issue is crisis management and humanitarian actions which are commonly referred to in Community parlance as the ' Petersberg tasks ' .
All the EU countries , including yours , can make a valuable contribution to this area .
We are trying at the moment not to create a European defence policy but rather a common culture of security allowing us to participate in crisis management .
In this respect , I can see no major problems .
We hope to ensure that all the various cultures which exist within the Union are compatible .
I would thank the Council .
I am nonetheless a little surprised at the answer .
I was under the impression that it was not possible to act if it was a national legal system which had pronounced judgement , because that would amount to interfering in national affairs .
In that way , Article 6 of the Treaty of Amsterdam would really , of course , be revoked , that is to say if action were to be taken on the basis of national legal systems .
It can hardly be intended that a Member State should be able to do whatever it likes as long as it does so via its own legal system .
I would also ask if the Council intends to look more closely into this issue and perhaps examine it in more specific terms .
The crisis management and humanitarian actions specified in the Petersberg tasks to which the Helsinki European Council referred are actions which may be carried out by the European Union .
However , our intention is to guarantee that these actions are totally compatible with what currently exists in the relations between certain EU Member States and the NATO countries .
The reason for this is that the mechanisms and means which exist for managing these crises are not extensive . In fact , most of the time , these means belong to NATO .
As it is the means for military and security action which currently exist within the EU and NATO which will be mobilised , it is therefore essential to guarantee effective cooperation with all the NATO countries , including non-Community countries and particularly the candidate countries such as Turkey , Norway and Iceland .
It is clear that at a much wider level and bearing in mind the dimension of the operations , these actions will also require the involvement of the United States of America and Canada .
We therefore need broad cooperation which aims to guarantee the sharing of responsibility among all those countries which currently have a similar security and defence culture and objective .
Question No 13 by ( H-0283 / 00 ) :
Subject : Violation of the right to freedom of expression The Court of First Instance of Thessaloniki , presided over by a single magistrate , recently banned from circulation a book by the author Mimis Androulakis , describing it as irreverent .
Article 6 of the Treaty of Amsterdam states that the European Union is founded on the principles of liberty , democracy , respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms .
Furthermore , Greece is a contracting party to the European Convention on Human Rights , which guarantees the right to freedom of expression and religious freedom .
In view of these considerations and given that the cornerstone of a people ' s Europe is the fundamental commitment to freedom , pluralism and human rights , what view does the Council take of such a measure and will it intercede with the competent Greek authorities to put an end to the persecution of the author and the ban on his book ?
Mr Papayannakis is asking the Council how it interprets this judgement of the Court of First Instance of Thessaloniki banning from circulation a book by the author Mimis Androlakis which it describes as irreverent .
He is also asking whether the Council intends to intercede with the Greek authorities .
I should like to explain that , under Article 6 ( 1 ) of the Treaty on European Union , as amended by the Treaty of Amsterdam , the Union respects a set of basic principles by reference to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms .
The underlying aim of this article is to establish a kind of political supervision over the actions of Member States and to ensure that democratic principles and values are respected .
It is intended to guarantee the sharing of common values .
However , Article 6 cannot be invoked for the purpose of any type of interference in the administration of the internal affairs of Member States , particularly at judicial level .
The Union has no competence to intercede in the exercise of legal power by the Member States . Therefore , the Council cannot interfere in the decision-making of the authorities .
The judgement delivered by the Court of First Instance of Thessaloniki , which is a judgement of a legal body of a Member State on a specific case , may be subject within the Greek legal system to an appeal to the higher national courts .
Having exhausted this recourse to the Greek courts , there would always be recourse to the Court of Human Rights .
My follow-up question is about how the decision at the Helsinki Summit about military , peacekeeping and peace enforcement operations is to be interpreted .
The decision provides an opportunity for the Applicant States too to participate in the military structures to be established by the EU .
Does this also apply to Turkey which has , of course , applied for membership ?
Does this mean that a door has been opened for military cooperation between Turkey ' s and the European Union ' s forces in , for example , peace enforcement operations ?
Mr Sjöstedt , the Member States undertake to act within the framework determined by the Treaty .
This is why they signed the Treaty .
If a serious and persistent violation of citizens ' rights were to be identified , according to the terms of these articles , then there would clearly be ways of interceding with the Member States .
The Union itself has ways of doing this but only in specific cases .
A case like this , in a democratic country like Greece , meets all the conditions to be judged and handled within the Greek legal system until the capacities for recourse within this system are exhausted .
If we were to intervene in a case like this , we would clearly be transposing to the Community dimension an issue for which there is a whole range of recourse in a country which fully respects human and citizens ' rights .
Thank you very much , Mr Seixas da Costa .
Since the time allotted to Questions to the Council has elapsed , Questions Nos 14 to 31 will be replied to in writing .
That concludes Questions to the Council .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.00 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m. )

Address by Mr Klestil , President of the Republic of Austria
Mr President , you expressed the wish to speak today at our Parliament ' s formal sitting .
It has always been the case that any EU Member State Heads of State who express that wish are received among us with the consideration due to their person , the high office they hold and the nation over which they preside .
( Loud applause ) It is in that spirit that I now welcome you on behalf of the European Parliament .
At the beginning of this year 2000 , the constitution of the present Austrian Government has , as you know , given rise to some strong feelings in all the EU Member States , among their governments as well as their people .
( Loud applause ) In the case of this Parliament , one question broadly transcends any political or national divergences between its Members , and that is their attachment to the values on which the European Union is founded and their determined resistance to the rise in racist and xenophobic ideologies .
( Loud applause ) Mr President , we know that you were not in favour of this coalition , in which an extreme right-wing party has an equal share , and that you spared no efforts to find an alternative solution ...
( Uproar on the far right ) ... and that , before agreeing to what you believed you could not prevent , you demanded and obtained from the political leaders concerned a strong commitment to the values on which the European Union are founded .
( Applause , and protests from the far right ) It is in that context and in a spirit of profound friendship and respect for the Austrian people that we will listen carefully to the message you wished to pass on to the European Parliament .
We have no doubt , Mr President , that it will take account of the very serious concerns our Parliament expressed by an overwhelming majority , on 3 February last .
Without further ado , I therefore give you the floor .
( As President Klestil prepared to take the floor , many left-wing Members left the Chamber .
Interjection from Mrs Muscardini : " So that is democracy , not to give a hearing to speakers ... " )
Financial services and complementary pensions
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A5-0059 / 2000 by Mr García-Margallo y Marfil , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the Commission communication on implementing the framework for financial markets : Action Plan [ COM ( 1999 ) 232 - C5-0114 / 1999 - 1999 / 2117 ( COS ) ] ;
A5-0053 / 2000 by Mr Kuckelkorn , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the Commission communication " Towards a single market for supplementary pensions - Results of the consultations on the Green Paper on supplementary pensions in the single market " [ COM ( 1999 ) 134 - C5-0135 / 1999 - 1999 / 2131 ( COS ) ] .
Before we begin I would like to advise you that , since this is a night sitting and we have a lot of work to get through , I am going to be very strict in applying time limits .
I therefore also ask Members to show an appropriate degree of self-discipline so that we can finish at a reasonable time .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , if I had to point here and now to two complex issues in the economic field , I would no doubt choose the following : the consolidation of the financial markets and the approximation of the direct taxation regulations - specifically tax on savings - which is under discussion .
The debate which we held recently on the bodies for collective investment in transferable securities and the reactions to the report on pension funds , which we will hear shortly , demonstrate the complexity and importance of these issues .
These two issues , the liberalisation of the financial services market and taxation , are dealt with in the action plan which is the subject of my report .
It is therefore appropriate to thank all the groups for their cooperation and confirm once again to the Commission that it can rely on the active cooperation of the European Parliament in the implementation of this plan , and we will not disregard our duties , but exercise them responsibly .
The complexity of the action plan also reflects the ambitious nature of the report presented by the Commission , which contains 43 measures and involves all the sectors in the field ( stock exchanges , banks , investment funds , insurance , etc . ) and which applies to what has come to be called the ' new economy ' , which is - according to the Lisbon Summit - one of the elements which will help to put an end to unemployment in Europe .
What is included in these measures ?
What is intended through these measures ?
In my judgement , to sum up , it is the following : the liberalisation of the financial sectors and the updating of the regulations on supervision and control in order to achieve a European financial market which is at least as competitive as the United States financial market .
In the explanatory statement , I offer a detailed comparison of the two types of market .
In order to achieve these two objectives , the Commission proposes a truly arguable and risky formula : the speeding up of the legal process , which , in turn , would involve three actions .
Firstly , a reduction in the standards which need to be included in a regulation or directive , that is to say , which require the participation of this Parliament .
Secondly , limiting those standards to the definition of the general approaches and basic principles which must be established in this field , allowing the Commission the possibility of implementing them .
Thirdly , granting the Commission broad powers of interpretation .
I do not doubt that we have to speed up the process , Commissioner , but this Parliament is not prepared to relinquish the powers which it has taken so long to acquire .
Therefore , one of the first tasks which we will have to undertake together is to find a model which will satisfy both objectives .
With regard to liberalisation , the first of the tasks which the Commission proposes , the Commission starts from one premise : the consolidation of the single market in financial services requires the removal of the barriers which hinder its operation .
We could not agree more .
The consequence is that , in order for the market to function , these barriers must be removed .
Again we agree , but we know that there are difficulties in this approach resulting from the need to reconcile the objective of liberalisation with the objective of protecting investors .
Firstly , the barriers are not identified .
Commissioner , it is not sufficient to be able to deduce what they are from the measures proposed by the Commission .
Personally , I would have liked to have seen a list of those national measures which , in accordance with the Directive on financial services , are hindering the operation of the market in each country .
Secondly , the solution proposed by the Commission still raises difficulties .
It is ridiculous that a financial company has to operate while being subject to , and having to have knowledge of , fifteen different legislations , but it is at least as ridiculous that an investor - especially a non-professional investor - should end up needing to contract services , bound by regulations which he or she does not know , from companies whose solvency is unknown , and , in the event of legal dispute , he or she has to take action in a foreign country , with foreign jurisdiction and procedures .
Liberalisation must therefore be implemented in parallel with the increase in measures relating to control and taxation .
With regard to control measures , we have a new problem : the need to adapt the competence and jurisdictions of authorities which are still national and which , on the whole , apply differing models , to a different world affected by globalisation , international competition and free movement of capital .
Finally , Mr President , my personal conviction is that , if we do not want liberalisation to give rise to distortions in competition and the flight of capital to more beneficial climates inside and outside the Union , the correct operation of the market in financial services will not be possible without a certain degree of approximation of the laws which regulate savings .
These are the concerns which are raised in my report .
These concerns reflect a constructive attitude towards cooperation with the Commission , which I have always considered to be a loyal ally of this Parliament , in the development of an issue which is so very complex .
Mr President , I am referring , as you have said , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , to the Commission communication on the action plan for the implementation of the framework for the financial markets .
As the main rapporteur , Mr García-Margallo y Marfil , has pointed out , in this regard there are two questions which are , firstly , taxation - without fiscal harmonisation it would be very difficult to establish Community financial markets - and secondly , a legal framework .
With regard to the legal framework , I believe that there is a paradox in this sector .
The more liberalised an economy is , the more necessary it becomes to rigidly regulate the financial markets .
The American economy , which is probably one of the most liberalised economies in existence , is the economy which lays down the most detailed regulations for the financial markets .
The Commission , in its proposal , on page 18 of the Spanish version , after recognising the competence of Parliament by means of codecision , in accordance with Article 251 of the Treaty , tells us that we should move towards very flexible procedures by means of comitology .
Comitology in these cases usually means taking away with one hand what is given with the other .
In this respect , I am in total agreement with the conclusions of the rapporteur .
I believe that we need some very specific legislation and I am sure that the Commission can count on the support of Parliament in the drawing up of this legislation .
As the rapporteur said a moment ago , we cannot expect confidence on the part of investors , consumers and , ultimately , the financial markets , if they do not have a specific legal framework in which to operate .
The only way to do this is to replace the current rigid regulations with a set of specific Community regulations which will produce certainty in this very delicate sector of the economy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy deplores the fact that the action plan for the financial markets does not take into account the problems which industry , small and medium-sized businesses in particular , is facing with regard to financing cross-border activities .
Many businesses , ranging from small businesses in border areas to large multinationals , would like to treat their accounts as one national account .
For example , they would like to use funds in their euro account in country A to settle an account in debit in country B. In this way , they would pay less interest .
Existing legislation , however , prohibits or hinders this type of cash management technique .
The world of banking has already driven this problem home to you on numerous occasions .
On behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , I would now like to ask the Commissioner whether it would be possible to set up a forum group which carries out market research into the legal and fiscal obstacles for businesses , SMBs , in particular , when they finance their cross-border transactions within the euro zone , in order to solve this problem .
I would appreciate a reply to this .
Mr President , in view of the Resolution of 3 December 1998 , to which the Kuckelkorn report does not appear to contain a reference , Parliament once again is obliged to request that the Commission produce as soon as possible a directive or , as Mr Medina Ortega appropriately suggested , a Community law coordinating the various national laws .
The Commission appears to be somewhat apathetic in this regard , and seems to be concentrating rather on producing a directive on prudential rules for pension funds , which is easier to achieve but less effective in terms of decision-making in relation to the elimination of barriers to labour mobility and the coordination of taxation systems .
The legal bases are very important , and , clearly , different : in view of the various judgements delivered by the Court of Justice , pension funds could be governed by Article 47 and Article 55 , the removal of barriers to labour mobility could be governed by Article 42 and the coordination of national tax systems by Article 94 .
However , I would stress the need and the desirability to develop a single package , because this is the only way to achieve an overall framework which tones down the extreme positions contained in certain proposals for amendments .
I refer , in particular , to biometric risks , which are a very important factor but which should be dealt with on the basis of paragraphs 7 and 8 of the opinion drawn up by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market .
Indeed , making cover for biometric risks obligatory would be likely to make the system very inflexible .
I therefore feel that funds which cover biometric risks should receive privileged treatment , and that any inflexibility of the system could , in effect , result in negative imbalances for the beneficiaries .
Mr President , we see the reality of the situation all around us .
If 23 % of Europe ' s population is over 65 years old today , this figure will have reached 40 % by 2025 , and the proportion of four working people to every retired person will have become two working people to every retired person by 2020 .
This demonstrates the pressing need to allow the development of supplementary self-funded high return pension schemes in the European Union to usefully supplement state contributory pension schemes .
As we all know , our Member States are working towards ambitious structural reforms , but it is also up to the European Union to intervene in the area of pensions , particularly supplementary pensions , in order to facilitate the free movement of workers in the context of the single market , to establish a genuine single capital market and also to ensure that equality between men and women is respected .
With this in mind , the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs has been concerned to reconcile the security and efficiency of supplementary pensions for future pensioners as it is true that the guarantee of a high level of security for beneficiaries encourages healthy and desirable competition between European pension funds .
This is why our Committee feels that the proposal for a directive on Community prudential regulations applying to pension funds must be tabled and adopted as quickly as possible , bearing in mind our discussion today , with proper guarantees for the external and internal supervision of the funds concerned and for the calculation of their prudential commitment .
Furthermore , in order to encourage the free movement of workers , we felt it essential to quickly improve the transferability and the acquisition of pension rights from supplementary schemes from different European countries .
This is the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
. ( FR ) Mr President , I would like to say first of all in this debate that we are expecting to see a proposal for a framework-directive very soon , which will guarantee the development of a genuine single market for supplementary pension funds under the second and third pillars , given that the first pillar , which covers all biometric risks , must remain the cornerstone of the European Union ' s social protection system .
This directive must in particular establish a framework to remove obstacles to the free choice of a pension fund , to the free movement of people , to the free provision of services and to charging double taxes .
We recommend a solution based on the principle that contributions should be tax-deductible , and that supplementary invested income should be taxed in accordance with the income tax law in force in the country of residence .
On the controversial issue of whether supplementary pension schemes should cover biometric risks , I wish to state that from the point of view of taxation , pension funds that do not cover these risks will not be discriminated against in relation to those that do .
With regard to prudential regulation , this should not be disproportionate , so that the security of the fund is guaranteed .
That covers the general framework .
I am grateful to the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs for having included all the relevant conclusions of the Committee on Women ' s Rights and Equal Opportunities in the motion for a resolution .
I now come to the report by Mr García-Margallo y Marfil .
With regard to the action plan which seeks to deepen the internal financial services market , I would like to issue a warning about certain strategists who are attempting to hold the liberalisation of the financial services sector hostage , because the work that has been undertaken on the taxation of savings has not made the progress they would have wanted .
As matters currently stand , we should remember that a single market for capital and financial services can function perfectly well without tax harmonisation .
Faced with proposals that confuse ambition and reality , I wish to emphasise that establishing a European Committee for stock exchange operations is certainly not the number one priority and , as I have no speaking time left , Mr President , I will give an explanation of vote tomorrow to say the rest of what I still wanted to say , because as draftsperson of the Committee ' s opinion and as a speaker on the second report , it is really impossible to say everything in two minutes .
Mr President , representatives of the Commission and the Council , Mr Kuckelkorn , ladies and gentlemen , firstly I would like to thank the Commission for the sterling work they have done .
The communication from the Commission is liberal-minded and forward-looking .
Why should Parliament now adopt a less liberal position and vote in favour of stagnating structures ?
We should not define the form and scope of the directive too narrowly .
What we need to do instead is to view the issue openly and from a wider perspective .
It is essential that we do not define the nature and scope of the risk coverage in a restrictive way .
Instead , we should be open-minded and look at the issue from a wider perspective and encourage a framework which is based on liberal markets and vigorous competition between different types of pension schemes .
What we should promote is the freedom of choice of the employee and the employer to choose the kind of scheme that best suits their interests
The question of biometric risks has proved to be of a controversial nature .
My firm opinion is that all the different pension schemes should be covered by the same directive in order not to protect certain types of schemes from competition .
Consumers and employers must have the right to choose the most suitable form of pension scheme and , therefore , schemes covering biometric risks should be treated under the same directive as schemes not covering these risks .
Both form a pension scheme but focus on different competitive benefits .
Mr Kuckelkorn , no-one in this Parliament is of the opinion that supplementary pensions should not cover the longevity risk , through the purchase of an annuity or by some other tool .
It is not the task of the European Union to define the nature and scope of the risk coverage concerning other biometric risks .
But it should be determined individually by each employee , as the Commission proposes .
Leaving this kind of decision to the individual is consistent with the principle of subsidiarity .
Allowing supplementary pension scheme managers the freedom to invest in a diverse range of instruments increases the security of the overall investment portfolio .
Increased freedom promotes the functioning of the capital market and has a significant impact on the growth of venture capital in Europe .
I am committed to the idea that we , as the European Parliament , should encourage healthy competition and the freedom of choice of the individual .
This must not only mean a single market for supplementary pensions , but the whole package of legislation concerning the financial services .
Mr President , the Socialists support the Commission ' s efforts to establish a transparent and fluid internal financial services market .
It is in the interest of economic operators and all consumers that the costs of capital and financial intermediation should be as low as possible .
European financial markets are currently suffering from compartmentalisation along national lines , even though , following the globalisation of the international financial system , we are seeing the widespread phenomenon of mergers and internationalisation .
The action plan aims to make the European market equal to the American market .
The success of the American market is basically due to ' king dollar ' .
It is paradoxical in this context to note that some of the most ardent supporters of financial liberalisation at the same time oppose the euro .
The real introduction of the euro in 2002 , however , will result in transparency and competition , which will force the national markets to adapt more quickly than they had anticipated .
The problem is that the legislative bodies , both national and European , are taking a long time to adapt the law to reality .
Personally , I would not be opposed to an accelerated legislative procedure , on condition that it does not end up as a mere exercise for non-accountable technocrats .
The Commission could make a useful contribution in the form of proposals simplifying and codifying the 11 or so directives that govern the banking sector , the 8 directives on investment funds , and the 21 directives dealing with the insurance sector .
There is not only a problem of coherence in the various legislations on the different sectors of the financial world , but in particular there is the problem of supervising and protecting the public interest .
John Kenneth Galbraith condemned the mistaken idea that there is any link between money and intelligence .
The lure of profit is such that the financial world tends to create a form of collective euphoria , which often leads to financial crisis .
The free movement of capital must be accompanied by an efficient regulatory and prudential framework , because supervision of the various markets is divided up according to country and sector , but at the same time , as a result of mergers , acquisitions and amalgamations , boundaries between banks , insurance companies , investment funds and pension funds are disappearing .
Finland and the United Kingdom have drawn conclusions from this and have established a single prudential authority for the whole sector .
Article 105 ( 6 ) of the Treaty stipulates that the Council can entrust the ECB with specific tasks relating to policies on the prudential supervision of credit companies and other financial companies , with the exception of insurance companies .
Should the Council not use the Intergovernmental Conference to establish the necessary legal basis for the Council to be able to entrust the ECB with certain specific tasks relating to the prudential supervision of insurance companies too ?
I must congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Kuckelkorn , for the tenacity with which he argues in favour of supplementary pensions and for these to become in effect a second pillar of insurance for old age .
I shall conclude , Mr President , by pointing out that it amounts to saying that whilst we should not discard insurance products we must favour products which cover biometric risks .
Mr President , Commissioner , if Europe is to grow , attract capital and create jobs , the single market for financial services must be turned into a reality .
Up until now , it has mostly been a matter of words and all too few concrete measures .
At present , the financial services market and , through this , Europe ' s power to grow have been impeded by countless national regulations and administrative complications .
These are detrimental not only to companies but also , of course , to Europe ' s citizens .
The development of the Internet is , and will be , of great importance to the provision of financial services across national borders .
Above all , it is consumers who will benefit from this development because they will have greater choice and access to lower prices .
We Liberals do not regard tax harmonisation as a prerequisite for bringing the single market for financial services to fruition , even if a degree of harmonisation may prove to be necessary to avoid harmful competition over taxes .
The euro has stabilised economic development and provided better opportunities to reduce the costs of acquiring capital , something which benefits both companies and private households .
It is my conviction that , if the EU is to be able to provide Europe ' s citizens with growth and strength , then all Member States must participate fully in the EU project , that is to say , be members of EMU .
Mr Romano Prodi ' s statement today in a Swedish newspaper to the effect that Sweden could stay outside EMU is therefore both surprising from an economic point of view and doubtful in terms of the Treaties .
The Commission ' s Green Paper on liberalising complementary forms of pension protection is something we welcome .
It is nonetheless important to emphasise that pension cover in Europe is characterised by national diversity and that there is no need to harmonise the various systems in order to create a single market .
It is important that a large number of systems should exist side by side .
This increases choice and diversity .
However , it is desirable , in order to avoid double taxation , to introduce a minimum degree of harmonisation in regard to the Member States ' treatment of supplementary pensions for tax purposes .
I also consider that the Member States themselves should be able to determine what the system should look like , for example whether or not the care of relatives should be covered by pensions .
This is an issue which can be resolved better at national level .
In committee there was lively discussion on biometric risks .
Views were put forward to the effect that only those systems which cover risks of this kind are to be included under the directive .
We do not believe that this should be the case , especially in view of the need for small and medium-sized companies to be able to do business .
Freedom of choice is emphatically a good thing .

Finally , I want to congratulate Mr García-Margallo y Marfil and Mr Kuckelkorn for two important reports designed to create a competitive Europe .
Mr President , where supplementary pensions are concerned , the crucial issue is whether one wants to provide pensioners with security in their old age or to reinforce Europe ' s capital markets .
These are not only two quite different goals , but it is also difficult to combine them in one and the same system .
The Commission ' s proposal and both the reports we are debating today give priority to the needs of the capital market .
The hope is that the market-based pensions will then also prove to be good for pensioners in thirty or forty years ' time .
How matters will turn out , however , we do not know .
If one considers how Europe has changed during the last thirty to forty years and acknowledges that circumstances are going to change just as much in the future , then one can see how uncertain such forecasts are .
There is a large deficit when it comes to security and solidarity in the pensions area because the risk is so great and because there can never be enough security and solidarity .
Supplementary assurances are therefore a problem .
They are , of course , much less secure than a system of basic pensions which has been financed on the basis of solidarity .
I also believe that supplementary assurances and supplementary pensions may be needed , but then their managers ought to be obliged to invest in such instruments as provide solid savings in the long term , instead of having short-term rates on the stock exchange and global financial capitalism determine how matters will stand for pensioners in the future .
I also believe it would have been commendable if these supplementary pension systems could have been run as pension funds on the basis of solidarity under the aegis of trade unions , as happens in certain Member States .
Even if these too are market-based , they offer much more in terms of stability and security than the privatised pension assurances .
It now looks as if we are to have a liberal arrangement in the pensions field in Europe , and I shall therefore advise my voters to invest their surplus funds in safer instruments than private pension assurances .
To young people I would say : pin your hopes on education and on developing your skills .
And to older people I would say : acquire a nice , inexpensive place to live in the autumn of your years .
We politicians ought to be putting our faith in a good , sound system of basic pensions .
Mr President , the European Commission ' s Green Paper has caused many to reach for their pens , so much so that in the motion for a resolution , the objective of the Green Paper has been lost almost completely .
Similarly , the intention of the rapporteur , Mr Kuckelkorn , who has carried out a vast amount of work , for which I would like to thank him , is not expressed very well in the motion for a resolution .
It is now up to us to see that an acceptable document is produced tomorrow during the vote .
The principal aim is for workers , when they move to another Member State , to be able to transfer their supplementary pension schemes and continue to pay into them without forfeiting their pension rights and with a guarantee that their accumulated pension rights will retain their value .
Unfortunately , the Commission has not really made any headway towards fulfilling this wish .
We have a long way to go before the compulsory transfer of value between Member States will be a reality .
The first obstacle we need to negotiate is the mutual recognition of supervisory rules .
It is then important that an adequate distinction is drawn between pension funds and commercial insurance companies .
A pension fund has an obligation to be generally acceptable .
A full-value pension scheme covers biometric risks .
Insurance companies do offer their participants a choice , and their products do not cover biometric risks .
Since the risks covered are not identical , government inspection will also vary for pension funds and insurance companies .
On account of this supervision , complete freedom of investment is justified in both cases .
This leads on average to higher returns .
We need to avoid creating a situation where the individual is forced , on account of significantly lower returns on pension funds , to enter the wild investment woods in search of their supplementary pension schemes , where the big bad wolf is after their money .
The second obstacle is the levying of taxes within the Member States .
Taking into account the fast approaching ageing of the population , it is desirable for fiscal systems to promote the development of supplementary pensions .
The EET model , where premium payments are tax-free and the retirement payout is taxed , meets this requirement and is also common in most Member States .
I hope that Parliament and the Commission will make the internal market for supplementary pension schemes a reality along these lines .
Mr President , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , I would like to express my opinion on the single market for supplementary pensions .
Firstly , I would like to express my agreement with the model based on the intergenerational solidarity of the basic state systems , to which are added the supplementary capitalisation systems .
On the other hand , I would also like to express my agreement with what Mr Kuckelkorn says in relation to the correlation established between pension systems which cover biometric risks .
We are not talking about systems for financial investment but about pension plans .
On the other hand , we are also in agreement with the participation of workers and the urgent harmonisation of the tax provisions .
Nevertheless , we have to clarify the basic concept of pensions in a way which includes the supplementary pension schemes which cover biometric risks .
It is necessary to clarify , on the other hand , that the single system applies to every type of worker in the European Union ; there are not only workers who work for themselves in the European Union but also many cooperative workers , fortunately .
We must opt for collective systems , but not only company systems - something which is mentioned in the report - but also sectoral ones , taking particular account of SMBs , which have been mentioned by Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel .
We must take account of the great difficulties which exist within the Union with regard to the development of supplementary systems .
We therefore understand and support the regulatory and supervisory systems for the protection of the rights of participants , but we must put the emphasis on the areas where systems are still underdeveloped , in aspects such as providing information or implementing new plans .
Finally , I would like to underline our support for the creation of a European pension fund with the participation of the different economic sectors and the pension providers .
Mr President , the ageing of the population and the reduction in the numbers of people of working age , while real enough , have been put forward by the Commission and other Members as a reason to open up the way for pension funds for supplementary pension schemes .
The dynamic of growth and job creation has run its course .
The capitalisation mechanisms mean adapting retirement pensions to the single market and the introduction of the euro .
Moving in this direction entails the risk of a system based on private insurance , which would gradually replace social security .
Welfare and retirement pensions would no longer be rights but would be commodities subject to the laws of the market .
The set pension fund strategy essentially aims to drain savings away toward the financial markets .
A system of this type is very dangerous and deeply unfair as it benefits the richest people , those who can save money , and leaves the poorest with a pittance of a retirement pension .
Mr Kuckelkorn ' s initial report considered the retirement pension primarily as social insurance against certain life risks , rather than a process of accumulating capital .
It has been radically changed , however , by the adoption of amendments unreservedly supporting the mechanisms of capitalisation .
I cannot , therefore , approve this report which makes the Commission ' s approach even worse .
On the contrary , we think that a high level of social protection must be maintained , based on solidarity , regardless of financial profitability .
The contributory system guarantees the rights of the employed and provides them with a pension , in the framework of national solidarity between the working population and the retired population , between generations , between men and women , between the public and the private sectors .
The objective should be to obtain new resources and to upgrading the purchasing power of retirement pensions from contributions which could be raised from taxes on financial products at the same level as those which apply to wages .
Employers ' contributions should be linked to companies ' employment policies and taxes set up on those which make people redundant .
Mr President , as medical advances contribute to a steady ageing of our populations , the burden of pension provision throughout the Union becomes ever more costly .
In the UK , as in the US , Chile and Singapore and , to a lesser extent , the Netherlands , the burden on the state and succeeding generations has been significantly eased through the successful provision of supplementary second and third pillar private and occupational pension schemes , involving funds which grow to provide pension benefits following the retirement of the individuals .
Both pillars have the advantage of being resistant to demographic change , and third-pillar portable schemes , in particular , which are not restricted to single companies , enhance labour mobility and choice for the investors and are much more affordable to small and medium enterprises .
I welcome the fact that there is widespread recognition in this House to extend these supplementary schemes throughout Europe , even if there are disagreements over their precise nature and the way that the funds are to be invested .
The problem needs to be addressed urgently in my opinion , with demographic pressures in recent years already generating deficits in the pay-as-you-go schemes in France , Germany , Italy and Spain .
It is even predicted that if the current trend continues some countries will be facing costs of up to 20 % of their GDP in the next ten years for their pension liabilities .
There are , of course , many risks with equity investments , but there are even greater risks to Europe with stagnant economies .
Growing pension funds will dynamise our economies by providing large additional capital funds for investment not only in the EU , but also in developing markets , with greater prospects for future growth and returns on investment for our pensioners .
In the case of defined contribution schemes , which give the investor a direct stake in the overall health of the national economy , there will also be a sense of participation in the country of that individual .
The state scheme will of course remain the primary mechanism for basic provision in old age .
But personal responsibility and choice will become the watchwords of success if the demographic challenges of the coming century are to be met successfully .
That is why we should not be too prescriptive regarding the issues of biometric risks or investment strategies .
We need a light-touch regulatory framework , with bilateral tax agreements , which will ensure the portability for those EU nationals wishing to work abroad throughout the Union , achieve a genuine single market in financial services and provide maximum choice to the European investor .
Mr President , this report seeks to harmonise supplementary pensions in Europe .
In fact , it seeks nothing less than to open up all European pension schemes to the financial markets .
Indeed , it recommends the development of a truly single pension fund market by referring to the inevitability of resorting to capitalisation .
It should be noted , by the way , that when the financial interests of the most powerful are involved , they are not slow to forget the principle of solidarity and to propose a single model .
This report puts forward cynical arguments and seeks to give credence to the idea that only capitalisation would ensure better protection of low incomes .
The truth is that it is not an attempt to supplement state pension schemes , but rather to gradually empty them of all substance .
Those who are employed know full well , however , that a pension is theirs by right .
They fought for this right , which is based on intergenerational solidarity .
That is why they do not , under any circumstances , want to see their pensions gambled on the stock exchange .
In several countries , powerful social movements have already opposed similar attempts .
Their threats have to this day prevented the French government , for example , from introducing pension funds .
This is in perfect harmony with past , present and future struggles , and it is in support of them that we shall be voting against a report that reduces this Parliament to the level of a lobby for high finance .
Retired people need an adequate , stable and safe pension .
Pension funds and the stock exchange will never be able to guarantee that .
On this issue , as on many others , a choice must be made between increasing the profits of a few or satisfying the needs of all .
Mr President , I would like to start by paying tribute to Mr Kuckelkorn , because he has drafted a courageous report in my opinion , given Germany ' s rigid and inflexible pension situation .
He clearly wants to take steps towards developing a European internal market for supplementary pension schemes .
I think he deserves tribute for this .
I myself come from a country where a very extensive second pillar of supplementary pensions exists .
Almost 90 % of the professional population in the private sector are in pension schemes which guarantee a wage-related pension .
This also includes small and medium-sized businesses .
With a capacity of over EUR 150 billion , the pension fund of Dutch civil servants is the largest institutional investor of its kind within the international capital market .
Pension funds in the Netherlands are daring to take increasing risks in their investments .
In 1999 , nearly half of the pension money was invested in shares , albeit under strict prudential conditions .
But the average return over the past five years has been around 15 % , instead of the usual 4 % .
It has been shown that it is precisely the compulsory nature of participation in collective pension funds which encourages these excellent results .
The fact that funds are spread over generations and risks means that the funds can invest in shares to such a high level .
On balance , this yields a far better return for individual members , much better than they could ever achieve on their own via a savings plan or investment fund .
Therefore , I must open Mrs Kauppi ' s eyes and disprove her reasoning that individual workers would be better off making their own choices , even if they belong to the fortunate ones who do not have any hereditary diseases , who are young and male , because , unfortunately , Mrs Kauppi , we women are even worse off under individual schemes as we live longer than men on average .
Consequently , I would strongly discourage you from formulating a principle of free choice at European level .
If I were you , I would leave this to the Member States and the free market .
As for biometric risks , other speakers have already talked enough about this .
I fully endorse Mr Kuckelkorn in this respect and would argue that such a definition is very important because we are expecting a number of additional directives from the European Commission .
Mr President , we are voting against this report advocating self-funded pension schemes .
This system restricts employees who want to guarantee a retirement pension for themselves that will give them enough to live on , to make their money available to investment funds , trusts , insurance companies or other private financial groups .
At the same time , it makes the value of pensions subordinate to the financial markets , in other words , to speculation .
What is more , all those whose salaries are too low for them to be able to pay into a pension fund will be entitled only to a very meagre pension .
Referring to demographic changes in order to justify this is a swindle .
Productivity has increased tenfold in the last fifty years and if company owners and shareholders had not transformed the fruits of this productivity into purely private profit , it would now enable salaries to be higher and would guarantee appropriate pensions for everyone .
If contributory pension schemes are having problems , it is only because there are fewer employed people in proportion to the number of retired people , because there are too many unemployed and because salaries are too low .
So , if there is a shortfall in pension funds , States should take over by deducting the necessary amounts from the profits of industrial and financial groups .
Mr President , the ageing of the European population means that we will have huge problems when it comes to footing the bill for our statutory pension schemes .
Member States where supplementary schemes are under-developed compared to statutory pension schemes will feel the pinch most .
Unfortunately , we are forced to note that this is the case for the majority of Member States .
A developed collective system of supplementary pensions , compulsory if so required by the relevant Member State , considerably reduces the dependence on demographic factors and enables the pension fund , in the role of investor , to derive maximum benefit from the possibilities which financial markets have to offer .
Needless to say , the objective of making employees more mobile and flexible within a large single European market and the euro zone will inevitably lead to interest in supplementary pension schemes .
One of the philosophies underlying the European Union and the Monetary Union requires that the internal market should be used to the full .
As such , you , as a worker , should be able to take your accumulated pension rights with you to another European country .
To this end , we need to develop a legal framework at European level at the earliest opportunity .
Why should a German employee , for example , have to wait ten years before he has built up a pension and a Dutch person only one year ?
As such , this German person suffers a considerable handicap with regard to mobility .
What is more , the fiscal treatment of pensions at the time when contributions are made and at the time of payout should be brought into line .
Commissioner , you deal with taxes , what is the latest on this score ?
I have to say that this parliamentary discussion seems to be more about a complete harmonisation than coordination .
This , unfortunately , is at the expense of Member States which already have their house in order .
One such country is the Netherlands , initially presented as a role model for all other Member States and gradually relegated to curiosity status .
But the Dutch system is a worthy system which accepts old age , surviving dependants and vulnerable groups within the labour market as they are .
The supplementary pension scheme is based on collective feeling and solidarity .
This enables SMBs - and specifically SMBs with reference to the UK MEPs - to cover biometric risks at relatively low cost .
Top of the list are payability and security , which is not the case for the proposals submitted by some MEPs .
Mr Bolkestein , how do you intend to bring the discussion back to the crux of the matter , namely mobile pensions for mobile people ?
Mr President , firstly can I say that the EMAC report is pretty good and I hope we do not amend it too much .
The key word is " supplementary " pensions .
We are not trying to relieve poverty or provide a basic income in retirement .
The second point is that it is important that we provide decent pensions to enable citizens to move around Europe .
So I welcome the emphasis on removing the restrictions on the investment of pension fund portfolios and support the objective of removing barriers to labour mobility .
The key is to keep it simple or it will not work , it will not remove the obstacles .
As Mr Tannock has said , there are demographic pressures upon us and it is in our interest to facilitate the development of supplementary pension schemes both around Europe and also in many countries within Europe .
On the issue of biometric risks , which we have heard a lot about , clearly a pension by definition has one biometric risk , which is longevity .
Once you start building on top of that , you are on dangerous ground if you make it a condition of a passport .
What we need is to have a very simple proposition , and then let the market sort the rest of it out because that is what the market is for .
The biometric risks problem means many different things to different people .
We must try and get a simple product which is marketable and can be moved around this market , because if we do not , we will end up with a product that does not work at all that the different Member States cannot make use of .
So the key is to keep it simple and make it work .
Mr President , for how long will workers be forced to sacrifice one-third of their salary to government and state pension funds , in the hope of receiving a pension in their old age , while those government and state funds are so designed that they make pensions vanish faster than Houdini himself could have done ?
Mrs Laguiller , the people trusted the states and the governments , especially the pledges made by left-wing governments , but they have been left with peanuts .
Every day , thousands upon thousands of elderly people reach retirement age and ask their governments , " Where are our pensions ? "
And the governments reply , " You are living too long and there is no more money left to give you " , concealing the truth .
And what is the truth ?
The governments have squandered the funds and made off with the workers ' salaries .
Shame on the Socialist governments for failing to provide for workers in their old age !
Despite the fact that there may now be a way of safeguarding this capital - the sweat of the brows of the workers - by capitalising pension funds , we are told that we must not do this , because the national governments want to get their hands on private pension funds as well .
It is time to change the tune . We must give to Caesar what is Caesar ' s and to God what is God ' s .
Mr President , we are facing a difficult issue , as evidenced by the large number of speakers .
I would like to extend warm thanks to Mr Kuckelkorn as rapporteur , for the huge effort he has made to achieve this report .
I am slightly less pleased with Mr Kuckelkorn ' s tabling of amendments , because he has tabled a great many and they go beyond the requirements of the current objective .
I think that we should differentiate between the two Kuckelkorns .
I believe that the systems we should pursue in Europe should be based on two principles .
One of them is simply the statutory pay-as-you-go system and the other is the system of capital cover which is an extension of the former , it is just that the only problem we are facing is that all countries have very different starting positions .
It is true that a country such as the Netherlands has managed to strike a fine balance between the two .
Other countries have managed to do this to a lesser extent .
Also , for example , countries where nearly all pensions are capital cover systems , such as Great Britain , do not meet expectations because , although the risks for the government are reasonably small , the cover for the retired is extremely modest .
In England , if there is a hard frost , for example , people are unable to pay their bills .
I do not think that this is the right way forward .
First and foremost , we need to remember that this is about people and based on this , we must develop a system which makes sound pension schemes possible , and we must , as far as we can , leave this task to the Member States .
We should keep intervention to a minimum .
We need to bear our starting point in mind , namely that if people move from one country to another to work or retire , it should be possible for them to take their pensions with them .
The Commission has always attempted to do this and I do believe that it has succeeded in its aim .
I think that two issues still need tackling .
Firstly , risks tied in with the second and third pillars should be sufficiently covered , because far too little has been said about this .
Secondly , the first pillar should at long last be defined , as the first pillar in one country is quite different from that in another country .
And if we could bring all of this a bit closer together , we would perhaps have far fewer problems than we have at the moment .
Mr President , may I start by extending warm thanks to both rapporteurs , Mr García-Margallo y Marfil and Mr Kuckelkorn , for the reports they have drafted and the efforts they have made .

In fact , could I also warmly thank all other speakers this evening - nearly thirty of them - for the comments they have made and questions they have asked .
This is an important matter , both the action plan for financial services and the pension issue , and it is heartening to see so many speakers take part in the exchange of opinions .
As far as Mr García-Margallo y Marfil ' s report is concerned , I would like to note that , according to the Commission , it is an even-handed report which strikes the right balance between an important political vision and the technical measures required in order to make progress .
Perhaps you will allow me to make a few observations in this respect . I hope , at the same time , to comment on the amendments which have been tabled .
The Commission welcomes the attention which the report pays to the need for capital markets to function to optimum effect .
In this context , I would also refer to Parliament ' s request for streamlined rules for stock market access , market manipulation and revision of the investment services directive .
The opening up of financial markets should , naturally , go hand in hand with an adequate level of consumer protection , and this was also requested this evening in this debate .
They are thus parallel processes , with liberalisation on one side and consumer protection on the other , and these are the two objectives which you will find wherever financial markets are at issue .
These are the European Commission ' s twin objectives .
We also have a few specific proposals in this respect .
Firstly , we would propose the provision of better information on financial products for citizens .
Secondly , we would like to see better and clearer dispute procedures for citizens who are dissatisfied with foreign financial dealers .
Thirdly , we would propose better harmonisation for the present national consumer protection rules .
The fourth proposal concerns electronic commerce , or e-commerce for short .
Policy and legislation should make provision for e-commerce without creating unnecessary barriers .
Our citizens , on the other hand , must experience the same level of confidence and protection for transactions on-line as they do off-line .
Finally , an adequate supervisory structure is essential to guarantee the financial solvency of our institutions .
Does this mean that the European Central Bank in Frankfurt will be given a central supervisory role ?
The ECB itself is of the opinion that this is not necessary .
There is in fact an alternative , to wit , a coming together of supervisory systems .
At this juncture , Mr President , I would like to bring up a remark made by Mrs Randzio-Plath .
It is an important remark .
Mrs Randzio-Plath has picked up some noises from the OECD and mentioned the word mega-risk .
Indeed , I think she is right to indicate the risks which can be inherent in financial movements .
She has referred to large mergers which are taking place and , without necessarily sharing her view regarding these risks , I would also like to refer to statements made by Mr Lamfalussi , who is well-known within the European financial system , and who has also indicated the need to be able to cope adequately with the financial risks and system risks which are heading our way .
This is a very important matter .
I still believe that coordination , cooperation and harmonisation of supervisory systems are enough to withstand the risks , but , once again , in the interest of the case itself , I would like to draw the attention of Mrs Randzio-Plath and other members of this meeting to a report recently drafted by Mr Brouwer , second-in-command at the Central Bank in the Netherlands .
This report was commissioned by the Economic and Financial Committee , which , as you are aware , is the gateway to the ECOFIN Council , and the report deals with financial stability .
The report will be made available shortly .
No doubt you will be able to find it on the Internet .
This report deals with the issue which is close to Mrs Randzio-Plath ' s heart and once again , I would strongly recommend all members attending this meeting to read it .
Well , most of the points I mentioned a moment ago can be found in the draft report of the rapporteur , Mr García-Margallo y Marfil , and also in many of the tabled amendments .
In sum , I would like to say that we will undoubtedly continue to discuss the nuts and bolts but as far as the main points are concerned , I do consider Mr García-Margallo y Marfil ' s report as welcome confirmation of the Commission ' s vision .
I would now like to say a few words on the way in which a number of these measures need to be implemented , the need to take a close look at our legislative ethos and the way in which legislation is established .
Everyone is currently in agreement that we need to drop over-complicated , fossilised legislation , in other words , rules which cannot keep pace with fast market development .
Accordingly , the process by which the European Union , i.e. the concerted efforts of Commission , Parliament and Council , lays down rules should be quicker .
But how exactly can this be done ?
There are quite a few different ideas and quite a few misconceptions , because if Mr García-Margallo y Marfil tells me that the European Parliament does not want to give up any of the powers it has only recently acquired , then I naturally share his view .
I myself have been a Member of Parliament for a long time , so I fully understand where Mr García-Margallo y Marfil is coming from .
In fact , this is not the Commission ' s intention , even if it was authorised to take decisions in this respect , which is not the case .
Nonetheless , we need to proceed faster in order to lay down the necessary rules .
I would invite the Members of this Parliament to come up with any ideas as to how we could speed up and enhance the process .
Should we make more use of comitology procedures ?
Should more weight be given to agreement reached between the institutions upon first reading ?
At any rate , the Commission intends to keep Parliament and the competent committees informed of the agendas more quickly and more effectively , so that these agendas can be better harmonised and we can speed up the drafting of the required legislation .
In any event , I would like to keep this Parliament informed of all the developments regarding the action plan .
Every six months , we send a progress report to the ECOFIN Council and it seems to me that these reports could be used to exchange views with Parliament on this matter .
Mr President , most speakers have expressed their thoughts on the issue of pensions and I would like to say the following on this matter .
In its communication on pensions , the Commission has included proposals on three fronts .
The first area is prudential rules for pension funds , and protecting pension scheme members should take centre stage .
There is no question that rules could be introduced which could threaten the rights of future pensioners .
This is beyond dispute .
However , this does not detract from the fact that investment and management rules can also serve the interests of people other than pension scheme members .
In fact futile provisions that inhibit the results of investments , do pension scheme members no favours and must be repealed for this reason .
Secondly , the coordination of national tax systems is a condition for cross-border participation .
Mrs Peijs has asked me when we are getting mobile pensions for mobile people ?
Other Members too , such as Mr von Wogau and others , have talked about the need to enhance the mobility of workers within the European Union .
As already stated , this does not require harmonisation ( a word we need to use with discretion because it conjures up incorrect associations in certain Member States ) so much as coordination .
So it requires the coordination of tax systems which differ in terms of tariffs .
This coordination is a precondition for cross-border labour mobility .
The Commission is in the process of drafting a proposal , a general framework , intended to facilitate the payment of contributions by occupational pension institutions which are located in other Member States .
This general framework has also been requested , of course , in this meeting by Mr Medina Ortega , for example , while Mrs Peijs has also indicated the need to set up this general framework .
Moreover , I would like to refer to the constant jurisprudence of the Court of Justice .
This jurisprudence has demonstrated that the restrictions which apply to cross-border contributions and premiums are at odds with the Treaty .
The Commission ' s third objective is to remove the obstacles which migrant workers are faced with .
More than anything , and this is also underlined in the draft report - rightly so - we should facilitate the transferability of rights from one Member State to another , and this is also very much in the interests of employee mobility , of course .
Mr President , concerning the motion for a resolution , I would first of all like to remark that this Parliament ' s support is crucially important if we want to translate these proposals into specific measures .
It was with great interest that I read the sterling report of the rapporteur , Mr Kuckelkorn , and the competent committees , a report that so far has covered an extensive and technically complex area .
I did not fail to notice that Parliament is backing the lines of policy proposed by the Commission .
With regard to the motion for a resolution , I would like to make the following brief comments .
The motion presses for the general introduction of the tax levy model that relies on the taxation of the pension payout whilst providing for tax exemption for contributions to the fund and returns on the fund . The desirability of this model was once again underlined this evening by Mr Blokland , among others .
Mr Blokland pointed this out and I share his view on this .
This is also echoed in the motion for a resolution .
Agreement on this approach would solve the problems of either double taxation or no taxation , which is what citizens and Member States are struggling with at the moment .
However , I would like to point out that this issue , as is known , only and exclusively concerns the competences of the Member States and , as such , falls outside the scope of the European Commission .
The Commission should ensure , however , if different systems continue to coexist in future too , that this does not have any adverse effects on workers exercising their right to mobility within the Union .
Regarding the amendments tabled , I would like to stress one point in particular , namely the scope of the future proposal - as the directive is not yet finished - for a directive regulating the activities of occupational pension funds .
In other words , the question is , and many Members attending this evening ' s meeting have spoken about this , Mrs Kauppi , in particular : should this proposal , which we are about to disclose , provide for all forms of pension schemes or should it simply be restricted to pension scheme products which cover the members against biometric risks ?
My answer to this is as follows , I hope it is clear : we need European prudential standards for all forms of occupational pension schemes .
These standards will differ in certain aspects according to the risks actually covered by the institutions .
But there is not one single technical reason why these different types of savings schemes could not be combined in one and the same directive .
It would , in my view , be incorrect - and the European Union would impose artificial restrictions on itself - if the Commission were to restrict the directive to be proposed to pension schemes which only cover biometric risks and if it were to exclude other pension provisions which , although they are full pension provisions because they cannot be collected before pensionable age , should nonetheless still be excluded from the directive , according to a number of delegates .
I believe that this is not right .
I think that the European Union would not do itself any favours if the subject of the directive were to be limited to biometric risks and I can honestly see no reason why other forms of pension schemes could not be included in the same directive , as I pointed out a moment ago .
Well now , Member States are thus given every opportunity to give certain pension products preferential treatment by using tax incentive measures , for example .
They can also demand that the products offered on their market , even if the institutions offering the service are based in another Member State , meet certain social criteria .
Employees and employers within one company or one sector are free to choose , according to the benefits and drawbacks of the products available on their market .
In other words , there is still a large degree of freedom for the Member States to arrange the pension systems within their own country as they see fit .
This freedom remains .
The Commission ' s ambition is to create , I repeat , one framework which liberalises the setting up and scope of pension funds for the benefit of all the members of such pension funds .
Accordingly , we need to set up this legal framework within the European Union which enables businesses and future pensioners to choose the products on offer within a transparent market by institutions which are adequately supervised .
Adequate supervision is crucial , as is liberalising the scope of pension funds .
It is not up to the Commission to specify a pension product in every detail .
Indeed this is a matter which falls under the subsidiarity principle , and the European Commission would not wish to do anything which could compromise this principle .
Mr President , I would like to ask the Commissioner if he could also reply to my question .
I have been waiting for a reply for one and a half hours now .
I would , at long last , like to have a response to my question on cash management and the solution to this problem which is particularly hitting small and medium-sized businesses .
Mr President , I would prefer to address Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel ' s issue when I respond to the report on the internal market .
This would , however , mean that Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel would have to stay even longer at this meeting .
This is not such a bad thing , in my opinion .
In the final analysis , many remarks made in this meeting will also be of interest to Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel , but since she has reminded me of this question , which , as I have already said , I would have addressed at a later stage , let me just say that this is of course an issue pertaining to the internal market .
It is true that small and medium-sized businesses are facing obstacles in their cross-border activities .
The Commission is acutely aware of this .
Needless to say , the scope of the internal market is intended to facilitate cross-border activities for small and medium-sized businesses .
The new strategy for the internal market comprises one hundred or so measures , many of which will be beneficial to small and medium-sized businesses .
But if Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel would like to approach me with specific problems relating to small and medium-sized businesses which are not covered in the new strategy for the internal market , I shall make every effort to address these points to her satisfaction .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Strategy for Europe ' s Internal Market
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0098 / 2000 ) by Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , on the communication from the Commission to the European Parliament and the Council : The Strategy for Europe ' s Internal Market [ COM ( 1999 ) 464 - C5-0212 / 1999 - 1999 / 2167 ( COS ) ]
Mr President , Commissioner , the report which I have the honour to present is the result of an extraordinary collaboration - which I am grateful for - between people and committees .
Allow me to make two observations : the Committee on Legal Affairs has not accepted all the suggestions of the committee asked for an opinion .
We were in complete agreement with most of them and they seemed to us to be very interesting , but we consider that this resolution was not the right place for them and that , by incorporating them , its message would be less clearly expressed .
That has been my criterion for recommending a vote in favour of the amendments presented in this House .
I therefore insist - and the opinion of the Committee on Fisheries is a good example of this - that they have not been included in the resolution , not because I reject their content , but because the message in relation to the internal market strategy had to be clearly expressed .
What was that message ?
That message stems from the position adopted by the Committee on Legal Affairs in our resolution of 4 November 1999 .
If you will allow me , Mr President , I will concentrate on three ideas .
The first concern of the Committee on Legal Affairs -and I hope this House will ratify it tomorrow - is the concept of the situation of the internal market .
What does the internal market mean to European construction ?
These days we hear the siren song of globalisation and together with that goes the idea that we are international .
The internal market appears to have become very small in this new globalised economy .
Nothing could be further from the truth .
This document on the strategy for the internal market expresses this very clearly .
The internal market is Europe ' s platform in the world .
The internal market embodies the key principles of a globalised economy with advantages for Europe in terms of competition .
That is the first message of the Committee on Legal Affairs .
We need to put the emphasis on the principles of the internal market : the principle of proportionality , the principle of mutual recognition , the principle of control of origin .
These must be the great pillars upon which this strategy for the internal market is built .
We will not make the headlines with this , but it is important nonetheless .
The application and control of Community legislation is also important . The Member States must cooperate in this application .
We must oppose procedures which are used too frequently , such as ' gold plating ' .
We need to strengthen our infringement procedure , we need to consolidate it , make it more transparent and more accessible .
We ask that decisions on the outcome of infringement proceedings be explained and that Parliament be informed of them .
We ask that infringement cases be processed more quickly and that they be more effectively presented to the citizen .
The second message of this resolution is that we need to make the present , rather disorganised laws , which the citizens see as a burden , into a genuine legislation , a coherent and clear framework of rules and regulations , without any overlapping or contradictions .
These contradictions are seen by the citizen and by industry as burdens , as a lack of clarity in the message regarding the direction we are taking .
Lastly , the third message is a change in the business culture in Europe .
We need businesspeople who are more willing to take risks .
To this end we will have to change certain laws , such as for example the European laws on insolvency in general , on the suspension of payments and bankruptcy .
We need to put the emphasis on the creation of a genuine capital risk market .
We need to convince young Europeans , as young Americans are already convinced , that the best option is not to join a large company , on a long-term basis , but to create new companies .
In all of this , electronic commerce , the Internet and new technologies must offer a good platform .
Finally , Mr President , to sum up , I hope that tomorrow , on voting for the resolution , Parliament will send a clear message .
We are behind the Commission in this initiative and of course we want to participate in the whole process , permanently , cooperating , offering ideas and monitoring the situation .
Mr President , once again the European Parliament must express its opinion on the Commission communication on the construction of the internal market , in this case , a new version of it .
A proportion of its content affects the competences of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
It is these points which I wish to discuss specifically .
Firstly , I would like to say that , in general , one of the criticisms levelled at previous versions of this documents no longer applies .
The European Parliament ' s resolution of 4 November 1999 said that the document was rather unspecific , that it did not contain specific actions .
This new version does contain specific measures and proposals .
Let us then analyse the content of these proposals , albeit in general terms .
With regard to taxation , the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs is that the Communication is not ambitious enough , especially when compared to previous documents .
We are aware of the stumbling blocks encountered in relation to the tax package and that some of its chapters have been blocked , but in situations such as this large doses of political courage are necessary to push proposals forward .
We notice a lack of such political courage in this document since the chapter on tax simply reproduces previous Commission commitments , and even leaves aside some of the European Parliament ' s proposals .
Secondly , in relation to the rules on competition , the Communication opts for deepening the process of reform underway , and this deserves our support .
Finally , in the chapter on financial services , it should be highlighted that up to now important progress has been made but , as indicated in the recent single market scoreboard , there is still a lot to be done .
Mr President , as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , it is natural that I should speak about the problems which the strategy for developing the internal market may pose from a social point of view .
We are starting with a European social model - which is a national model - and we are transforming the economic structure of that society .
In doing so , we are concerned that the effort to liberalise should not transform the essence of the current European social model .
An example of this can be found in an area as apparently banal as urban transport .
If urban transport is not subjected to political considerations and the intervention of local authorities , for example , straightforward liberalisation could make it practically impossible for us to reach our workplaces .
We have had examples such as the case of Venezuela where a strictly private system of public transport led to a profound social and political crisis in that country .
Liberalisation presents other difficulties .
For example , when public services and public companies are privatised and those public companies come to be controlled by a private sector which in reality replaces the state monopoly with a private monopoly , liberalisation may not come about effectively at all .
Liberalisation by means of privatising public companies may end up consolidating dominant positions and private monopolies which in my opinion may offer fewer benefits than a monopoly conceived in the public interest .
Another aspect - which we referred to in the recent debate on the Kuckelkorn report - is the need to coordinate social protection .
Social protection in a single internal market cannot simply be left to subsidiarity .
Lastly , cohesion also seems to me to be important .
If there is no economic and social cohesion , if we do not balance the quality of life in the different regions of the Community , we may find ourselves in a situation where the European Union is an unfair European Union in which some regions will make more progress and others will be left behind .
This is the basis of the amendments which Mrs Berger and I are presenting , representing the views of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
- ( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , firstly I would thank the rapporteur for explicitly mentioning the opinion of the Committee on Fisheries , although we regret that it has not been included in the report .
I say this especially , Commissioner , so that you can communicate to the Commission , and particularly to Mr Fischler , the fact that the common fisheries policy is one of the few areas of Community activity where until now very few steps have been taken in the creation of a genuine internal market .
The lack of action is related to the original conception of this policy .
The current Council Regulation No 3760 / 92 establishing a Community system for fisheries and aquaculture , provides for derogations in respect of the internal market , notably in Articles 6 and 7 , which allow derogations from the principle of freedom of access to fishing grounds , so that Member States have the right of exclusive exploitation of their fisheries resources within a 12-mile coastal band , as well as a series of preferential fishing rights , through application of the ' relative stability ' principle , which distributes national fishing quotas .
At the same time it lays down restrictions on exercising fishing activities in certain areas known as ' boxes ' .
These restrictions on the principle of freedom of action , which were originally intended to be temporary restrictions , have been extended and will be in force until 1 January 2003 as a mechanism to allow certain Member States ' fishing industries to adapt to the rules of free competition in an increasingly open and globalised market .
Over 20 years have passed and , as we are about to embark upon a general review of all aspects of the common fisheries policy which , for compelling legal reasons , must take place in 2002 , it is now time , I believe , to examine whether the transitional period for adaptation to free competition provided for in the said regulation should be ended .
In my opinion , the fishing industry and the common fisheries policy should also be subject to derogations in respect of the internal market .
Therefore , the principles and fundamental freedoms enshrined in the Treaties should also be applied to fisheries , in other words , the framework of the common fisheries policy should be brought into line with the general legal framework of Community legislation .
Mr President , on behalf of our Group I should like to warmly welcome Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi ' s excellent report .
As she said in her introduction , she has made the very wise decision to focus on what are the most critical issues for the creation of the single market .
I want to focus on a couple of the principal points that she makes .
The first one is the need to address , within the Union , the impact of legislation on business .
It is particularly important that we ask the Commission to reinforce its activities , to ensure proper compliance cost assessment and to assess the costs on businesses of the new legislation .
I say to the Commissioner that we do not expect this to be done as an after-thought , after all the departments in the Commission have developed legislation .
It needs to be an integral part of the policy and regulation process .
He must make sure that from now on that a central objective is to help the internal market to move forward .
We were delighted to see a second point on the agenda at Lisbon .
Our committee and , indeed , our Group has been emphasising , since this new Parliament started last year , the need to encourage the development of small- and medium-sized enterprises across the European Union .
Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi ' s report emphasises a number of key points such as the need to make business formation cheaper and quicker and the need to remove some of the barriers preventing entrepreneurs from benefiting from the risks of putting capital into starting up new businesses .
I am disappointed to see that our Socialist colleagues are proposing that clause should be taken out of this resolution .
I can assure them that we will vigorously oppose that tomorrow .
I invite colleagues to reject that proposal .
I conclude by confirming that the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market will continue to press vigorously for the speedy completion of the internal market .
I give credit to all our colleagues , across all political groups , for the speed with which we have dealt with the electronic commerce directive this week .
I hope that is appreciated .
I hope it will demonstrate that we are prepared to work with speed .
I hope that , together , we can really make the internal market work as quickly as possible .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I feel nothing but appreciation for Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi ' s clear draft report .
It concisely outlines and highlights the key points from the Commission ' s communication on the strategy to be followed for Europe ' s internal market .
I would like to highlight some of these points .
The promised dialogue between the Commission on the one hand and business and citizens on the other is to be welcomed because the relationship between the Commission , the European Parliament and society should , after all , be interactive .
In order to keep pace with the present breakneck speed at which technology is developing , it is not only desirable but essential to keep the dialogue going .
So far , the average citizen has had insufficient insight into what drives the Union and what can be gained from European cooperation .
This is why information campaigns are essential . After all , Europe cannot afford to remain a remote spectacle .
Back to basics should be our motto .
The e-Europe initiative praises the use and expertise of Internet and multimedia .
This is very commendable indeed but , rather than just creating a frame , it is more important to give substance to education .
I would like to repeat the words of the French President spoken at the official opening of this Parliament building and I quote : " We must create a citizens ' Europe in which each individual gradually comes to see that he or she has a role to play .
We have a duty to build this great common house in which each individual nevertheless feels at home . A house in which everyone lives together , in a spirit of solidarity , but in which each individual retains his or her identity " .
In order to meet these objectives , the residents need to get to know and get a feel for their house , or rather their home .
In order to build a genuine internal market , we should , more than anything , concentrate on promoting the interests of small and medium-sized businesses .
To this day , there are still too many obstacles .
Companies ' competitiveness and dynamism depend directly on a regulating climate which is conducive to investment , innovation and entrepreneurship .
Finally , I can only echo the need for SLIM .
Legislation must become simpler and must be written in a clear language .
Superfluous legislation should be withdrawn .
It would therefore be beneficial to draw up a scoreboard of laws which have been abolished .
Mr President , I would like to speak on a point of order .
During the debate , Mr Harbour referred to an amendment tabled on behalf of Mrs Berger and myself - Amendment No 2 , paragraph 22 ( 2 ) .
If I am not mistaken , Mr Harbour said that he was opposed to our amendment .
I believe that there has been a little confusion .
In the Spanish version which I have there is no problem .
The amendment is based on the German text , which causes some concern because it refers to the issue of share options .
I imagine that in the English text which Mr Harbour has there is no problem either .
The Spanish text simply says " remove the barriers imposed on entrepreneurs capitalising on company value through the issue of share options on the stock exchange " .
If this is the correct text , there is really no problem , in which case I would withdraw that amendment and simply ask for the German version to be adapted to what is said in the Spanish text .
Mr President , many thanks for giving me the floor regarding an issue which is very dear to the Commission as a whole and myself , in particular , namely the new strategy for the internal market .
To begin with , I would like to extend my warm thanks to Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi for the ardent support she has shown for the set of measures proposed by the Commission .
The Commission feels confirmed in its intention thanks to this important vote of confidence coming from this Parliament .
Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi has mentioned three topics .
First of all , she stressed the importance of the internal market as a forum in the world , which is essential for the competitiveness of European industry and the European service industry , and she is absolutely right , of course .
This is , in fact , echoed in Mrs Berger ' s remarks , who stated that the internal market is not an old hat one can simply take off , the internal market is and will remain essential to European competitiveness as a forum in the world .
Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi ' s second remark highlights a number of inconsistencies .
According to her , sometimes one does not know where one stands .
This would be a serious shortcoming if it were true to this extent .
Needless to say , the Commission attempts to establish internal consistency between rules , but it is , of course , possible for rules to be in conflict with one another in certain areas .
If this were the case , then the Commission would be more than happy to rectify this situation .
I would like to thank Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi and the other Members for their comments regarding specific inconsistencies between rules . This will enable the Commission to do something about this .
Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi ' s third remark concerns the change in culture .
This is an important yet very difficult topic , which predominantly refers to the availability of risk capital , as Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi has also pointed out .
There happen to be bankers in the risk capital industry who believe that Europe has the money but lacks the entrepreneurs .
In other words , according to these bankers I spoke to recently , the bottleneck is not so much due to the availability of capital as to the availability of entrepreneurs . This is tied in with the economic culture .
I happen to disagree with these critics .
Responsibility lies with both camps .
The bottleneck is the result of both the availability of risk capital , especially the cost of risk capital , but we are also , of course , lacking the sufficient entrepreneurship .
This is down to Europe ' s economic culture which still instils in us the belief that bankruptcy will stay with a young entrepreneur for a long time , while in the United States , as everyone knows , bankruptcy is taken far more lightly .
I hence agree with Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi that something needs to be done to breathe new life into Europe ' s entrepreneurial culture .
Moreover , I suspect that in the light of developments , which are termed the " new economy " , an increasing number of , mainly , young people , young entrepreneurs , will be encouraged to start up a business .
After having expressed my thanks once again to the rapporteur , Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi , I would now like to move on to remarks made by Mr Berenguer Fuster .
According to him , the Commission should have more political courage , especially in the fiscal domain .
My response to Mr Berenguer Fuster is : should the Commission have yet more political courage ?
What the Commission is trying to bring about is already so hard to achieve .
That does not just pertain to the topic that was under discussion earlier this evening , namely the coordination of taxes and tax legislation regarding pension contributions .
It also concerns the taxation package formulated by my predecessor , Mr Monti .
Moreover , during the discussion of the previous topic , Mr Lipietz remarked that he , and probably his group too , is not prepared to further liberalise the provision of financial services if the package , also known as the Monti package , is not adopted .
I would like to oppose such reasoning which has no foundations in the real world .
It would be an example of cutting off your nose to spite your face , if Parliament or the Commission were to say that they refuse to make further attempts to integrate the financial services if no progress were made in terms of the taxation package .
This would not be the right attitude , in my opinion .
Although Mr Berenguer Fuster has not said this in so many words of course , I would still like to take the opportunity to stress this point .
I ask Mr Berenguer Fuster if he would like the Commission to have yet more political courage ?
We are already struggling to achieve what we have proposed .
I would like to see the Commission achieve what it has proposed to do first and then take it from there .
Mr Berenguer Fuster has also said that a great deal still needs to be done in the field of financial services .
And he is right , of course .
Mr Berenguer Fuster is undoubtedly familiar with the action plan for financial services which was adopted on 13 May 1999 and which includes 43 objectives .
We are in the process of achieving these , at least we are in the process of achieving those objectives that need to be achieved this year .
I am hoping , on behalf of the Commission , to make certain proposals regarding pensions , for example - we discussed this topic a moment ago - but also regarding the opening up of markets for postal services , regarding the public provision of goods and services , public tendering etc . , before the summer recess .
We are truly active in the field which is dear to Mr Berenguer Fuster .
I would now like to comment on a remark made by Mr Medina Ortega .
He said that at present , there is a risk of state monopolies being replaced by private monopolies .
I would like to assure Mr Medina Ortega that this is , of course , by no means the intention .
Replacing a state monopoly by a private monopoly only makes matters worse .
This is certainly not the intention of this Commission .
What the Commission does intend to do , however , is to add substance to the decisions taken by the European Council at Lisbon , namely to free up the markets for gas , electricity , transport and postal services a lot faster .
The Commission is trying to flesh this out and this also means that those state monopolies need to allow for more competition in the fields I mentioned a moment ago .
But , I repeat , the prospect of replacing state monopolies by private monopolies is something which we do not exactly relish .


I would then like to come back to the remarks made by Mr Harbour , who , like Mr Beysen and Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel , was absolutely right to highlight the importance of small and medium-sized businesses and the costs related to running these businesses .
The Commission is aware that , for example , the costs involved in establishing a business or a small business over here far outstrip the costs in the United States .
To give you an idea of the cost difference , it takes an average of five days to set up a small or medium-sized business in the United States .
In Europe it takes far longer , even as long as five months , a ratio of 1 in 30 .
This is , of course , directly reflected in the cost .
If we then talk about culture , and I am addressing Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi once again , we need to try to do something about these establishment costs of small businesses very quickly , because otherwise we will naturally come off second-best in the competitive battle with North America .
Finally , I would like to turn to Mrs Berger as I have already responded to Mr Beysen ' s remarks concerning small and medium-sized businesses .
I have quoted what Mrs Berger said earlier about the hat which you cannot simply take off .
I like this metaphor because it is true that European citizens have the feeling that this internal market is already in place . They take it for granted and do not give it any further thought .
This could not be further from the truth .
The internal market is far from complete .
We must - and the Commission does , in fact - work on it week in week out and defend it , because the internal market is subject to constant pressure , and the Member States fall back into old , protectionist habits which we need to fight .
Mrs Berger was right to refer to directives which remain in the Council .
We are all familiar with examples of directives which remain in a vacuum for five , ten or even fifteen years because they are not adopted by the Council .
Let us hope that this will change .
If you will allow me to highlight one aspect of it : we all hope , of course , that the difference of opinion which is keeping Spain and the United Kingdom divided over a well-known rock in the Southern half of this continent , will now be resolved .
I read in an article in a Spanish newspaper that the issue is moving in the right direction . This would actually unblock half a dozen directives .
We are all waiting for this moment .
To sum up , on the subject of Echelon , I can assure Mrs Berger that this is completely unrelated to the internal market and does not form any threat to it whatsoever .
Mr President , this concludes my remarks .
Could I once again express my appreciation to the Members of Parliament and the rapporteur , in particular , for the important vote of confidence which we received from Parliament regarding the new strategy for the internal market ?
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
2001 : European Year of Languages
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0099 / 2000 ) by Mr Graça Moura , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council decision : European Year of Languages 2001 [ COM ( 1999 ) 485 - C5-0278 / 1999 - 1999 / 0208 ( COD ) ]
Mr President , I should like to thank Mr Graça Moura for a splendid piece of work and for the energy he has put into drawing up this report .
I should also like to thank the Council for being so accommodating and the Commission for the role it has played as mediator , especially just recently .
The Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party is very happy to support initiatives which may create greater awareness of the value of linguistic diversity in the European Union .
It is important that the EU ' s citizens should be encouraged to learn foreign languages early on in school and also throughout their lives .
A knowledge of languages is important , for European languages are of great significance to European culture and civilisation , and people need good language skills in order to be able to find employment in EU countries other than their own .
The programme for the European Year of Languages offers a splendid basis for providing information about the many different opportunities there are for learning foreign languages , and it is important .
Mr Graça Moura ' s proposal includes the 11 official EU languages , together with a number of other languages recognised by the Member States , including Irish and Luxembourgish .
The Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party also thinks that the programme should include other languages which are actually used in the various Member States , for instance Catalan in Spain and Frisian in the Netherlands .
Finally , in the programme for the European Year of Languages , consideration is also given to the forthcoming enlargement of the Union , something which we in the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party consider to be crucial to all EU programmes .
On behalf of the Group , I can recommend supporting this programme .
Mr President , needless to say , I too would like to thank the rapporteur for his excellent and exquisite work .
I would like to make a few minor observations regarding a European campaign which intends to teach Europeans languages from other communities .
We are all convinced of the usefulness of this exercise , of course .
But the thing that often goes wrong with European campaigns - and fortunately I have not been around long enough as a politician to be unaware how the ordinary citizen reacts to this - is that , very often , they are nothing but an attractive front , pretty to look at but insubstantial .
I would therefore like to think that this campaign will offer something different , and that , more importantly , consideration will be given to why it is so hard for people in Europe to learn languages , and at what stages in their lives they are able to learn languages .
I come from a bilingual country myself and I have met some people in that country who never learn the other language , despite the fact that they attend language classes , sometimes for twelve years , and are still unable to speak another language .
This is a terrible observation to have to make .
I therefore hope that in the course of this year of European languages , research will be carried out into the best language teaching methods and , more than anything , how Europeans can be encouraged to learn the language of the other Europeans using a modern and appealing method .
Mr President , after I too have congratulated the rapporteur , Mr Graça Moura , who has done such a good job that it won the unanimous support of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , I would like to focus my attention on just one point , namely that in addition to the human , cultural and political advantages , the need to learn more than one language is also of considerable economic benefit .
The report also highlights the findings of all the experts : having a good command of one ' s mother tongue and learning classical languages , especially Latin and classical Greek , makes it easier to learn other languages .
I would also add our own mother tongue to the equation .
This great truth emerges from a fact rather unknown to most , that in the English language , for example , there are at least 75 000 words of Greek origin .
I repeat , 75 000 English words derive from classical Greek .
There are a similar number of words in the French language that derive from Greek , and the same is true of most other modern European languages .
It is also certain that Latin is just as important for most European languages .
The English sage , Francis Bacon , said that knowledge is power , so knowledge of the basic languages from which our modern European languages derive improves our general knowledge and reinforces European civilisation , which , besides its humanitarian value , is also a weapon for our survival and prosperity as Europeans in a globalised economy .
Besides , the contemporary German professors , August and Werner-Karl Heisenberg , have characterised both classical and modern Greek as the mother and nurturer of human civilisation .
I believe that revival of the teaching of Latin and classical Greek in middle education will also provide a cultural shield for the younger generations against the onslaught of the generally levelling effect of the American cultural message , so that only its positive elements are preserved .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank the rapporteur .
The European Year of Languages is important and worthwhile .
All the languages of Europe are equally valuable and worthy of respect in terms of culture .
It could be said that the people who speak the same language share the same mentality .
The mother tongue is not merely a tool of communication , it is in fact more than anything else , it is thought itself .
Language is the most peaceful way of communicating .
Independence is language and language is independence .
The Kurds are a nation with no land or borders of their own , kept together only by language .
Language is a powerful force .
It is the most important bond for a nation .
Large countries , and many smaller ones too , often tyrannise others through language .
It is a means of occupation .
The legislation regarding language in my country is among the most liberal in the world .
We have seen how two different foreign languages have twice been proclaimed the official language ; only at the beginning of last century did our language , Finnish , become the official one .
That is why we have guaranteed the important status of minority languages .
The multilingual nature of the European Union is thus a source of wealth .
At the same time it is also the right of each citizen in each Member State .
The multilingual nature of Europe must be preserved after enlargement too ; there are no obstacles to this .
It is wrong to think that a multilingual environment is costly and ineffective .
Translation is not costly ; it is the most effective practical instrument of peace .
Mr President , in addition to congratulating the rapporteur , I would like to highlight in this debate that the idea for this celebration originates from the Council of Europe , an institution with a particular sensitivity towards the cultural and social aspects of the old continent , which , with its initiative of increasing the knowledge and use of more languages by Europeans , hopes to promote understanding and tolerance and bring citizens closer together .
When we speak of European languages , let us not forget that this does not only mean the official languages of the Member States .
In Europe , many other languages are spoken , some of them thousands of years old such as Euskera in the Basque Country or Gaelic , whose origins have been lost in the mists of time , and others such as Catalan , Galician and Alsatian , which is spoken right here in Strasbourg .
This initiative should also benefit all these other regional and minority languages , and the bodies created by the Member States to organise participation in the European Year of Languages must also include representatives of these other languages , which are also European , and which are the essence and lifeblood of the wealth of our unity in diversity .
Furthermore , the learning of languages leads to an awareness of our cultural diversity and contributes to the eradication of xenophobia , racism and intolerance , which forms part of our Community objectives .
Mr President , I would like to thank the Commission and , at the same time , the rapporteur , Mr Graça Moura , for having permitted so many amendments , many of them open to broadening the scope of the Year and extending it to rural areas and the least favoured areas .
However , I would also like to express certain concerns with regard to the economic restrictions .
I would recommend that many projects be allowed since it is clear that cultural projects attract a lot of investment from Autonomous Regions and private initiatives which we cannot afford to lose .
I would also ask , in this era when emotions often take precedence over good sense , that we do not support projects which are aimed at exclusion and the use of language to support positions which often seek to cause divisions between people , when the objective of this programme is to unite people .
I would also like to see the European Union begin to take great care of languages which have no country , maternal languages which often have no school and no teachers ; languages which are spoken throughout Europe , which no state accepts and which will never become official .
I am referring , for example , to Ladino and Yiddish .
These languages furthermore do not have any media of their own .
Of the 150 languages which are spoken in Europe , we should make a list of those which are only transmitted from mothers to their children , which are only spoken in a domestic setting and which , currently , with the invasion of the media and with the official use of languages in schools , will have very few years to live .
I would like this European Year of Languages to be opened up to them as well and that a space be made for them so that they may be considered in any other future programmes which may take place .
Mr President , I should like to address my remarks on languages to my fellow Members , of course , but also to our interpreters , who enable this Parliament to function , to the rapporteur , of course , not for his work as rapporteur but because he is also a poet in this Parliament and , moreover , as I have discovered , one who speaks my mother tongue perfectly .
What better rapporteur could there be ?
When one is a new Member of the European Parliament , as I am , one finds oneself dealing with all sorts of things : chocolate , end-of-life vehicles , the qualified majority , dried beans , Spanish lentils , anything and everything .
Then , suddenly , one finds that one is going to have to deal with something that gives Europe its historic and cultural depth , namely its languages .
And when one looks back at the great periods in history , and I am thinking here of the Renaissance , that great age of trade and commerce , what remains of that era today are the cultural achievements , the artefacts of our heritage , and thus will it ever be .
In terms of languages , Europe has known times when a single language predominated : Latin , and also French .
Now it tends to be English .
So what are we to tell our fellow citizens for this year 2001 .
Let me just briefly mention a few points .
Firstly , that European unity may not mean linguistic unity .
Next , that every language is deserving of respect and deserves to be promoted and defended .
This is applicable to any amount of things : monuments , objects , you name it .
Why should it not be the case for mankind ' s best and most lasting achievement , i.e. his method of communicating with his neighbour ?
And then , all languages are learnt within the family first of all .
This is why we call them " mother tongues " , and no State , whatever it may be , may have the direct , indirect , explicit or implicit goal of destroying one of its mother tongues , or of allowing it to disappear .
Furthermore , finally , without linguistic diversity , there is no Europe , because this is also one of the few , and perhaps the only , parliament in the world which operates in eleven languages , to the extent that occasionally we speak in this House for the purpose of being interpreted and not to be heard in the original .
It is up to us to construct this dialectic of European unity and its linguistic diversity .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Youth
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0100 / 2000 ) by Mrs Gröner , on behalf of the Parliament Delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council decision establishing the Community action programme for youth [ C5-0116 / 2000 - 1998 / 0197 ( COD ) ]
Mr President , I am very pleased to add my support and my group ' s support to this report .
This report had a long gestation period .
But the fact that we are still here so early in the morning is a tribute to the rapporteur ' s work on this programme and , indeed , that of the Commissioner and the Portuguese presidency - which has shown itself to be committed to youth , to the voluntary service and to education in its broadest sense .
The report we have ended up with now is more closely targeted , with an emphasis on social protection and , as the rapporteur has said , a more flexible approach than in earlier reports .
We also have more money in the programme in recognition of its importance .
We will always ask for more money .
The budget is not enough .
It is perhaps Parliament ' s role to ask for more .
But we can be pleased with the outcome .
We can be sure that whatever money we have in this programme will be directed at youth and will , in the long-term , be money well spent .
I agree with the rapporteur that this money and this programme will ensure that the efforts are targeted not just at some small sections of society but , as the Commissioner said in a previous report , at all sections of society .
We must look to those who will benefit most and those who are in greatest need and who might otherwise be socially excluded .
We are delighted that some candidate countries of Central and Eastern Europe will benefit as well .
We can be pleased with our efforts and pleased with this report .
In seven years ' time we will look back at the youth of today who will have benefited from this report and be pleased that this was the beginning of real progress .
Mr President , I should like to thank Mrs Gröner for her splendid work and for the personal , almost passionate commitment she has shown in preparing the present report .
I should also like to thank the Council and the Commission for contributing to our at long last achieving a good result .
The Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party is very happy to support those initiatives which give young people in Europe opportunities to acquire knowledge , skills and qualifications which will help form the basis of their future development .
The strength of the programme is , of course , that , by means of cross-national exchanges , it encourages young people to contribute actively to further European integration .
It will also lead to understanding of the cultural and linguistic diversity within the European Union .
I also think that the programme will ensure that the fundamental values upon which the European Union is founded will continue to be propagated .
Through increased communication between young people in Europe , the programme will indirectly help combat xenophobia and increase respect for human rights .
Finally , the Community ' s action programme for youth also gives consideration to the forthcoming enlargement of the Union , something which we in the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party believe to be of crucial importance to all EU programmes .
I would recommend that we support this programme .
Mr President , I also commend the report and thank Mrs Gröner for the excellent effort she has made .
It is a very good report .
Youth is the sector in our Community that is so often ignored .
Indeed in the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport it is the " Cinderella " sector of funding , as with sport .
We hope that imbalance will be redressed .
The insufficient commitment to youth affairs from the Council , when the European Parliament was calling for EUR 980 million , shows , in my view , this grave disparity and the lack of commitment on the part of the Council to a very important sector .
The danger , in this regard , with the changes that are proposed , of combining two programmes - Youth for Europe and the European Voluntary Service - is that several good parts of both those programmes might be lost .
I hope that does not happen .
We should include the best parts of those excellent initiatives in whatever programme we formulate in future .
The new Youth Programme emphasises the developing links with the youth of entrant countries .
That is an excellent initiative .
The bridges built between youth will be the bridges that eventually unite Europe .
The agreement to constantly review the situation is an initiative that I welcome .
When more funds are needed , budgets should not be cast in stone but be flexible so that they can be amended in the best interests of the deserving needs of youth .
What more deserving cause could there be than supporting youth in the European Union .
Mr President , I would like to join all those who have congratulated the rapporteur , Mrs Gröner , who has produced an excellent report , full of commitment , on behalf of young people .
In her task she has enjoyed the very strong support of the members of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport . I offer them my thanks for their work .
The Youth programme is crucial to the European Union , as you have all already said , because it is a unique programme , in which all young people , without distinction , can participate .
I would like to reassure all Members who have spoken about possible sanctions .
In the Youth programme and in the way it is implemented , there will be no sanctions against anyone , and that includes young Austrians , who will not be discriminated against .
The programme has ambitious objectives , which are essential to the development of the idea of European citizenship .
This programme will encourage and consolidate the continuation and development of innovative actions at Community level and will help to improve the quality of the action undertaken on behalf of young people .
It therefore represents a useful instrument in assisting a policy of cooperation and will contribute to the process of European integration .
In addition to ensuring that the programme is effectively implemented , I wish to make a commitment before this House that I will encourage a process of structured and regular cooperation with Member States , in order to work towards drawing up action plans that are up to the task of the challenges , and without which the programme would be less effective .
Mr President , I wish to take this opportunity to talk about the youth policy of the future .
In fact , I stood before you for the first time last September .
I spoke of the White Paper on the European Union ' s youth policy , which is a priority .
I would now like to clarify the role of this White Paper and the role of political catalyst that youth policy must play in the future .
I hope to prepare the White Paper on the basis of broad consultation with the different parties concerned and when I say the parties involved I mean above all young people .
That is why , at the Youth Council on 23 November last year , I proposed to the Member States ' Ministers for Youth that they hold national meetings of young people during the first half of 2000 .
This proposal was very warmly received by all the Member States and these meetings are being organised at the moment .
Most Member States have already set dates for them and most of them have also assured me that these meetings will be open , with the participation of all possible parties including , of course , Members of the European Parliament .
These meetings must allow young people to play an active role and to assert their aspirations , their expectations and their opinions , but also their recommendations for political action in the areas that affect them .
The various national meetings will culminate in a huge European meeting which will be held at the beginning of October , under the French Presidency .
At the same time as consulting young people , the Commission hopes to consult those responsible for youth policy at national level .
The Commission hopes that these national authorities will be able to incorporate into their contributions the opinions and expectations of local administrations , which play a considerable role , I believe , in youth policy .
In order to achieve this , the Commission will be holding bilateral meetings with Member States , followed by a discussion seminar with youth leaders .
We will also rely on the various studies on young people , which will be financed under the Youth programme , and the study , already underway , on the status of young people and the situation of youth policy in Europe .
Lastly , I would like to include the European Parliament in this exercise .
The cooperation methods still have to be worked out , but I can assure you as of now that you will be invited to take part in the European meeting of young people and that I will keep you informed on a regular basis on progress in this matter .
To conclude , I would like to emphasise the fact that the consultation process , particularly with regard to young people , will not be a one-off exercise , because the publication of the White Paper will constitute the second stage of this dialogue with the parties involved , and this is a dialogue that I would like to see established on a more permanent basis .
Ladies and gentlemen , there is a considerable amount of work to be done , but it is exciting .
As many of you have pointed out , we are not working for politics here , but for the future of our Union , and I hope that the debate launched by the publication of the White Paper will enable us to strengthen our capacity for joint action in order to implement a genuine strategy for developing the talents of these 80 million young citizens in the European Union , towards whom we have a great responsibility .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Before the sitting is closed , I would like to thank the interpreters for their generous cooperation this evening , since we have exceeded the time allotted .
( The sitting was closed at 12.45 a.m. )
Principles for recording taxes and social contributions
The next item is the report ( A5-0073 / 2000 ) by Mr Knörr Borràs , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the Proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation clarifying Council Regulation ( EC ) No 2223 / 96 as concerns principles for recording taxes and social contributions ( COM ( 1999 ) 488 - C5 ­ 0220 / 1999 - 1999 / 0200 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are discussing here today a subject of an extremely technical nature , of the type which , at first sight , appears to refer purely to issues involving the adoption and transposal of procedures and terminology within the European Union , which is the political framework to which they are to be adapted , as is the case with certain instruments in the statistical field .
We are all aware , or at least I think we are , that it is important that statistical data is not only reliable , that is , obtained scientifically and rigorously , but also , above all , comparable .
This is particularly true with regard to the shaping of the European single market , a context in which we require statistical data which is comparable and equivalent between the different Member States .
I would even go so far as to say that this is even truer , if that is possible , in view of the enlargement of the European Union , a process in which the availability and comparability of information , particularly statistical and economic information , must be treated as absolutely crucial .
I do not intend to dwell on the qualities of ESA 95 - the European System of Integrated Economic Accounts - nor on the progress which it represented in relation to the previous 1979 system , an issue which I spoke about in the House at the time of my report on the proposed Council Regulation amending the Regulation on the application of the Protocol on the excessive deficit procedure .
What should really be underlined is that , in my view , we must firmly support a Commission proposal which , essentially with regard to an issue as serious as the budgets of the Member States , is inclined to give priority to the revenue actually collected rather than criteria such as the amounts due in the field of taxes and social contributions .
It is common knowledge , or should be common knowledge , that there are occasions when administrations may record , as due , amounts which they will never collect , however many analyses of collectability are made , and this therefore leads to what is tantamount to a concealed falsification of the public deficit .
This is a serious issue which has been debated .
We should remember that in the Parliament of a Member State there was also a great argument between one of the candidates for the presidency and his opponent , and current President , in which the candidate , Mr Borrell , rightly condemned widespread use of the criterion of income which , since it had not been duly corrected , in reality amounted to a concealment of the deficit in the public accounts .
Ending this type of practice requires clear principles , as the Commission proposes , which in addition allow , very correctly in my judgement , for the calculation of income with the option of using amounts collected or the amounts recorded in a tax document .
This course of action by the Commission , which some people attack because in short they believe it does not once and for all end the practices of concealing deficit , in no way intends to distort the assessment of the amounts in the national accounts but , on the contrary , to arrive at the same figure in two different ways .
One , in my view the more correct way , or at least the more academic way , is the criterion of income , with the corresponding provision concerning collectability , set out in paragraph ( a ) of Article 3 proposed by the Commission , and the other , set out in paragraph ( b ) of Article 3 , is the criterion of cash receipts adjusted to take account of the time difference between the activity and the cash tax receipt at the end of the financial year .
Both calculation procedures should inevitably lead us to the same figure , which will be the outcome of the tax in that financial year .
I would also add that there is no other accounting method which would correctly record revenue in a budget .
On the other hand , it is obvious that the option to use either of the two methods offers the advantage of a speedier adaptation on the part of those who choose one or other of the systems .
Therefore , I consider that the Commission proposal regarding the treatment of taxes and social contributions in the accounts is both the most correct one and , from every point of view , is effective in view of the possibility that it can be applied immediately .
Nevertheless , we believe that , in order to encourage Member States to gather statistical data , even aggregated data , concerning taxes on products , Article 3 of the Commission proposal should deal with this issue by establishing a similar mechanism for recording and adjusting such taxation .
I therefore take a favourable view of the proposal and I congratulate the Commission .
I would like to repeat that the proposal rightly stresses that we should give priority to the revenue actually collected rather than the taxes and social contributions due in the Member States , and allows these two methods of calculation , which make it possible for the systems used by the Member States to be adapted .
A study of the Commission proposal shows that the treatment of taxes and social contributions should indeed follow the two proposed methods .
Finally , I would also like to stress that , consistent with our opinion that the Commission proposal is more an amendment than a clarification and that , moreover , it affects basic concepts , instead of using the procedures under Article 2 ( 2 ) of Council Regulation 2236 / 96 of 25 June 1996 , for the adoption of changes to the methodology intended to clarify and improve the content of ESA 95 , use should instead be made of the introduction procedure set out in Annex A of that regulation .

Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to ask you , and also the Commission , for your help .
I would be grateful if you could please keep strictly to your speaking time , as our timetable is very tight .
Although Commissioners can , of course , talk for as long as they wish , I would ask them to help me in this regard as well , so that we can finish on time .
Mr President , a Europe that is functioning properly needs transparent and comparable statistical material on its Member States , not least with regard to recording taxes and social contributions .
We have rightly reached agreements in this respect in the European system of national and regional accounts , ESA 95 .
On closer examination , it now appears that the information recorded on taxes and social contributions is not as precise as was hoped because it does not always correspond to the amounts actually collected or collectable for a particular assessment year .
The aim of the proposal under discussion is to refine the recording procedure by applying a correction factor both to cash data and data evidenced by assessments and assessment registers .
The PPE-DE Group agrees with the Commission proposal in this regard .
Two questions still remain , however .
In view of the fact that the proposal effectively contains an amendment to the ESA 95 Regulation and that is implicitly acknowledged by the fact that we are applying the codecision procedure , it does seem logical to grant the Member States a transitional period .
The Member States also need time to adjust to new rules .
We have therefore tabled an amendment on behalf of the PPE-DE Group and would ask our colleagues in the House and the Commission as well to support this amendment .
A second question to the Commission concerns the amendments by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs regarding VAT as a basis for calculating the third source of own resources .
I should have liked to hear the Commissioner confirm whether the Commission is indeed drawing up a proposal to amend Article 8 of the ESA 95 Regulation to the effect that all the Member States will , in the future , have an adequate legal basis to use ESA 95 for the calculation of the third source of own resources , that is to say , VAT .
I should like a reply from the Commissioner and also , of course , a response from the Commissioner to our amendment .
Mr President , firstly I wish to thank Mrs Thyssen for her gesture and for her defence of the amendment we are presenting .
I also wish to thank and highlight the patriotism of Mr Berenguer and Mr Knörr .
This patriotism is consistent because ESA 95 was adopted by the Socialist government , to whose party the former belongs .
Having said this and leaving aside accusations which are truly libellous at the moment , I would like to defend the idea of an extended transition period of two years .
Anybody who knows anything about accounting and who looks at this text with open eyes will know that this implies a profound change in the basic concepts and the data on the resources of the institutional sectors which affect financial companies , non-financial sectors , public administrations and private individuals .
This change is a complicated change .
As any expert knows , the estimations in accordance with ESA 95 require breakdowns which affect no less than 60 accounting categories .
Secondly , this profound and complex change must be done in a gradual way .
As Mrs Thyssen has pointed out , changing and adapting the accounting rules requires a certain amount of time .
At the end of the day this would lead to a fair change because a sudden change would prejudice those States which have adopted the criterion of income , in other words , those which have , to a greater extent , complied with the regulation which entered into force in 1999 .
We are being asked to change a regulation which entered into force a few months ago .
The PPE-DE ' s amendment asks for the change to be introduced gradually .
Mr President , I think we would all agree that , if we are to run the Community properly , we need a high-quality statistical base within the Community and the applicant countries .
There has been a broad welcome in the House for this proposal and the apparent ability to give priority to the revenue actually collected rather than the more notional contributions which may be due .
This is certainly a step forward .
It seems logical to use the revenue collected as the basis for determining the actual percentage deficit .
So far as the transition period is concerned , many of us will have sympathy with the need for some form of transition because , clearly , if you amend the regulations in such a way that you move from a system which is being used over a long period of time to a completely new system some time will be required .
However , I hope that the countries of the Union will not use this as an excuse , if it is passed , but seek to implement the new system as rapidly as they can - in other words , two years should be regarded as an exception and as a maximum rather than as the normal ration for the job .
On the treatment of taxes and social contributions , I agree with the rapporteur that this is a relevant way of doing the calculations and that we should take a favourable view of the criteria which the Commission intends to set because of the way in which priority is given .
Overall , this is a useful step forward .
I welcome the commitment of the Commission .
I hope that we can work together and see this translated into Community law with suitable adjustments as soon as possible .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 11.30 a.m.
COM in bananas
The next item is the report by Mr Dary ( A5-0093 / 2000 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the Proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( EEC ) No 404 / 93 on the common organisation of the market in bananas ( COM ( 1999 ) 582 - C5 ­ 0277 / 1999 - 1999 / 0235 ( CNS ) ) .
, rapporteur .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , if the Commission ' s proposed reform of the COM in bananas , seeking to replace the current system by ' tariff only ' , were implemented as it stands , it would lead to the disappearance of ACP producers in the short term and Community producers in the medium term .
At the Seattle Summit and then at the Davos Summit , the people of Europe have been able to observe the inability of the WTO to reconcile financial priorities with their own priorities , which are living conditions , working conditions and the quality of the goods they consume .
They would not appreciate it if their representatives not only called those values into question today , but actually went further and reneged , in passing , on the Union ' s commitment to its ACP partners .
The banana issue is a perfect example of the difficulties the Union is experiencing in establishing the European model the institutions evoke so often .
In that connection the 1993 COM complied with four essential objectives : ensuring the free movement of bananas in the single market while maintaining reasonable prices for consumers , respecting the Union ' s commitment to the ACP countries , maintaining Community preference for Union producers like Martinique , Guadeloupe , the Canaries , Madeira and Crete and , finally , respecting GATT obligations .
Under constant attack since its adoption , this regulation eventually led to several WTO rulings against us , the latest in April 1999 .
Always quick on the draw , the United States immediately drew up retaliatory trade measures against Union countries .
To comply with the WTO , the Commission is proposing to go over to a ' tariff only ' formula , that is , eliminating quotas and introducing a flat rate tariff at an unknown level .
As we know , this system has already been attacked by the majority of operators and producers from all geographic areas .
We are right to question the grounds for an approach which involves changing the rules of the game in midstream , forcing producers to rethink their production plans and marketing forecasts . That has led us to identify reforms complying with the rules of international trade , but not just dictated by it .
The stakes are high .
Since 1993 , the position of the Community producers has been constantly deteriorating .
The same applies to many ACP countries , traditional suppliers .
It is impossible for these producers to maintain fair competition with the great producers and operators in the international network .
We should also remember that over 60 % of the bananas consumed in the Union come from non-ACP third countries .
It is not a question of practising protectionism , but rather of protecting the permanence of a certain method of production .
It is not just the banana we are trying to defend , but a whole production network , which entire regions often depend on to survive .
The margin of manoeuvre is technically narrow , but the choice of a reform model is political .
We need to know what our objectives are .
As I see it , the first priority is to defend the European model at the international level .
That is certainly the position the members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development unanimously adopted .
Here I would like to thank all my colleagues very warmly for their effective cooperation on this issue , and Mr Westendorp and Mr Fernández Martín for their excellent work too .
As there are no objective reasons for choosing ' tariff only ' , I propose to retain the first option in the Commission ' s proposal , the ' transitional ' option , and implement it without moving on to ' tariff only ' , but with a review of the operation of this reformed COM at the end of a ten year period .
The ACP / European Union Partnership Agreement for Development , which replaces the Lomé Convention , provides for a ten-year transition period for the ACP countries , to allow them to conform as closely as they can to WTO rules .
Why should it be any different for bananas ?
I also propose ensuring that the level of quotas will not increase the oversupply already noted , and finally , aware that the third quota will henceforth be open to all , I propose increasing the minimum preferential access rate for ACP products to EUR 300 .
In any case , accompanying measures are essential to ensure the permanence and viability of Community and ACP production .
I have some suggestions : regionalisation of aid , so as to correct the discrepancies observed between the various areas of Community production , establishment of a cyclone compensation measure , a marketing aid to re-establish the balance with the distribution network for dollar bananas , special support measures for organic production and finally , an acceleration of aid provision .
I hope Parliament will follow the line proposed by the Committee on Agriculture , but we also need the understanding of the Council and the Commission .
Of course , this is not a codecision procedure and the Commission , naturally , can reject all our amendments . At a time when a code of good conduct is being set up between Parliament and the Commission , is it judicious to fail to take account of our opinion , and is it reasonable for either the Commission or the Council to neglect the opinion of the people we represent ?
Ladies and gentlemen , as we now have a new report before us and a new team here in the Chamber , I must repeat what I said at the beginning .
I would like to ask for your help in making sure that we finish by 11.30 a.m. , as that is when voting time begins , and we cannot overrun .
So I would be grateful if honourable Members could please keep to their speaking time , and I would also ask the Commission to help out here , although they can of course talk for as long as they wish . That way we can finish on time .
, draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy .
( ES ) Mr President , I will be very brief .
I simply want to say that , when the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy received Mr Dary ' s report , after a detailed examination of the problems facing the banana industry , we came to the conclusion in our committee that the solution proposed by Mr Dary met the absolutely fundamental conditions for its success .
Firstly , with regard to the international obligations of the European Union , not only towards the ACP countries , but also within the World Trade Organisation .
As you know , the European Union has been condemned for its regime of granting licences for this product , but has maintained the viability of the quota regime proposed by Mr Dary .
In fact , in the Commission ' s current negotiations , it appears that the main suppliers would prefer this system .
On the other hand , this is the system which best defends the principle of multifunctionality of agriculture , protects the European Union producers , also protects the developing countries , with whom we have a very special relationship , is sensitive to the protection of fundamental social regulations and the protection of the environment and , lastly , it is the system which best obeys the principle of consumer protection .
For all these reasons , my committee voted in favour of Mr Dary ' s draft report .
Mr President , we all want to see the end of the ' banana war ' , but the immense complexity of the problem deceives no one .
Clearly the banana has become a political issue , with the dispute symbolising a certain conception of world trade , of a Europe which stands by and defends its decisions , its specific political nature and its commitment to the countries of the South .
So on this issue - I know - the Commission ' s task is not an easy one .
It is torn between contradictory positions and I understand the difficulties encountered in trying to reconcile the various interests .
But while I share the desire to put an end to a trade war which is poisoning transatlantic relations , this cannot be done at any price , abandoning without compensation the principles of justice and solidarity which guide the action of the European Union .
I , for one - and there are many in this Parliament who feel the same - refuse to see Europe dictated to , even indirectly , by a handful of multinationals with colonialist attitudes and anachronistic social behaviour .
I am sorry , too , that we have not fought for the retention of a specific quota for the ACP countries which alone guaranteed them access to the market .
But the rapporteur ' s proposal is satisfactory because it defends the quota system and rejects any automatic move to an exclusively tariff-based regime .
So I thank him and I also thank Mr Fernández Martín for putting the committee ' s point of view .
Of course , the ACP countries know they must adapt to world trade .
But let us give them time .
Let us give them enough time , let us give them the means to produce their plants themselves , let us help them build their greenhouses .
Let us encourage organic farming and , in ten years , believe me , the price of African bananas will have fallen to the level of dollar bananas .
They will then become competitive .
If we impose the brutality of an exclusively tariff-based regime too rapidly , bananas are going to taste incredibly bitter to thousands of small African producers .
Mr President , the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on whose behalf I speak , broadly supports the report by Mr Dary and , in general , rejects the Commission ' s proposal .
The European Commission has made this proposal supposedly in a spirit of consensus but , frankly , having analysed it at length with the best will in the world , I cannot find a single reason to accept it .
I take comfort in the fact that I am not the only one .
The Commission ' s proposal has not been well received by anyone , neither by the Community producers , nor by the ACP countries .
It seems that the Council cannot easily accept it .
Parliament does not like it either .
What is even more serious however is that not even the United States like it .
In this proposal , the Commission not only renounces the defence of Community interests and the interests of the ACP countries but has also , in my opinion , abandoned the minimum degree of neutrality required .
The World Trade Organisation condemned the system of licences in force , which must undoubtedly be modified .
However , the Commission proposes many other things .
It proposes removing any type of quota , and I would like to ask : does it intend in the future to remove the system of aid to producers ?
Has the Commission decided to begin the reform of the common agricultural policy with a reform of the COM in bananas ?
After bananas , will other sectors fall ?
When will we stop protecting Austrian white wines , for example , ?
This clearly remains an open question within the WTO .
However , after the experience of Seattle , I suppose that we should have learnt something from the point of view expressed by the developing countries and , especially , in this case , by the ACP countries , with whom we have commitments and obligations to fulfil .
It is in defence of our obligations and commitments to the ACP countries that the amendments have been presented on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am speaking for our ' shadow ' rapporteur , Mr Vatanen , and I would like to mention that this is now the fifth time since 1993 and the introduction of the common organisation of the market in bananas that the WTO has considered the Community rules to run counter to international trade regulations .
The banana controversy is a good example of how hard it is to reconcile the interests of the fifteen Member States , the Union , the ACP banana producing countries , European consumers and our trading partners .
I congratulate the Commission for striving to reach a compromise that has regard to the various interest groups .
It is right that the European Union should bear responsibility for seeing that European agricultural producers , including banana producers , earn a sufficient income .
It is not right , however , that the EU and businesses operating within its territory should suffer annual losses of around EUR 400 million because of trade sanctions by the USA and Ecuador , which are a result of our violating the GATT agreement with regard to banana imports .
I would like to express my concern regarding the consequences of Mr Dary ' s report for trade policy .
To adopt the report as it is could result in a strong reaction from our trading partners , as it does not even include the possibility of talks to ease access to the market .
There is strong evidence that some Latin American countries will refuse to accept import quotas - at least not without the prospect of better access to EU markets .
For this reason , I would appeal to you to support Mr Chichester ' s Amendment No 38 , which states that if the EU does not abolish import quotas it will at least indicate its intention to start official WTO talks on the future distribution of import quotas .
The Union has lost the banana dispute in the WTO four times already and it cannot afford to lose a fifth time , for three reasons . Firstly , the continuation , despite the bans by the WTO , of the EU ' s import quota system , which has been found to be discriminatory will lead to the continuance of trade sanctions costing hundreds of millions of euros .
Secondly , if our trading partners receive permission from the WTO to even disregard intellectual property rights , the costs of sanctions will be enormous and could cause long-term damage to EU businesses .
Thirdly , continued breaches of the regulations will hurt our image internationally in matters of trade , which might weaken the case for the European agricultural subsidy model .
This , meanwhile , would have very serious consequences for the whole of European agriculture .
It is high time we showed ourselves to be credible and mature trading partners , as waking up to the realities of the present will accord with our real interests in the long term .
Mr President , the WTO has challenged our Community regulation on bananas several times and each time we have had to redefine the content of this COM and suffer the burden of the fines imposed on us as reparations for damage caused .
It is certainly not easy to find a balanced response which would satisfy our four objectives , which are : supplying consumers at reasonable prices , guaranteeing a future to our Community producers , honouring the Union ' s commitments to ACP countries and , finally , at the same time , presenting a case which cannot be attacked by the WTO .

However , in the light of these four concerns , Mr Dary ' s proposal is entirely apt , at least that was the feeling of Parliament ' s Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development in unanimously supporting it , a quite exceptional occurrence for such a sensitive subject .
In fact it seems to us that the choice of maintaining the import quotas plus preferential tariffs for the ACP countries for ten years , instead of six , would make it possible to plan for the future of Community and ACP producers , who face a form of competition tantamount to social and environmental dumping .
That we are seeking elimination of any automatic movement to ' tariff only ' should not be regarded as downright rejection of the measure .
Our intention is to let the situation develop in a way that is economically and socially tolerable for our producers and those of the ACP countries , without damaging the openness of our market .
So the European Union certainly has arguments to present to the WTO , so that this time our approach is recognised as valid .
Of course , the Union may have difficulty determining the quotas in the immediate future , but is that exercise any more difficult than agreeing on adjustments to the customs tariff in the ' tariff only ' hypothesis ?
For my part I am convinced that the approaching start of the next WTO cycle should mean we can handle this issue positively in a more global context and for that I am counting on the Commission ' s determination .
Mr President , it is high time that we resolved this complex and long-standing issue once and for all .
As we all know , there are many competing claims - the claims of ACP banana producers , Community banana producers , EU businesses which have been hit hard by US sanctions , the EU 's role and standing in the WTO and , of course , the rights and interests of European banana consumers .
It will not be possible to satisfy fully all these claims and therefore we have to accept a compromise .
The Commission 's proposal is a compromise between those who demand an immediate move to a tariff only system and those who wish to ignore the WTO rulings and stick with the flawed regime as it is .
That is why the majority of the ELDR Group supports the Commission 's proposal to continue a tariff-rate quota system for a transitional period before moving to a definitive tariff only system .
The Dary report , on the other hand , is premised on the somewhat unrealistic notion that we can ignore rulings from the WTO altogether .
It gives complete priority to the concerns of EU banana producers over the equally legitimate concerns of innocent EU businesses in other sectors suffering from arbitrary US sanctions .
Most strange of all , it risks complicating matters so much further that the Commission , as stated in its proposal of November last year , will be obliged to move directly to a tariff only system .
This would be exactly the opposite of the objectives of those who support this report .
I have also heard that during the vote , which will take place either today or tomorrow , some may advocate referral back to committee .
This would be an undignified act of foot-dragging which would do nothing to address the long-term issues at stake .
We need stability for European and ACP banana producers and EU consumers .
That can be done by rejecting this report and supporting the Commission 's compromise proposal .
Mr President , the common organisation of markets in the banana sector has allowed this sector , which is fundamental to the sometimes fragile economies of the ACP countries and the outermost regions of the European Union , to function .
Less than seven years have passed since the entry into force of the COM on bananas , and the Commission is now proposing a profound modification of its operation .
Furthermore , this has been preceded by disputes within the World Trade Organisation which have generated uncertainties and which have led to difficulties in its correct functioning for Community producers .
For us , a transitional period until 2006 , as proposed by the Commission , is not acceptable , and we should wait at least until 2010 before deciding on possible reforms .
On the other hand , an exclusively tariff-based system is not coherent with the achievement of the objectives of the COM , given that it does not guarantee access to the market or the survival of the Community and ACP producers .
The Commission proposes a quota of 353 000 tonnes and a possible increase in the event of a rise in demand .
Given that the additional tariff quota is not consolidated , its quantity should be capable of being adapted to Community demand , not only in the event of an increase , but also in the event of a decrease .
In any event , we should safeguard the Community preference and prevent any marginalisation of Community production .
Lastly , special attention should be given to the development of the situation of the Community and ACP producers , who are already in a vulnerable position and will be even more so in a context of intense and open competition .
The Commission must carry out a report in advance assessing the consequences of the application of any modification of the system in order to provide the due compensation for its negative effects on prices and incomes as a result of the increase in the global income in question .
I would therefore , Mr President , like to offer my heartfelt congratulations to Mr Dary .
We support his report .
He has been generous with the amendments of the different political groups .
Furthermore , I hope that the Commission will send a clear political signal which will take account of his points of view .
Mr President , the reason we are having to express our opinion on a draft for the banana COM yet again , for the fifth time since 1993 , is the relentless attacks on the Community regime by three large American multinationals . They dominate the world market in bananas and the WTO backed their interests after an appeal was lodged by the United States , which is also imposing very heavy unilateral sanctions on a series of our companies .
But , in fact , almost 60 % of the 4 million tonnes of bananas consumed annually in the European Union are supplied not by Community or ACP producers , but by Latin American third countries where the American companies run vast plantations under production conditions characterised by scant regard for social and environmental concerns .
In traditional ACP countries and Union countries , which already have only a minority share of the European market , bananas are grown in small production units , usually family concerns , and in areas where there is no real possibility of alternative occupation .
So they represent an essential element in the balance of the economic and social fabric of these fragile territories .
After having driven the Ivory Coast to despair to allow five multinationals to lower their production costs to the detriment of cocoa producers , are we now going to grant three American multinationals the exclusive right to the world market for bananas , including the European market , ruining our own producers and those of our ACP partners into the bargain ?
Are we willing to sacrifice production which means life or death to some of our territories for peace at the WTO ?
Unfortunately , that certainly seems to be the route the Commission has chosen , with a short and dangerous transitional system and an exclusively tariff - and uncertain - formula as from 2006 , which would imperil both ACP and European production and put the Community banana market under the control of a few large operators , able to set the profit margins through the commercialisation of dollar bananas .
So the Commission ' s proposal is in line with neither the interests of Community and ACP producers , nor the long-term interests of European consumers , because it actually encourages the emergence of a far from competitive market situation .
That is why it has been unanimously rejected not only by our Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , but also by the ACP-EU Joint Assembly and the French Parliament .
So I hope our Parliament will follow the Committee on Agriculture , and the European Commission will feel obliged to make new proposals to us , more in accordance with European interests and our cooperation with the ACP countries .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , seven out of every ten bananas eaten in Europe come from Central America via three multinationals , all with reduced customs duties of EUR 75 per tonne instead of EUR 850 .
We are giving the United States a marvellous present there !
Well , it is not enough !
The United States wants more .
Technically , what does it want ?
It wants the end of import licences , because the B licences give Community bananas and ACP bananas priority sales over dollar bananas .
But , most of all and politically , the United States actually wants the monopoly of the future Eastern European market for their multinationals .
What is Europe doing to face that challenge ?
It is divided and getting bogged down .
We are divided from our German friends .
Indeed , because of the ancient links with the 1945 German diaspora to Latin America , Germany has eaten 100 % dollar bananas since 1960 - though at first they were ' armband ' bananas . So much so - it is an open secret - that the three American banana multinationals put their banana butter on SPD and CDU parsnips .
But we are also getting bogged down in technical proposals .
Thus the Commission proposes , before surrendering totally to the United States , a six-year transition period when , in essence , there would be three quotas , including the ACP quota and the dollar quota .
From 2006 , there would no longer be anything but a common customs tariff which would have equal impact on the bananas of the poor of Africa and the bananas of the rich , the multinationals .
We could undoubtedly challenge that , and our excellent rapporteur , Mr Dary , does challenge it .
He proposes that the respite of six years be extended to ten years .
Another four years , Mr American executioner !
And we have tabled amendments too .
We call for regionalisation of aid , because Guadeloupe is further away than the Canaries ; quarterly payment ; cyclone compensation ; the maintenance of the ACP quota ; historical guidelines for imports , instead of first come , first served .
Well , all that is very fine , but the battle is elsewhere .
The battle is for Community preference , first and foremost .
We have to choose : either the Canaries , Madeira and the Antilles - or Chiquita .
It is regional policy that is at stake .
Do we want the outermost regions which depend 100 % on bananas , like the Canaries , to survive , or do we want Dole and Chiquita to accumulate more wealth ?
It is cooperation policy that is at stake .
We have to choose : either Africa and the Lomé Convention , or the WTO .
We have to choose : either Europe ' s social policy and human rights , or the multinational slave-drivers who produce with social costs totalling 8 % instead of the 42 % social costs in the Canaries , Madeira or the Antilles .
This is about protection of financial interests , because when OLAF disputes a few centimes of Members ' taxi expenses yet is not interested in the annual present of two billion dollars from Chiquita , there is a problem .
The United States was found guilty of two billion dollars ' worth of fiscal fraud and it has changed nothing .
When the United States alters its policy , we will discuss the mere 191 million for bananas .
When the United States stops cheating for the benefit of Boeing , Kodak , Cargil and Ford , we will discuss bananas .
In the meantime , we need long , global , political negotiations .
We must talk about Iraq , Echelon , Serbia ; put everything on the table .
Sanction for sanction , retaliation for retaliation .
The banana is a moment of truth .
Europe can either surrender or stand up and be counted .
There is a saying that bananas can be eaten from both ends .
Does Europe want to stand up or be eaten from both ends ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we must put an end to the tug of war over a system that complies with the WTO Agreement .
The EU has not exactly covered itself in glory in this almost endless debate .
I respect the Member States ' efforts to protect their banana producers against a considerable loss of income , but such considerations cannot justify persistently refusing to comply with agreements under international law .
It should be our objective to create a market organisation consistent with the WTO dispute settlement body ' s proposals as soon as possible , chiefly in the interests of companies which , because of the introduction of the COM in bananas , have been forced to accept financial losses which have threatened their very existence . This is also in the interests of those who have been hit by the punitive tariffs imposed by the United States .
No one should underestimate the adverse impact of export restrictions of this kind on the economies of export-oriented countries , and above all on related jobs .
This is an area where some Member States are indulging in protectionism at the expense of others .
We pay subsidies to banana producers , we have to grapple with punitive tariffs , and we have to pay excessive banana prices in our supermarkets .
Those Member States who want to continue with these restrictions have to recognise that they are partly to blame for the current situation , because they have quite simply forgotten to make structural changes in the field of banana production .
The lack of competitiveness of EU banana production cannot be allowed to justify a refusal to accept uniform and non-discriminatory access to the European market .
Mr President , Commissioner , it falls to me to summarise the problems of the COM in bananas in just a few minutes .
That is a considerable challenge and one which makes no sense unless we understand what is really at stake in this issue . It has been a source of conflict for at least a decade , both at the trading level - between the operators - and at the institutional and international level .
The reason for that is simple .
The banana is now one of the great basic human foodstuffs and control of the trade clearly has a geostrategic dimension .
This is a tropical fruit marketed in the Northern hemisphere and its distribution is also a fundamental part of North-South cooperation .
The real question we face is whether or not the European Union can succeed in organising , within its own market , a juxtaposition of flows from the producer regions of Europe , the ACP countries and Latin America .
Today we are debating a proposal from the European Commission which , by providing for an automatic swing towards tariffs , will lead to the ineluctable disappearance of production in European regions , which currently represents 25 % of our market supply .
Such a development would be contrary to the actual purpose of regional policy and the common agricultural policy - the two pillars of the European Union - and we do not want that under any circumstances .
So we must resolutely set the prospect to one side by adopting the Dary report .
I congratulate and thank Mr Dary .
For those fundamental reasons , and to protect the interests of consumers on the European market by maintaining a juxtaposition of flows from the Union , the ACP countries and third countries , in the context of genuine and sustained competition based on an adequate number of operators , we ask you to accept all the proposed amendments .
Failure on this sensitive banana issue would be an admission of weakness on the part of the European Union and would represent a very strong and rousing signal , exploited by all opponents of the common agricultural policy to oppose the social , family and multi-functional agricultural model .
It is our duty to preserve everything the Union stands for , especially on the eve of its enlargement .
Mr President , the defenders of the interests of the multinationals in this Parliament have not studied the subject of bananas properly .
They have not studied it properly because they talk about the multiple decisions of the World Trade Organisation and Community violations of international law .
In fact , so far the World Trade Organisation has only declared two extremes incompatible with international commercial law .
The first is the partnership system which linked the importing of non-Community bananas with that of Community bananas .
Community regulations on bananas were modified to comply with that decision .
The second refers to the incompatibility of the exemption in favour of ACP countries within the Community system .
In other respects , the Community system is wholly in accordance with community rules , international law and the rules of the World Trade Organisation .
The problem is that in this case the Commission has been more papist than the Pope and , as Mr Fernández Martín has pointed out , more in favour of free trade than the multinationals themselves .
In other words , at the moment the Commission wants to throw out the banana with everything else - it wants to throw out the baby with the bath water .
It does not remain within the strict limits of compliance with our international obligations , but it is taking a political decision which would lead - as Mr Fernández Martín pointed out - to the dismantling of the whole of our Community agricultural policy .
The Dary report , the Westendorp opinion and the Fernández Martín opinion ask the Commission to adapt so as to conform to international law , not to go beyond what it is laid down by the World Trade Organisation , to negotiate and , furthermore , to take account of the fact that , if we give in on this point , we are going to give in on other more important points , such as the maintenance of social and environmental policy requirements on a global level , which is how we stand internationally .
Mr President , Commissioner , the European Commission ' s proposal on the reform of the banana sector is negative , unacceptable and disastrous for the agricultural sector in the outermost regions and the ACP countries affected by it , which , of course , supply 40 % of the Community market .
I have put this so strongly because , if implemented in the terms which have been laid out , it would lead to the sinking of the economies of thousands of families who live off this very special activity on Community islands such as the Canaries , Madeira , Guadeloupe , Martinique and Crete , not forgetting the producing areas of the ACP countries .
It would therefore lead to social and economic deterioration in regions which are already least favoured and suffering serious and permanent difficulties with their development , with horrendous difficulties in terms of conversion and which are vulnerable to the uniform and homogenous commercial measures which are taken at international level . In my opinion , the European Commission has given in to such measures , incapable of recognising the regional agricultural reality and diversity of the countries of the Union and the need for a genuine policy of solidarity and cooperation with the ACP countries which , until recently , were colonial territories of countries which now form part of the Union .

Therefore , it is a good thing that the Commission is receptive to the report by Mr Dary , who I congratulate , and the amendments tabled , which are intended to achieve the following : correct the imbalances created by globalisation and persuade the Commission to be sensitive to the problems of banana-producing families , not to submit to imports with single customs tariffs and to fight where necessary to maintain , for a reasonable period , its commitment to the citizens and the agricultural organisations involved . These organisations make up one of the most vulnerable sectors of very special regions of the Union and the ACP countries , with the accompanying social , economic and environmental repercussions .
For many of us , bananas are a national issue , since they are related to our history and our culture .
Mr President , it is important for this House to approve Mr Dary ' s report , as the Commission proposal to introduce a tariff only system for banana imports by 2006 is unacceptable .
The flat-rate system that the Commission intends to introduce would cause producers in the outermost regions of the European Union , such as Madeira and the ACP countries , to go bankrupt .
Furthermore , the fiasco at the last World Trade Organisation meeting demonstrated that the WTO is in no position to meet the expectations and demands of the public and of consumers in certain respects , such as product quality , environmental protection , training , social conditions and worker protection , as is evident from the report .
If our policies are to be consistent with our declarations of support for the ACP countries and for the development of the outermost regions of the European Union , we cannot allow agriculture in those regions and its future development - in which the production and export of bananas play a major part - to be squeezed by waves of dollar bananas from the large plantations that banana multinationals own in Latin America .
It is against this background that we are supporting most of the amendments in the report , which we also contributed to . I have in mind in particular the call for a transitional period of not less than 10 years , and which should not imply a move to a tariff only system , as the Commission should assess the impact of the new situation on prices and on the income of banana producers in these regions , so as to ensure that compensatory aid can be adjusted , based on the principle of guaranteed income for producers .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in the long run , we cannot swim against the tide of free and fair world trade with the common organisation of the market in bananas .
We ourselves also have to observe the rules that we signed up to when the WTO was founded .
By infringing them and thus triggering sanctions , we are already blocking access to the major US markets - and also increasingly to Latin America ' s markets - for whole sectors of our economy .
We will be jointly responsible for large numbers of lay-offs in these sectors if we as the European Union do not change our stance .
That is why we - and I am now speaking on behalf of a significant minority in the PPE Group , which could be a majority the next time - support the Commission ' s position .
Following a transitional period , a tariff of EUR 275 per tonne is to be introduced for bananas from third countries , from which bananas from ACP countries would be exempt .
This will protect the essential interests of the ACP producer countries .
However , the Achilles ' heel of the Commission ' s proposals is the lack of sufficient protection for the interests of banana producers within the European Union , essentially in the peripheral regions and the overseas departments .
They are up in arms about this omission - particularly our French colleagues , and I assume the same applies to Portugal and Spain .
Commissioner Fischler , things are not as the officials in your directorate-general perhaps claim - and I would also like to address this comment to Mr Lamy .
The arrangements for EU banana producers are not as good as they might be .
There is still a need for a political compromise here .
The structural measures envisaged in Title III of the Regulation on the common organisation of the market in bananas need to be considerably strengthened .
If we made just 10-20 % of the total punitive tariffs of EUR 400 million , that is to say EUR 40-80 million , available as agriculture budget appropriations , instead of diverting it for other purposes , we could help our banana producers a great deal .
I call on the Commission to improve the structural measures and so open up the way for a compromise which is fundamentally in accordance with your proposals .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first I would like to present my compliments to the rapporteur , Mr Dary , because he has chosen the path of resistance and not renunciation on this complex issue .
Indeed , we find the Commission ' s new proposal unacceptable , because it makes unacceptable concessions to the multinationals of Latin America .
Is there anyone in this Parliament unaware of the role played by these multinationals in financing American campaigns ?
Is anyone here unaware that the food safety conditions involved in the production of these bananas are dubious to say the least , and the social conditions are dominated by total disregard for the rights of men , women and children ?
Who can ignore that by bending to the diktat of the United States - under cover of the WTO - the European Union would throw 35 000 of its own nationals in the Canaries and over 30 000 in the French overseas territories out of work ?
Because , ladies and gentlemen , adopting a ' tariff only ' system after a transitional period of six years , as the Commission proposes , would truly condemn our producers to failure and despair .
That is why , like Mr Dary , I urge the maintenance of quotas and I oppose automatic passage to the tariff system , because , for my part , I refuse to sacrifice our producers in Martinique or Guadeloupe on the altar of a liberalisation beyond all regulation .
Ladies and gentlemen , let us make no mistake , if Europe surrenders on the banana issue today , it will surrender on sugar or rum tomorrow , and the next day it will have to abandon its social model and its development policy .
That is why I want to tell Commissioners Fischler and Lamy , in all seriousness , that , while I understand their legitimate desire to put an end to this dispute , they cannot do it at the expense of the poorest citizens in the European Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the banana regime of the European Union has already been condemned four times by the World Trade Organisation .
After the United States , Ecuador has also now obtained permission to take retaliatory action for an amount of USD 200 million .
Let us not forget that such punitive measures serve absolutely no purpose at all for our banana producers , but have extremely negative effects on European industry and employment .
Therefore , we cannot afford to be condemned like this again .
We must now come to an arrangement as quickly as possible that complies with the rulings of the WTO , with the promises made to the ACP countries and which is in the interests of our producers and consumers .
That is not easy , but the present system is untenable .
We must , therefore , urgently find and accept a compromise and a more liberal attitude .
In view of the fact that the Commission proposal , in my modest opinion , meets these requirements , I shall support it .
Commissioner , I too remember the European Union introducing a regulation in 1993 on the organisation of the market in bananas , so as to ensure protection of outlets and income for Community producers and to guarantee the exports of the ACP countries to the Community market .
Although they do not produce a single kilo of bananas , the United States has complained to the WTO about the Community banana import regime .
Their one aim was to defend the interests of their great banana companies which are effectively ravaging Latin America and which already dominate over 70 % of the world market .
In 1999 , the WTO panel , orchestrated by the United States , condemned the Community ' s import licences system .
The Commission has submitted to that verdict by amending the market conditions to end up with a ' tariff only ' system in 2006 .
The implementation of this new regulation , which actually goes beyond the WTO ruling , would call into question the distribution of Community and ACP products and would aggravate an already fragile social situation , especially in the French Overseas Territories where the selling price of bananas had already fallen below 3 francs in 1998 and was less than 2 francs in 1999 .
I am glad the Committee on Agriculture has rejected not only the amendments championed by the intermediaries of the American multinationals , but also the Commission ' s proposals .
I entirely approve of the Dary report which opposes the automatic move to a ' tariff only ' system and which defends the principles which presided over the establishment of the common organisation of markets , especially Community preference .
By adopting the Dary report , we will be sending the Council and the Commission the clear signal that our Parliament is determined to defend the interests of Community and ACP producers , to make the WTO recognise that the preferential agreements constitute development aid instruments .
Our vote will also express our rejection of any compromise with the United States that would sacrifice the Community and ACP producers to the profit of the dollar banana .
Mr President , I would like to start by putting some questions to the Commission in the person of Commissioner Fischler .
Why is it that for the banana trade you are advocating pure and simple liberalisation with effect from 2006 , whereas in the case of meat , milk and cereals , which absorb 68 % of EAGGF Guarantee Section resources , you refer to the special characteristics of European agriculture , as the Commission did in Seattle ?
Surely it is unacceptable to be applying two different sets of criteria .
Is the Commission not guilty of double standards here ?
Are bananas the poor relation of agricultural production in the European Union ?
Should the European agricultural model not be used to safeguard banana production in the European Union which will certainly be threatened by the liberalisation being proposed ?
Is there also a plan to liberalise trade in meat , milk and cereals ?
Will the Commission yield to the more radical approach adopted by the United States at a time when the Americans are significantly increasing their support for agriculture ?
Is no attention being paid at all to the fact that bananas are the main agricultural product in four outermost regions which are amongst the 10 most disadvantaged regions in the European Union ?
What is the relevance of Article 299 ( 2 ) of the Treaty , which provides for special treatment for the outermost regions , to the proposal to amend the Regulation on the COM in bananas ?
The multi-functionality of European agriculture , which is a key aspect of the European agricultural model I have already mentioned , needs to be reflected in this reform , since in Madeira , for example ( the region that I represent in this House ) the environmental aspect of agriculture is as important as , or even more important than , its economic aspect .
If banana production were to cease on the island of Madeira , it would represent an enormous environmental catastrophe as well as a serious loss of income for thousands of families .
Furthermore , as we saw in Seattle , the new round of WTO negotiations should be a genuine development round .
For this reason , we can justify giving priority to bananas produced in the European Union and in the ACP countries when we reform the common organisation of the market in bananas and this would be perfectly legitimate .
And it is only by maintaining import quotas that we can achieve this objective , which is perfectly compatible with World Trade Organisation rules .
Mr President , Commissioner Fischler , banana production has a special significance in certain less developed countries , signatories to the ACP agreements , island regions such as Crete , and , in particular , outermost regions such as Madeira , the Canary Islands , Martinique and Guadeloupe .
We are not talking about fully developed regions in the centre of Europe which have countless alternatives when faced with changes in market conditions , and where the common agricultural policy invests most of its resources .
For this reason it is not possible for us to accept radical changes in the Community ' s trade policy in this field unless we take full account of its regional impact and unless we take the necessary measures in this field in terms of economic and social cohesion .
The Lisbon European Council instructed the Commission to present as quickly as possible practical measures aimed at implementing the Commission ' s report on the application of Article 299 ( 2 ) in relation to the outermost regions .
Agriculture is absolutely vital to many of these regions , which are hoping that the Commission will act swiftly and decisively to maintain regional conditions for agricultural development .
Mr President , I believe that these Commission proposals will mean that a number of African , Caribbean and Pacific countries will go out of business .
That will lead to poverty and even more deprivation .
Yes , we have to simplify the system .
It is far too complicated at the moment .
But I believe those countries need time to diversify properly and that is why I would agree with a ten-year transitional period .
Chiquita , Dole and Del Monte , who produce in Latin American countries , have not seen their production levels go down since 1993 . Their access to the market has not gone down since 1993 .
All they want to do is get more access to the market at the expense of the ACP countries .
Yes , we have to find a solution .
Producers in the UK are being held to ransom by the USA .
We must not let ACP countries go to the wall just to save companies in the EU .
This is not just about bananas ; it is about trade with developing countries overall .
I am quite aware of the inconsistencies in the common organisation of the market in bananas and associated relations with the WTO .
It is difficult to take into account the various requirements and follow a policy which will favour the weakest parties and supply a high-quality product at affordable prices .
Having said that , it is not that I do not think it is possible , as put forward in the Commission proposal , to adopt , as of 2006 , a system which does not impose quota restrictions or tariffs on ACP countries or any other countries .
Postponing this until 2010 would not make much difference , although that would undoubtedly give us more time to find less damaging solutions .
The Commission ' s proposal is too similar to the proposal of the Council of Ministers , which does not consider it necessary to allocate part of the budget to a policy of cooperation and protection of the Community ' s primary producers in accordance with WTO negotiations .
Rather than adapting to the WTO system , we should endeavour to reform it without giving in to blackmail by US multinationals which make a profit out of exploiting poor countries .
We are all aware of the illiberal acts of these multinationals , which are destroying and corrupting both people and the environment .
The challenge should be to reform the WTO .
The Seattle Summit and the huge public demonstrations made the need plain .
We must reform the WTO , without adversely affecting development and protection policies for poor countries , small producers and craftsmen , but , as per the Dary report on facilitating access to the market for fair-trade organisations in order to invest in environmentally-friendly and socially viable farming practices .
This should be the European Union ' s policy .
Mr President , I speak from three perspectives .
That of external trade , where I believe the European Union should uphold progress towards a liberalised world-trade order ; that of industry , European industry , where jobs and industries are at threat from sanctions and they are innocent victims of these sanctions ; and I speak from the perspective of a UK Member of this House who is tired of receiving letters of complaint from companies whose business and whose workers ' jobs are at threat from the sanctions through no fault of their own .
I regret various aspects of this Dary report .
I have to say that this timescale of ten years is wholly unrealistic and unreasonable .
I regret the attempt to cling on to quotas and to interfere with trade in that way .
Of course , I also regret proposals for higher rates of tariff , which is another intervention in trade .
The amendment , which has been put down in my name and others , calls for a negotiated settlement of this dispute , which is World Trade Organisation compatible .
That is essential .
We have been down this road several times now and innocent companies and jobs are at risk and being threatened as a result of our failure to come to grips with this situation .
I support the Commissioner 's efforts .
He has a difficult task .
I have to say that I cannot think of anything more reasonable or pragmatic or sensible than the amendment which a number of colleagues have supported me in submitting .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , like many of my colleagues in the Group of the European People 's Party , I reject the Dary report , but there are also some amendments that seem very reasonable to me .
I have in mind above all Amendments Nos 33 and 34 .
Amendment No 33 calls for financial support for ecologically sound farming in third countries also .
Amendment No 34 calls for fair trade bananas to be supported regardless of their country of origin .
By the way , I think it is a shame that the Greens are not taking part in this debate and also highlighting these aspects .
But through these two amendments this House is clearly indicating that it also wants a global approach , and there are certainly small producers who behave in an exemplary fashion , not only in the traditional ACP countries and in the EU , but also in Latin America and in the non-traditional ACP countries .
In Ecuador , 60 % of banana producers are small producers with less than 20 hectares , and they are suffering from unjustifiable discrimination .
The world is not just black and white , as some people would have us believe , and the Latin American countries have been quite justified in their complaints to the WTO about our common market organisation .
That is why contradictions exist within the Dary report , which , on the one hand , advocates a global approach and support for fair trade bananas throughout the world , but , at the same time , continues to create difficulties of this kind for small producers in Latin America .
I consider fixing the quotas for ten years to be a step in the wrong direction , and I believe that the Commission was already going the right way before this .
To my mind , they could have moved rather more forcefully towards liberalisation , but they were going in the right direction .

I would of course be delighted if Mr Chichester ' s amendment , which I have also signed , were to be accepted , but I would like to tell Commissioner Fischler that even if this amendment is not accepted , Amendment No 5 , which was accepted by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , will give him the remit of coming up with a workable compromise acceptable to the WTO .
That is why I believe that the Commission will , in any case , have a mandate to negotiate , including a mandate from Parliament .
Mr President , Commissioner , at this point in the debate I am not going to enter into a discussion of the Dary report , nor discuss its fundamental points , but I do wish to say that the official position of the PPE Group is in support of the entire Dary report .
That is the official position .
Commissioner , your proposal does not accord with the objectives nor resolve the problems being suffered by the banana industry and politically it is not worthy of our producers .
Mr Schwaiger recognised this a moment ago .
Nor does the Commission ' s proposal comply with our international commitments .
However , the most serious problem is that , immersed in difficult negotiations with the World Trade Organisation , we are showing publicly , in black and white , where our weak points lie .
Therefore , Commissioner , I ask you to listen to this Parliament - not simply to hear us - and to take note of the directions indicated in the Dary report and the opinions of the two competent committees .
This Parliament is sending you a very clear political message , unanimously from the committee responsible in this area , and I hope that this House will support it by a majority .
Judging by the great political sensitivity which you have always shown , I am sure that you will understand that message .
Furthermore , I am sure that you will find a viable route in the direction indicated .
Therefore , Commissioner , act politically , find a solution and listen to this Parliament .
This is not the time to fail to take account of this House .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to thank you , Mr Dary , for your wide-ranging and appreciative comments on the Commission ' s proposal to amend the common organisation of the market in bananas .
By way of introduction , I would like to stress that the Commission takes a positive view of the principles behind many of the amendments , such as the system of historical references for the allocation of quotas .
In fact , these reflect our discussions with the WTO complainants and the ACP producers .
However , the Commission believes that we should not amend our proposal at this delicate stage in the discussions , and I therefore have no alternative but to reject your amendments .
I would like to give my reasons for this rejection area by area .
The first area is the deletion of references to a tariff only system and an automatic move to such a system after a certain transitional period .
I will make no bones about it : the main objective of our proposal is to bring the COM in bananas into line with WTO rules .
The most important part of the proposal is the introduction of the tariff system after a certain transitional period .
On the other hand , this requires agreement with interested parties on the management of tariff quotas during the transitional period .
The Commission firmly believes that your wish to replace the tariff system with a permanent tariff quota system will only lead to renewed attacks in the WTO .
In addition , I would like to point out that the proposal already includes a request to the Council to empower the Commission to enter into negotiations under Article XXVIII of the GATT , so there is no need to refer to this in the regulation .
The second important area is the issue of managing tariff quotas .
The Commission is attempting to negotiate with the principal suppliers about allocating tariff quotas on the basis of historical references .
It would not be advisable to additionally define the individual options until these discussions have been concluded .
Furthermore , with regard to the demand that the tariff quota administration system should not have an adverse effect on operators and producers already present on the market , I must say that if we have to modify the whole COM now , there can be no guarantee that things will stay exactly as they were .
That really would be demanding the impossible .
Our discussions have also covered other alternatives for managing quota C. However , the Commission believes that it would not be appropriate at present to modify its proposal for auctions in relation to quota C , because auctions of this kind are , in any case , a reliable method of allocating licences .
The third area , which relates to quotas , is the extension of the period for maintaining the quota system to at least 10 years .
The Commission considers that extending the period in this way would reduce the credibility of the central theme of our proposal , which is that the COM in bananas should be brought into line with the WTO rules as soon as possible .
As we explained in the explanatory memorandum , the quickest way to do this is through the tariff system .
The Commission has proposed the transitional period because it gives time for producers within the Community and in the ACP countries to prepare for the new system .
Furthermore , if we moved automatically to a tariff only system , there would be no point in having an interim review or an appraisal at the end of the transitional period .
With regard to the tariff preference for ACP countries , the Commission believes that EUR 275 per tonne is sufficient to secure access to the Community market for these countries .
A higher preference would also lead to renewed attacks in the WTO .
If the higher preference limited Latin American countries ' access under quota C , this could be interpreted as if we wanted in practice to introduce a special ACP quota .
I shall now turn to the special support measures for our own producers in the European Union .
As I have already said , the principle aim of the Commission ' s proposal is to bring the COM into line with the WTO ' s final ruling .
The final ruling does not affect our intra-Community support system .
Furthermore , I would like to point out that this is a deficiency payment system , which means that it has a built-in guarantee . If prices fall , subsidies automatically increase .
My last point is about measures giving equal access to organic and fair trade bananas .
There are already horizontal measures in place guaranteeing equal access for organic bananas from third countries and organic bananas from the Community .
In addition , the European Union can grant subsidies for the production of organic bananas under the agri-environmental measures envisaged in the development plan for rural areas .
Measures to support sales of organic bananas can be financed under national and regional programmes .
Fair trade bananas would also come under the horizontal measures for fair trade , which , I hope , will soon be adopted on the basis of a Commission communication to this effect .
As you know , this communication is not just about fair trade bananas , but about fair trade in general .
In addition to the possibilities I have just mentioned , it is also possible to provide support for developing production of organic bananas and also of fair trade bananas in the ACP countries under the Regulation establishing a special framework of assistance for traditional ACP suppliers of bananas .
The Commission is grateful for the wide-ranging discussions that have taken place here today .
Even if it feels unable to accept Parliament ' s amendments because of the current international situation , I must say that the whole dossier has been handled very constructively and comprehensively in the various committees that have contributed to the Dary report and in the recent hearing held by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 11.30 a.m.
I shall suspend the sitting until the President arrives .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.25 a.m. and resumed at 11.30 a.m. )

Vote
Madam President , at the appropriate moment , I would ask you , pursuant to Rule 161 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure , to request that the rapporteur and the Chairperson of the Committee on Budgetary Control explain their position in relation to the coherence between the explanatory statement and the resolution that we are voting on .
Madam President , Mr Barón Crespo , Chairman of the Socialist Group , also directed a comment to me .
Last Monday we did indeed have a wide-ranging discussion in the Committee on Budgetary Control on the admissibility of this question , and on whether , as chair of the committee , I should make use of Rule 161 .
Almost every member of the committee spoke on this .
I myself have several times looked into the connection between the resolution , as it now appears in the compromise , and the explanatory statement , which reflects the rapporteur ' s position and is her responsibility .
I established the connection , and I said in the clearest terms that the language in the explanatory statement before us is very harsh .
Nevertheless , I do not think I should comment on the style and choice of words in a censorious way , because I would then have to do the same for every explanatory statement .
As I see it , there is a factual connection and I therefore decided not to reject this explanatory statement and informed the committee accordingly .
Madam President , I tabled this amendment , along with 37 colleagues from the European People ' s Party , because I was appalled at the way the media had exploited the explanatory statement which , as everyone should know but obviously does not , is the responsibility of the rapporteur and in no way commits the House .
I was struck by the contradiction in tone between the explanatory statement and the content of the resolution .
They are radically different . That is why I tabled this amendment .
Having said that , I think you are right , Madam President , to declare it admissible because the vote this amendment involves is not a vote for or against the explanatory statement , but is simply intended to highlight the distance between that explanatory statement and the resolution .
After the explanations given by both Mrs Stauner and Mrs Theato , who has stated publicly in the clearest possible way that the explanatory statement is only the responsibility of the rapporteur and in no way commits the House , I consider the amendment no longer necessary , and that is why I am withdrawing it .
In other words , Mr Barón Crespo , you will take over Amendment No 5 , on behalf of your Group , pursuant to Rule 139 of the Rules of Procedure .
Is that correct ?
Yes , Madam President , and furthermore , I would be grateful if , on such a sensitive issue , the rapporteur could speak on the basis of the question , as she is required to do .
Madam President , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , I shall support Mr Barón Crespo ' s proposal .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Barón Crespo , I have not specifically reiterated this point , but I am sure you will realise that when I was drafting both the resolution and the text of the explanatory statement I was very acutely aware that they needed to be in accord with each other , and I have really searched my soul about this over the last few weeks .
I did not think it was necessary to say this again explicitly , but if you wish I will gladly do that .
I like to think that I am sufficiently conscientious and intellectually able for you to assume that I would have considered this long and hard , and that I am happy to take responsibility for this and to face all the consequences that you seem to be threatening me with .
on Amendment No 5

Madam President , just so that things are clear , I withdrew the amendment because I considered it unnecessary , but as it is being voted on I obviously support it and I invite my friends to do the same .
After the vote on Amendment No 5
Madam President , although some people are pleased at the decision that has been taken , this creates a very dangerous precedent .
Whenever , in future , there is an explanatory statement which some in the House do not like we have established that every time we will be able to vote against if we wish to do so .
We had a problem when we had to prepare the voting list , which was that we could not find the amendment tabled by the Greens , the Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , the Group of the Party of European Socialists and the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party for point 5 .
I do not know whether it is possible to have it read out so that we have the chance to adopt a position on it .
Madam President , there are two amendments tabled to Mr Kuhne 's report which propose to postpone discharge for Parliament .
These amendments make reference to the Secretary-General .
If either of these amendments is adopted , will you , as President of Parliament , assume full political responsibility for their content and take the consequences if the demands set out in them are not met by the deadlines .
Mr van Hulten , as President , I take responsibility for declaring these amendments admissible .
I am not expressing an opinion on their content .
Parliament has not yet voted on them .
The problem facing me is whether they are admissible or not .
I am telling you that I sincerely and honestly believe , after examining the position , that these amendments are admissible .
If they are voted through they will obviously be implemented , like everything else we vote for .
on Amendment No 4
Madam President , we have an amendment before us which allegedly sums up the substance of two observations by the Court of Auditors very concisely .
If you think it is necessary , I can read out the full wording of these observations , although personally I would prefer not to .
I just wish to say that I am opposed to this amendment , because I really do not think it serves any useful purpose for us to include tendentious summaries of official documents in our parliamentary documents , even if said summaries are tabled by the chairman of the Committee on Budgetary Control .
on Amendment No 1 from the Greens / ALE Group
Madam President , Point 6 , on which we have to vote in this amendment , stipulates a deadline of 15 May .
If we were to accept this , we would be contradicting a paragraph that we agreed earlier .
Earlier on , under Paragraph 10 of the proposal for a decision to be precise , we agreed that we wished to see options for buildings management and a financing plan , taking into account the situation on negotiations , by 1 July .
We have already agreed on this , and this was also unanimously agreed in committee , because we accepted that this was only possible if we took account of the situation on negotiations .
If we were now to set a deadline of 15 May without taking account of the negotiating situation , we would not only be agreeing to something which it was agreed in committee simply cannot be done , we would also be contradicting something that we have already agreed upon .
I therefore appeal to the Greens to withdraw this point , failing which I would recommend that you vote against it , so as to ensure consistency with the rest of the decision .
Madam President , this is a compromise amendment which was negotiated among groups and then , of course , examined by the various groups last night .
Our Group supports this compromise amendment with , however , the exception of one word : " plus " - " plus proportionnelle " .
Presumably the English version is " more proportional " .
We cannot accept that word .
However , under the Rules , it is not possible to ask for a split vote on a compromise amendment .
I note that if Amendments Nos 100 and 101 were both to be adopted , it would come to exactly the same text as this compromise amendment , except for the problematic word " more " .
As I know that colleagues in other groups had exactly the same problem with this word , I would suggest to friends and colleagues that it might be appropriate not to accept the compromise amendment but to vote instead in favour of both Amendments Nos 100 and 101 , which are compatible , and that would achieve precisely the result desired by many people .
Thank you , Mr Corbett .
But I have to apply the rules .
A compromise amendment has been put before me .
Mr Brok , could you respond to Mr Corbett ' s remarks , and say whether you agree to change the compromise amendment ?
Madam President , we would like to keep the compromise amendment .
I put the question to Parliament .
Are there any objections to our putting this compromise amendment to the vote ?
I thought that was the case .
Madam President , I think it is fair that it be put to the vote .
However , my Group and many others will vote against it in order to support Amendments Nos 100 and 101 , which will achieve almost exactly the same effect with the slight improvements .
Yes , Mr Corbett , but I have to ask Parliament if there are any objections to my putting the compromise amendment to the vote .
Madam President , this amendment has been tabled under the Rules of Procedure and it should be voted on accordingly .
If it is rejected , we can then switch to the rules suggested by Mr Corbett .
That is the simplest approach .
Let us have a vote on the amendment , and if it is rejected , we can proceed as Mr Corbett has suggested .
Excuse me , Mr Brok , Rule 130 of the Rules of Procedure is very clear .
It says that if there are any objections to putting a compromise amendment to the vote , the President of the European Parliament must leave it to the wisdom of the House .
I am only following the Rules , just as I should .
( Parliament decided not to put the compromise amendment to the vote )
on Amendment No 118 from the Greens / ALE Group
Madam President , there seems to be a lack of correspondence between the different linguistic versions of Amendment No 118 .
The French version simply refers to " les autorités compétentes " , whereas the English version refers to " the competent devolved authorities " which , in English , has a more significant meaning .
We established our voting lists in favour of this amendment on the basis of the French version .
However , I understand that the original version is , in fact , the English one , in which case , unless the word " devolved " in the English version can be removed , I will recommend my Group to vote against this amendment .
Madam President , the French text takes precedence .
Right , thank you for making that clear .
on compromise Amendment No 227
Madam President , your services were informed yesterday that we would not sign this compromise amendment .
on Amendment No 174 from the PPE Group
Madam President , we wish to request a split vote , first on the term " four-fifths " and then on the rest .
Actually , a split vote on the original text is scheduled , that is , if the amendment is rejected .
Are you withdrawing this amendment , in which case we will hold a split vote on paragraph 29 ?
Is that right , Mr Brok ?
Madam President , if we were to do that here , we would not need to present the oral amendment on Paragraph 29 .
So it would be easier to do that here .
So what you want , if I have understood properly - and I also want to check with the rapporteurs - is for us to vote on paragraph 29 with an oral amendment .
Is that right ?
Madam President , I have the highest regard for Elmar Brok , but in this case he is mistaken .
The only point of the compromise amendment was to add the word " continuing " in English or " anhaltend " in German to " serious " , which is " schwerwiegend " in the German version .
That is the old text .
We have not agreed on the four-fifths majority , so it is just too late for this now .
We cannot split this again now .
If the amendments are withdrawn , I will take the vote on the original text .
Now , on the original text of paragraph 29 , I believe I had a request for an oral amendment from one of our rapporteurs .
So I will give him the floor to present his oral amendment and then we will have a split vote and roll-call vote on paragraph 29 .
Mr Dimitrakopoulos , if you would like to present your oral amendment , Parliament will decide .
Madam President , the oral amendment consists of adding the word ' continuing ' to the second part .
That is clear .
Are there any objections to putting this oral amendment to the vote ?
Madam President , this interesting idea simply takes up in oral form the compromise amendment that has just been rejected .
It is not really in order with our normal procedure .
Are there twelve Members against putting this oral amendment to the vote ?
( More than twelve Members rose to oppose the vote on the oral amendment )
Madam President , I would like to say just one thing to the Group of the Party of European Socialists . It has subsequently voted against or withdrawn its name from all the compromise amendments that it had signed , without informing us of this .
I do not think that this is a reasonable way to do business or how we should treat each other !
Madam President , I must refute what Mr Brok said .
A number of compromises were made and we respected those compromises , except in two cases where there are problems , as we sometimes find when we take compromises back to our various groups .
I proposed a solution in both cases .
In this case , we informed your services yesterday that we would not be signing that compromise amendment .
Thus , it should never have been tabled in our name .
It may have been a compromise between the ELDR and the EPP Groups , but it was not a compromise which we signed .
before the final vote
Madam President , I would like to make a political declaration on behalf of my Group in relation to an issue which I believe has left a nasty taste in the mouths of all the groups in this House : the vote on paragraph 3 , on the composition and distribution of seats in the European Parliament .
My Group will vote in favour of the Dimitrakopoulos / Leinen report , but I propose that the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , in its wisdom , be charged with the task of finding a solution to this issue , because it is enormously sensitive throughout this House .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
President .
I warmly congratulate our two rapporteurs , Mr Dimitrakopoulos and Mr Leinen .

( Loud applause )
Mr President , I would have been tempted to follow the example of Mr Cox and abstain from the vote on Mrs Stauner ' s report , but , in all honesty , I have to say that before I left to come to Strasbourg , some pensioners asked me what I was going to do here .
When I told them that my tasks included voting on the postponement of discharge , which we are discussing today , they asked me to remind the President of the House that the pensioners and their party , which I represent , consider that expenditure takes up too great a part of the European Parliament ' s budget .
They therefore call for expenditure to be halved and the resources freed up in this way used to increase the pension funds of the 15 Member States , which have been in serious difficulties for too long now .
- The Liberal Group today supported the amendment tabled by Jean Louis Bourlanges of the Group of the European People 's Party , which called for the resolution to be separate from the explanatory statement .
By way of explanation , consider the following quotes :
" One might conclude that the Commission had decided in some fields to draw a veil over and forget past events .
The Commission has sought to distract the public attention from unresolved internal problems in the present by making glib and bombastic promises for the future . "
" The Commission apparatus which wielded excessive power even under President Santer has now become even more powerful ; moreover it is all too often dominated by coteries " .
By any standards these comments are excessive , unfair and , in the context of the discharge procedure , wholly unsuitable .
On the final vote on the resolution we were faced with three choices today : to vote in favour , to vote against or to abstain .
We chose to abstain and this requires explanation .
To vote in favour of the Stauner report is to vote for postponement of granting discharge which , all things considered , we believe should be granted now .
As we explained in the Budgetary Control Committee , our preference was to vote " yes " to reform but " no " to visiting on this Commission the sins of its predecessors .
In the Liberal Group we have been consistently in favour of many of the elements in the Stauner report such as access to documents - it is a duty of the current Commission to provide access to documents .
But the political question remains - is this the moment and is this the issue for an apparent public stand off between Parliament and the Prodi Commission ?
We think not .
If we do not vote in favour of the report it is because we want to indicate a preference to do business on reform now rather than later because we believe , on the evidence to date , that this Commission is a reformist Commission .
Voting against the report would merely have the effect of sending the report back to the Budgetary Control Committee without a clear expression of what happens next and by what means .
We are against such an approach .
So we have chosen to abstain .
This is a motivated abstention rather than an indifferent one .
Our Group preference was to have voted to grant discharge while promoting reform which we accept is also the view of the European Commission .
Unfortunately , today 's choice did not allow for such an option and so we have chosen to abstain .
The French Socialist delegation has voted for Mrs Stauner ' s report postponing the granting of discharge for the financial year 1998 , because it resulted from a compromise by our political group with the Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats and the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party .
This resolution reflected the desire of the majority of members of the Committee on Budgetary Control to break the deadlock over Mrs Stauner ' s proposed report in the committee , but also in the European Parliament , which was putting our institution ' s relations with the Commission onto a defiant footing .
The French Socialist delegation is glad a majority was achieved to pass Amendment No 5 highlighting the slippage between the resolution put to the vote and the explanatory statement .
By that vote , Members have reaffirmed that only the rapporteur is responsible for the explanatory statement .
The proposed report Mrs Stauner submitted to the Committee on Budgetary Control caused consternation far beyond the members of the committee itself .
Indeed , the proposed document bore little relation to the discharge procedure , which is about approval of the accounts for the financial year and the propriety of the expenditure .
The resolution put to the vote in Parliament today presents a catalogue of reasonable demands and recommendations to the Commission .
The postponement and the response time given to the Commission allow it to answer the questions from the Committee on Budgetary Control within the set time .
They leave the Committee on Budgetary Control sufficient time to prepare a report which will rule effectively on the implementation of the 1998 budget by the Commission .
- ( IT ) The delegation of the Democratic Left to the European Parliament , of which I am chair , voted against the Stauner report on the 1998 discharge because it does not agree with the basic line taken .
The report does not focus on the Commission ' s actions during 1998 , to which the discharge relates , pursuant to Article 205a and Article 206 of the Treaty and Article 89 ( 5 ) of the Financial Regulation , but is lingering over alleged cases of fraud , most of which occurred in the early nineties during the terms of previous Commissions .
The Prodi Commission has undertaken a vast reform , which is necessary in order to modernise the European civil service and to reorganise its structures in preparation for the many challenges which it will have to face over the next few years .
We , too , are convinced that reform of the budgetary control and programme management procedures is essential , for these systems have proved to be inadequate .
Indeed , it is necessary to ensure not only that past cases of fraud cannot be repeated , but also , and above all , that the level of management errors identified by the Court of Auditors in its annual report is greatly reduced .
In any case , it is not by attempting without fresh proof to reopen disciplinary proceedings which have now been concluded that we will achieve a thorough , effective reform of the Commission .
It should be recalled that 80 % of Community funds are managed at national level , and improving the financial management of the European Union budget could not therefore be contemplated without the cooperation of the Member States .
Furthermore , we fear that behind this unjustified vicious attack lies an attempt to use such incidents to undermine and sabotage not just Commission actions but the work of the European institutions in general .
We cannot therefore support the perpetrators of these schemes , and , for this reason , we voted against the report .
Kuhne Report ( A5-0097 / 2000 )
- ( NL ) In view of the inadequate management with regard to the buildings and personnel policy contracted out , as mentioned in the Kuhne report and in the report by the Financial Controller , we are of the opinion that discharge to the European Parliament in respect of the implementation of the 1998 budget must be postponed .
The European Parliament must operate the same high standards with regard to its own management as are required of the Commission .
We are convinced that discharge can only be granted to the European Parliament in respect of the implementation of the 1998 budget , provided that specific measures are taken to buck this deplorable trend once and for all .
We are very much in favour of a specific action plan through which such mismanagement can be prevented in the future .
Dimitrakopoulos / Leinen Report ( A5-0086 / 2000 )
Mr President , I would like to underline that no one in Parliament will agree with every single item and every single paragraph of this important report .
That is clear .
The overall message that we are giving to the IGC is that this Parliament wants the IGC to be ambitious , to think long term and not short term and to address all the issues that need to be addressed if a Union of nearly 30 Member States is to be able to function effectively .
We have put a large number of suggestions on the table .
Clearly , not all of them will be taken up in the form which this Parliament has advocated .
But we know that .
We think it is right that the IGC should look at these issues , look at them seriously and come up with appropriate solutions that will enable the Union to work .
My Group , as you know and as Barón Crespo has just said , has some reservations on particular points .
They relate , in particular , to the composition of this Parliament , where unfortunately attempts to reach a compromise position fell down at the last minute .
We must come back to this issue and put forward a proper proposal on a matter which is of direct concern to this House .
I am confident that we can do that .
We were very near to a compromise agreement .
We should be able to crack this one .
We are happy to vote for the report , given the circumstances , and with the reservations I have just described .
Mr President , I have voted against this report .
I say this with regret .
I have voted against this report for almost the same reasons that Mr Corbett has voted in favour .
I have the same objectives : an ambitious Intergovernmental Conference which deals with the real issues and looks to the long term .
I believe that this Parliament is sending a confused message to the Intergovernmental Conference through this resolution .
Reading it will not give a true idea of the message that Parliament wanted to send in relation to this Intergovernmental Conference .
Therefore , Mr President , while I am in absolute agreement with many of the things said in the resolution , I disagree with many others and regret , for example , with regard to an issue as important as the Court of Justice , that the resolution essentially fails to provide for the necessary reform of this institution , nor does it provide suitable clear guidelines in this respect .
For all these reasons , I regret , once again , to say that I have voted against .
Mr President , we are opposed to the Dimitrakopoulos / Leinen report because it proposes an integrated , centralised , rigid model of Europe , which is the opposite of our Europe and which can only block enlargement .
We find three points in this report particularly harmful .
The first is the federalisation of the institutions , by making qualified majority voting in the Council and codecision with the European Parliament the general rule , introducing transnational European elections , and strengthening the powers of the Commission in an attempt to turn it into a European Government .
The necessary but unacknowledged counterpart of all these measures is the marginalisation of the national democracies .
The second is making a constitution out of the Treaties and adding a restrictive European Union Charter of Fundamental Rights , gradually subjecting the peoples to texts which go far beyond them and which will be imposed on them , without any of them , individually , being able to escape that .
Thirdly , the totalitarian drift of so-called European democracy , with the introduction of mechanisms , in particular making the application of Article 7 of the EU Treaty more flexible so that a Member State can be suspended , mechanisms , then , which will give a handful of leaders authority to operate a thought police across the continent , even against peoples expressing themselves democratically , as in Austria .
One of the most controversial points that arose during the debate was the contradiction between the anticipated proliferation of Members of the European Parliament because of enlargement , and the ceiling of 700 Members the Treaty of Amsterdam has imposed on our Parliament .
That limit was chosen to make the European Parliament resemble a national one , but all it does today is set the countries against each other , as none of them will accept a reduction in its quota of Members , and that is understandable .
The Europe of Nations Group proposes putting an end to these conflicts by breaking through the ceiling of 700 Members .
Why not a European Parliament of 1000 Members ?
It could work in variable geometry formations and its originality would have a powerful impact on the imagination .
Mr President , I shall endeavour to explain myself clearly .
I voted against this report and I was not alone in doing so .
We did so with conviction on behalf of the European regionalists of the ALE .
We form part of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , but by taking this position we wanted to express our disillusionment over what is being discussed here today .
This agenda is , of course , too restricted .
Europe is very ambitious when it comes to enlargement , which is a good thing , but it is not ambitious enough to provide a real democratic structure that emanates from the regions and the people .
We regret that all amendments that serve to incorporate this dimension into Europe have been rejected .
We have had to conclude that , contrary to our expectations , the power of the large states will increase and the power of the European Parliament and the possibility of our regions being represented within it , will decrease .
We therefore hope that the IGC will prove successful in getting vigorous reform under way .
We had to vote against because we do not fully identify ourselves with the structure of this democratic Europe .
Mr President , like many others in the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , I have voted against this report for many reasons , but above all for three reasons .
First of all , it is not , as many perhaps believe , federalism which is now a salient feature of Parliament ' s attitude but , rather , centralism .
It is the big States which are obtaining more power , those and the central institutions .
There is no trace of decentralisation and the redistribution of power and no sign of any substance being given to the subsidiarity principle .
Secondly , no adjustments are being made in anticipation of enlargement , which is perhaps the most serious feature of all .
If a Union of 28 Member States is to be successful , it must obviously have a flexible structure .
There must be clear definitions of powers in regard to what is to be decided centrally , what is to be decided in the Member States and what can be decided at regional level .
There is nothing of this , however .
If such a large Union is to be a real success , a large proportion of the decisions now made centrally must clearly be decentralised to a lower level .
Otherwise , the whole system will implode .
Thirdly , this is no democratic , constitutional process but a case of a power game behind locked doors .
I have therefore voted against .
Mr President , I express my disappointment at my Green colleagues and my own group , because I was left with no opportunity to vote on two key amendments on the common , foreign and security policy .
One was an amendment on the arms industries and arms exports and the other was on nuclear weapons .
It was very important for us to have an opportunity to say whether nuclear weapons play a role of any kind in the future of the common , foreign and security policy .
Unfortunately , my Green colleagues deemed these amendments unnecessary , which raises the question whether the Greens are changing their policy on nuclear weapons and on the arms industries .
I voted against the report itself , because I feel that more centralisation means less safety for smaller Member States , less democracy , less involvement of people at a local and national level .
This is not in the interest of the ordinary people of Europe .
A new constitution for Europe that overrides national constitutions , a legal personality for the European Union and , of course , more militarisation : this is not the kind of Europe I want .
I want a de-militarised Europe , a democratic Europe where the people have the real say , not bureaucrats .
Mr President , I voted for Amendment No 100 to the Dimitrakopoulos / Leinen report on the European Parliament ' s proposals for the Intergovernmental Conference , which , I regret , was not adopted by the House .
It laid down that elections to the European Parliament should be held as soon as possible using the same lists of candidates in all 15 Member States , that is to say genuinely European lists .
I feel that this amendment is based on a point which brings the citizens much closer to Europe and the European Union : the citizens who are called on to vote realise that the candidates are the same throughout the 15 States , and this would show them that Europe does exist and that there is a reason for its existence .
This is why I voted for this amendment .
Mr President , I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution although I did not agree with the individual points .
I regret that , at the end of the day , only 238 Members voted for the text , and I would like to ask those responsible for the running of this House to check whether the procedure followed really made sense .
To my mind , the fact that so many amendments were tabled is a sign that there had been a failure to reach sufficient agreement beforehand , and the fact that not even the compromise amendments were adopted is a sign that we were not yet ready to vote on this in plenary .
I would also ask you , Mr President , to raise this vote in the Bureau , and to consider whether we cannot arrange matters differently , so that we avoid a mammoth voting session like this , which has lasted two and a half hours .
And I am sure that in the end there was not a single Member here who could understand what this was all about .
We should make sure we do not have procedures like this in plenary in future !
Mr President , although I am broadly in favour of the Dimitrakopoulos report on the Intergovernmental Conference , I abstained on the final vote .
In fact , in the course of one paragraph - paragraph 32 - the scope of which will certainly have escaped the majority of Members , the door has been opened to calling into question the current status of public services in the context of international trade negotiations , especially WTO negotiations , without the agreement of a Member State . This is proposed on the pretext of amending article 133 of the Treaty and , in fact , making it possible to break the principle of the agreement of all the States in establishing the position of the European Union as regards services , investment and intellectual property rights .
The rejection of Amendment No 57 , which would have removed this ambiguity , therefore leads me to abstain on the text although , I repeat , I support its main thrust as regards the IGC .
And I am quite sure the IGC will not retain the current wording of paragraph 32 .
Mr President , I voted for the Dimitrakopoulos report , although I do have some reservations about it .
The Dimitrakopoulos report does not go far enough for me in terms of EU federalisation and integration .
I believe that we should go much further , and move more determinedly , towards federalisation and away from nation states , towards the regions and the peoples of Europe .
I hope , even if the omens for this Intergovernmental Conference are not the best , that there may still be an opening here or there .
I am enough of a realist to know that this is a gradual process .
That is why I voted for this report and I hope that we will take many more such steps in the near future .
Mr President , I abstained in the final vote for several major reasons and also some minor ones .
It was difficult for me to support the resolution because it mixes the worst in with the best .
On the other hand , I did not want to vote against a resolution which probably represents the best the European Parliament can do at the moment .
The obvious conclusion seems to me that Parliament itself still has a long way to go to meet the profound aspirations of the majority of European Union citizens .
Moreover , the rejection of two compromise amendments during the sitting bears witness to the difficulty of finding representative majorities , as does the rejection or acceptance , by the narrowest of margins , of institutional measures of the highest importance .
To take just one example , Parliament was only able to maintain a compromise on the composition of the Commission with difficulty , but truth obliges me to state that the compromise incorporates two contradictory ideas .
We have passed a resolution actually stating that the number of members of the Commission should be limited , as long as it is not .
Is that really a very sensible position for a Parliament to take ?
Ainardi , Bakopoulos , Eriksson , Figueiredo , Frahm , Koulourianos , Meijer , Herman Schmid , Seppänen and Sjöstedt ( GUE / NGL ) , in writing .
We , Members from different parties in the GUE / NGL Group , have not voted in favour of the report concerning the European Parliament proposal for the IGC .
We oppose the development of the European Union towards a state with superior powers to those of the Member States in all aspects of policy , as the report in practice advocates .
Instead of transforming the EU into a state , we are of the opinion that the Union must be democratised .
Democratisation of the European Union must be achieved through a decreasing of the Commission 's power , the introduction of openness and transparency to the legislative practices of the Council , and strengthening of the role at EU level of the national parliaments .
We further protest against the report 's advocacy of the militarisation of the EU .
We insist that the EU remain a civil organisation and that the non-aligned countries ' special status be respected .
We are of the opinion that the Intergovernmental Conference must reconsider the construction of the EMU , reassessing the currency union 's lack of democracy and its right-wing policies .
We demand that the stability pact be reconsidered and Article 56 of the Treaty be rewritten in order to bring the ECB under democratic control .
We reiterate our condemnation of the failure to submit the EMU project to referendum in all of the Member States .
- ( DA ) The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament today voted against the report by Mr Dimitrakopoulos and Mr Leinen on the European Parliament ' s proposal for the IGC .
We consider that in insisting on a broad agenda , the European Parliament is not facilitating what should be the main task of the IGC , namely that of resolving the outstanding institutional problems regarding the composition and voting rules of the Council , the Commission , the European Parliament , the Court of Justice and the other institutions , and so making enlargement possible .
The European Parliament ought instead to take up the important task of ensuring that the essential issues which need to be resolved are debated in such a way that Europe ' s citizens are involved and can form their own views on the important subjects being debated .
The EU should build on a common political will to achieve the overriding objectives relating to peace , the environment and prosperity in Europe , focusing on the interests of its citizens .
The debate in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , which adopted the draft report with a very small majority , plus the fact that more than 200 amendments have been tabled for consideration in plenary , show that this report cannot contribute to creating a common basis for the IGC .
Despite the fact that we do not consider that the European Parliament should propose all these amendments to the Treaty , we have elected to adopt positions on the individual points , as will be evident from our voting .
However , we would like to draw particular attention to the points which we think the IGC should concentrate on .
As regards the composition of the European Parliament , we have voted for calculation of the number of Members from each Member State according to a sliding scale so that the European Parliament ' s composition reflects the size of the individual States , populations as well as the fact that there are benefits to be had from making the European Parliament more representative by enabling the different political viewpoints in the individual countries to be represented there .
As regards the composition of the Commission , it is important that all States have the right to a Commissioner with the same rights and obligations , particularly as in our opinion , the Commission must continue to enjoy the right of initiative .
When it comes to the voting rules in the Council , we consider that a balance must be maintained between the interests of the small and large states . This can be achieved by laying down requirements for a certain number of votes in the Council which must , at the same time , represent a simple majority of the total population of the Union .
We are open to discussing increased use of qualified majority voting , although we do not consider that it should be the rule .
Each particular instance of a transition to qualified majority voting must , however , be analysed and debated thoroughly and a balance struck between what is fundamental as far as the individual Member States are concerned and the need to make cooperation work .
It is especially important that this matter be discussed on an on-going basis with Europe ' s citizens .
All Member States must demonstrate the political will to make cooperation work .
It is this will and the desire for common solutions which the EU must also build on in future .
We are not , therefore , worried that , following enlargement , the EU will be paralysed unless a thorough reform of the Treaty is carried out now .
In parallel with the IGC , the Member States are discussing a common European security and defence policy .
These discussions are far from complete , and we do not think that the European Parliament should table amendments to the Treaty before the outcome is known .
We continue to believe that the EU should not be an actual defence alliance .
In this area , the EU must focus in particular on conflict prevention and civil crisis management .
Also in parallel with the IGC , the creation of a Charter of Fundamental Rights is being debated .
We would like once again to stress that we want a charter in the form of a political document and that it should not be raised at the IGC with a view to incorporating it into the Treaty .
- ( ES ) The process of enlargement which the European Union has started has brought it to a crossroads and its ability to continue making progress will depend on the direction it takes .
It can therefore be said that the IGC , which is charged with proceeding with the institutional reforms which will make enlargement possible , holds the future of the European Union in its hands , since it has to decide between the minimal reform laid down in the Treaty of Amsterdam and the broad reform which will allow the Union to accept the countries which are preparing for accession and pursue its task in favour of respect for human rights , peace and social justice .
Therefore , given that we are at a crucial moment in the process of European integration , it was appropriate for Parliament to send a message indicating what it understood to be the key points of the reform .
In the Dimitrakopoulos-Leinen report which we have just approved and which I have voted in favour of , Parliament indicates that we have to make further progress and that , to this end , we have to give the European Union the necessary means to complete the shared project of peace and well-being initiated 50 years ago .
Let us hope that the IGC is aiming sufficiently high for the great challenges facing the Union and that it follows that path which Parliament has set for it .
The Committee on Constitutional Affairs adopted an amendment seeking to add the following sentence to Article 289 of the EC Treaty :
' In the case of the European Parliament , it shall decide , by an absolute majority of its members , on the location of its seat and of all its meetings ' .
I would like to point out that this issue is not on the agenda of the Intergovernmental Conference . The IGC ' s principal aim is to reform the institutions in preparation for enlargement .
Furthermore , the issue of the European Parliament ' s seat is covered by a Court of Justice ruling of 1 October 1997 and laid down in the protocol on the seat of the institutions annexed to the Treaty of Amsterdam .
That ought to be enough to ensure that this question is never raised again .
To those who envisage building a Europe where the places of work and decision making are concentrated on one site only , I say that today , more than ever , we must build a democratic Europe , close to all its citizens .
The very identity of Parliament and the powers it claims depend on that .
As a French Socialist Member , I am therefore very much opposed to any proposal that would call into question the Strasbourg seat of the European Parliament .
Madam President , that is why I have voted against this motion .
- ( SV ) Enlargement of the European Union is one of the most important issues for the future of Europe .
The aim of the present Intergovernmental Conference is to prepare the EU for this enlargement . If enlargement is to be implemented successfully , certain institutional changes are required .
The EU must become more efficient and more democratic , and a balance should be maintained between the small and large countries . Moreover , it is important that the Intergovernmental Conference should be concluded before the end of the year so that the process of enlargement which has been embarked upon is not delayed .
The report on the Intergovernmental Conference is the European Parliament ' s contribution to that conference .
It discusses both the necessary institutional reforms , about which no conclusions were reached in the Treaty of Amsterdam , and a number of additional questions which must also be dealt with prior to enlargement .
We , the Swedish Members , Mr Pierre Schori , Mr Jan Andersson , Mr Göran Färm and Mrs Ewa Hedkvist Petersen , support the main features of the report , but we would highlight the following points on which , to some extent , we have different opinions , which is why we abstained from voting in the final ballot .
The role of the European Parliament is to represent the people in the Union .
Enlargement means more States ' representatives in Parliament .
If an efficient decision-making procedure is to be maintained , there must be a change in the way the seats are distributed .
We advocate a ceiling of 700 Members of the European Parliament .
The number of seats allocated to each country is determined through a system of degressive proportionality on the basis of the country ' s population .
Should a system with a single European constituency be introduced , the number of Members should not be increased .
A new weighting of votes in the Council is a prerequisite for successful enlargement of the EU .
It is important that the solution should be a permanent one and not need to be changed in connection with any future enlargement .
It ought to strike a balance between the principles of , on the one hand , ' one country , one vote ' and , on the other hand , ' one citizen , one vote ' .
An alternative would be for the weighting of votes in the Council to be calculated on the basis of the root of the population in the individual countries .
We believe that each Member State should have a Member in the Commission .
The Members of the Commission work for the whole Union and are important if a consensus between the Member States is to be achieved .
The Commission should therefore be able to draw upon knowledge and experience from all the countries in the Union .
In that way , the legitimacy of the Commission would also be strengthened .
The task of protecting the Union ' s interests against fraud is to be carried out by the individual Member States ' institutions and not by a supranational authority .
It is nonetheless important and desirable that there should be European prosecutors in each Member State and that they should cooperate .
Unanimity in the Council must be required in questions of a constitutional and fundamental nature , as well as in questions affecting general security and defence policy .
Closer cooperation between at least a third of the Member States cannot apply in the case of defence cooperation .
EU cooperation is , in the first place , a civilian European project and ought to be distinguished from military cooperation .
The Member States have different backgrounds where military alliances and neutrality are concerned .
We made great progress in Cologne and Helsinki by preparing ourselves for preventive crisis and conflict management .
It is therefore important that the Treaty should reflect the difference between civilian and military cooperation .
Military aid of a kind which places countries under obligations to each other has no place in the EU ' s Treaty .
We are not prepared to dispense with the veto in regard to military cooperation .
- The agenda of the IGC has now been set by the Member States .
We now know its general scope , and it is clear that much of the content of this resolution , regardless of its merit or lack of it , has nothing to do with it .
While Parliament is fully entitled to be aspirational , it is a mistake for us not to have focused our input into what the IGC is actually going to discuss and decide .
I fear that not doing this will damage Parliament 's reputation and standing , and will not be as helpful to the IGC as it could be .
- ( EL ) The citizens of Europe , especially workers , farmers , small and medium-sized enterprises , women , the young , the nouveaux pauvres , all those who suffer under the policies of the EU , are already voicing their anger and disagreement , some more forcefully than others , with the choices being made by the European Union .
Unfortunately , instead of heeding the anxiety and supporting the claims of all these classes of society , the resolution on the Intergovernmental Conference kow-tows to capitalist forces and adopts the decisions made by the monopolies to militarise Europe and intervene in third countries , including militarily , in order to limit further still the national independence and the grass-roots sovereignty of individual countries .
With the Single European Act and the Treaties of Maastricht and Amsterdam , the ÅU is now beginning , under the pressure of enlargement and the new order , to address issues which it was unable to solve at previous intergovernmental conferences .
Despite proclamations to the contrary , what we have before us is an integrated plan of attack by capitalist forces on the democratic , social , collective and personal rights and freedoms which workers have fought hard to acquire within the context of bourgeois democracy .
The European Union is being used by imperialists and multinationals as a battering ram to break the people ' s resistance and make them give up their fight for a better tomorrow .
The efforts being made , supposedly in the name of democracy and the " effectiveness of the institutions " , seek mainly to serve the interests of monopolies and they will inevitably be opposed by the workers and people of Europe .
What is the implication behind generalising the majority voting rule by introducing majority voting , in terms of both the number of States and the number of EU citizens , if not complete indifference to , and degradation of , the interests of the " smaller " countries , of the less developed regions , of the weaker classes of society and of the working and grass-roots classes of the EU in general ?
How else are we to interpret the abolition of a country ' s right of veto when its vital national interests are at stake ?
What is the point of rotating Commissioners ' nationalities and not rotating the presidency of the Union if not to exile a supposedly small country from the centre of power for long periods of time so that it is basically unable to defend its interests and the interests of its people , insofar as they can be defended within the framework of the European Union ?
What is the point of limiting the number of MEPs , despite the increase in the number of Member States of the European Union , if not to silence those voices which criticise capitalist forces and their plans and promote political processes which brook no alternatives and which are confined to vapid changes of power which pose no threat to capitalism ?
Why is the role of national parliaments being eroded by substantially limiting democratic scrutiny ?
Why is the weighting of votes in the Council being changed for the benefit of the large countries , at the expense of smaller countries ?
There is only one conclusion to be drawn from the EP resolution , which the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece will be voting against , and from the Commission ' s recent proposals .
The people of Europe can once again expect no good to come out of this Intergovernmental Conference .
They alone can defend their rights by conducting their own fights , fights which the EU will face in ever more acute form , ever more dynamic form , despite all its efforts to mislead , pull the wool over everyone ' s eyes and sugar the pill .
Fights which will lead to coordinated action by the peoples of the EU , to a strong , pan-European , grass-roots front opposed to the EU and its policies and fighting for a different sort of Europe free from rulers , exploitation and war .
The institutional changes envisaged with a view to the enlargement of Europe , whether relating to the composition of the Commission , the weighting of the representation of the Member States or qualified majority voting , do not answer the basic questions we face ten years after the fall of the Berlin Wall about the kind of Europe we live in .
European Union policy detaches the most developed regions from any sense of solidarity , accelerating the break up of multinational federations .
It imposes forced privatisation .
Above all , it leads to the policy of a pyromaniac fireman in the Balkans , where all the political , social and environmental consequences still have to be reckoned up .
The stability plan for South-East Europe is a failure : the declarations of loyalty to NATO by the governments of Eastern Europe do not prevent the European Union treating them with contempt and imposing anti-social policies on them .
We must build a Europe capable of enlarging towards the East and the South , to all peoples who democratically express the wish to join .
A genuine public debate , involving all the peoples in drawing up a charter of rights and a common plan for society , would allow us to make progress towards that .
That is why we have voted against this report .

I am sorry I could not vote in favour of the report which contains the European Parliament ' s proposals for the Intergovernmental Conference , despite the efforts made , especially by the rapporteur , Mr Dimitrakopoulos , to humour small Member States and look after their interests to some extent .
It is inadmissible to seek to cut the smallest national delegation , the Grand-Duchy of Luxembourg ' s , by a third , without giving any details about reductions to the large delegations .
There are other excesses in this veritable shopping list . I denounced them yesterday in my speech and Parliament has adopted them , in particular as regards the composition of the Commission and the decision-making procedures .
Unanimity cannot be limited to constitutional decisions .
It is completely unrealistic and utopian to think that the members of national parliaments will ratify a treaty which contains such dismantling of their rights , as useless as it is unacceptable , and such a veritable castration of the national parliaments .
The Intergovernmental Conference is not intended to increase the powers of the Union ; the point of the operation is to improve the functioning of a Union enlarged from 15 to 26 or even 30 Member States .
Through these excesses a majority of this Parliament has done Europe a disservice .
, in writing .
( SV ) The Intergovernmental Conference is an historic opportunity for Member States to transform the EU into a democratic , open and efficient organisation , which is why we regret that the governments of the Member States do not have the political will to carry out an in-depth reform of the Union .
We therefore welcome the fact that Parliament wishes to accept the challenge to reform the Union along these lines , but we wish to clarify our position as follows .
A Union of 25 to 30 Member States cannot operate in the same way as a Union of 15 Member States . Instead , we need both an overview of the institutions ' working methods and a clearer distribution of labour between the Member States and the EU .
The EU can only function efficiently and democratically if it deals exclusively with cross-border issues and leaves other issues to be resolved mainly at national level .
The difficulty for the Intergovernmental Conference is to find a delicate balance between the desire to create an efficient and democratic Union and the need , at the same time , to reflect the historic balance of power between small and large Member States . In other words , it must be borne in mind that the EU is a Union of both peoples and States .
On this basis , we think it is important for the present Intergovernmental Conference to establish the size of the Commission at one Commissioner per Member State .
With regard to the distribution of power in the Council , the Commission has proposed a system of ' double simple majority ' voting on certain questions . This means that a majority is required from the Member States , but also that these States should represent a majority of the citizens if a decision is to be implemented .
This is important from a democratic perspective in view of the fact that , in this way , the voting clearly reflects the will of the people .
The Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party supports the Commission ' s proposal but would emphasise that small countries should not be placed at a disadvantage .
Parliament ought to have 700 seats , distributed among the population on the basis of a degressive proportional scale .
We are well disposed towards trying out a new system involving European lists , which means that elections for a limited number of the 700 seats could take place within the context of a single constituency .
We are aware of the fact that European parties at present have little support among our citizens , but we believe that a supplementary system involving European lists would , in time , lead to an increased European identity .
An EU of approximately 25-30 Member States will lead to more countries wanting to exploit the opportunity that exists for a number of them to go further than others in certain areas of policy ( so-called closer cooperation ) .
We do not think it is appropriate to see this as a permanent solution to the problem which will arise when the EU is enlarged .
The risk entailed in a Europe ' à la carte ' is that the whole integrity and basic idea of EU cooperation will be lost .
The solidarity between cooperating States would be in danger of becoming fragmented , something which might have very undesirable consequences for the Union as such .
Flexibility of this kind ought to be seen , rather , as a temporary alternative for countries which are not yet ready , or sufficiently well prepared , to enter into deeper cooperation .
The wording in the Treaty of Amsterdam about closer cooperation is therefore an adequate and acceptable solution .
Too many parallel concentric circles create a system which is difficult to supervise .
The Union ' s common objectives should be promoted within the context of such cooperation , and no Member State should be excluded from participating .
We welcome the EU ' s increased opportunities to pursue a credible foreign and security policy so that the EU can assume increased responsibility when it comes to solving conflicts in the vicinity of the EU .
At the same time , we would emphasise that this development ought not to lead to our having two parallel and competing organisations for resolving conflicts .
It is therefore important to emphasise that the development concerned must take place in the context of close cooperation between NATO and the EU and that representatives of these organisations must sit down together as soon as possible and agree upon a satisfactory distribution of labour .
- ( PT ) Once again , the European Parliament finds itself compelled to adopt a maximalist position on the institutions , a position bereft of any realism .
As usual , it is going all out for an unfettered federalist approach .
This is reflected in the proposal to almost totally eliminate the unanimity rule , to make the codecision process the norm , to institutionalise the European political parties , to create a European electoral club , to integrate the Western European Union , to strengthen Europol , and , to constitutionalise the Treaties in a far-reaching way .
These are ideas from which we have always unequivocally distanced ourselves and will continue to do so .
However , this report also proposes new and unacceptable ideas .
On the pretext that it is necessary to adapt the institutions to the prospect of enlargement , it is now being suggested that there should be a disproportionate strengthening at various levels of the decision-making powers of the large countries and an intolerable reduction of the decision-making powers of the small- and medium-sized countries . All this suggests and implicitly encourages the creation of political inner cabinets , which are totally unacceptable , and which will make it easier to achieve ' enhanced cooperation ' .
We are , of course , opposed to such ideas .
At the same time , if the European Parliament approves a report like this , it will appear to be indifferent to situations which are obviously urgent , such as the need to overcome or at least mitigate serious democratic deficits ; the need to modify the monetarist principles - in particular the Stability Pact - which are the root cause of today ' s social scourges such as unemployment and unstable employment ; to change the Statute of the European Central Bank so as to ensure greater transparency and appropriate controls and limits on its powers ; and to make the existing principle of economic and social cohesion a reality , which is a vital step in creating a Europe of the future based on solidarity .
The European Parliament could demonstrate its worth by adopting these policies .
But if it opts for the proposals contained in the Dimitrakopoulos-Leinen report , this will suggest that it is becoming increasingly remote from the people it is supposed to represent .
We will therefore be voting against the report .
- The complexity of the IGC process inevitably requires a complex response from the European Parliament .
The Dimitrakopoulos / Leinen report covers a wide range of issues which could be considered in the framework of the IGC which is taking place over the remainder of 2000 .
The debate which has begun between Member States is reflected in the points of view expressed within the European Parliament , as is the tension over the scope of the IGC .
The European Parliamentary Labour Party believes that it is imperative to conclude the IGC before the end of 2000 in order to leave the EU fully prepared for enlargement .
In order to achieve this , we believe that the scope of the IGC should be restricted to " tidying up " the outstanding points from Amsterdam , plus a small range of other issues .
EPLP Members voted in accordance with this approach , reflecting our concerns over the following areas :
There are doubts over the practicability of a European top-up list from 2009 of 10 % of MEPs to be elected on a single European constituency .
We have concerns over the workings of a European Public Prosecutor 's office whilst being concerned to protect the Union 's interests and resources against fraud throughout Community territory .
Likewise , the legislative measures in criminal matters in respect of fraud damaging the interests of the Union will need to be carefully constructed .
The EPLP believes that unanimity cannot solely be restricted to constitutional items , as issues including tax and social security must be dealt with at national level .
Constitutionalising the Treaties and division into two parts is not acceptable to the EPLP , and the same concerns about unanimity apply here .
The EPLP wishes to see a Charter of Fundamental Rights , but until the content of the Charter is determined , the question of giving it binding legal force should be left open .
Whilst greater coordination is required at European level over our airspace ( i.e. Eurocontrol ) , service provision should remain at national level - the Commission has never suggested a single agency and Eurocontrol already exists to coordinate .
The Commission has not previously called for the establishment of a single European air traffic control agency and the request in this report is superfluous .
- ( SV ) As representatives of the Swedish Christian Democrats , who view enlargement towards the East as being clearly the most important issue for the EU , I wish to make the following remarks before the Heads of Government and State discuss the European Union ' s powers and forms of decision making at the forthcoming Intergovernmental Conference .
1 ) There ought to be one Commissioner per Member State ( paragraph 10 ) .
This is about the Commission ' s legitimacy and future and about its being able to claim popular support .
2 ) There ought to be at least six Members of the European Parliament per Member State and , thereafter , a degressive proportional system as at present ( paragraph 3.2 ) and not , as the Committee on Constitutional Affairs proposes , only four Members per State , followed by a strict proportional system .
This is required if it is to be possible to mirror the political breadth and diversity in each Member State .
3 ) There ought not to be any pan-European lists or single European constituency ( paragraph 4 ) .
So as not to make the distance between electors and elected representatives still greater , the Member States should remain as constituencies .
4 ) 700 should not be set as the upper ceiling for the number of Members of the European Parliament ( paragraph 3 ) . Instead , a certain flexibility should be possible , depending upon the number of Member States in the EU .
5 ) No EU financing of parties which operate at European level should be introduced , nor should any democratically dangerous and arbitrary suspension procedure ( paragraph 6 ) .
6 ) Decisions by qualified majority voting in the Council should not be taken on the basis of a simple majority from the Member States .
Instead , it ought to be a two-thirds majority ( paragraph 8 ) , and this in order to win legitimacy .
7 ) A decision as serious as that of suspending a Member State from the EU should require the unanimous agreement of the other Member States and not , as proposed by the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , the agreement of four-fifths of the Member States ( paragraph 29 ) .
8 ) Social protection should not be regarded as an issue of Community interest ( paragraph 42 ) . In accordance with the principle of subsidiarity , this ought instead to remain an issue to be legislated on at national level .
9 ) The financing of the EU should not be completely independent of contributions by the Member States ( paragraph 44.4 ) .
10 ) Respect for neutral States ' solutions in the field of defence policy and for their right to make their own decisions should be clearly upheld within the framework of the CFSP ( paragraph 34 ) .
11 ) To make it easier for citizens of the Member States to know which institutions are responsible for what , the principle of subsidiarity ( to which there are unfortunately no references at all in this report ) should be integrated into the Treaty in such a way that the EU ' s powers are concentrated upon clearly defined , cross-border core issues .
The national parliaments and local authorities should play an important role by ensuring that the principle of subsidiarity is respected and by monitoring governments ' action in the Council .
- ( SV ) When the European Parliament today stated its position on the Intergovernmental Conference , I advocated solutions which also provide for the interests of the small Member States .
The trend within Parliament towards less understanding of smaller countries ' needs will increase the antagonism between Parliament and the Council of Ministers .
I am concerned that there is no desire to find a balanced solution regarding the weighting of votes within the Council of Ministers and regarding the number of Commissioners who should provide for the interests of both large and small Member States .
Through my Group , I have tabled an amendment aimed at guaranteeing that all of a particular country ' s nationalities and regions are represented in Parliament .
I also supported the proposal which emphasised the right of regional ministers to participate in meetings of the Council of Ministers on matters which fall within the scope of their autonomy .
However , I would express my satisfaction at the fact that so much attention has been devoted to the way in which the EC Court of Justice operates .
The Intergovernmental Conference must now give consideration to Parliament ' s constructive proposals .
I am extremely surprised at the proposals which would give Members of the European Parliament the right to participate in the appointment of the judges .
Finland supports the proposal that the Commission might be given a mandate to conduct trade negotiations in regard to services and immaterial rights following decisions in the Council with a qualified majority .
When the Council in this way reaches a decision about a negotiation mandate , Parliament ' s consent ought to be requested .
Otherwise , there will be a loss of democratic and parliamentary control over the trade negotiations .
Since I do not consider the report to be in earnest with regard to the demands for decision making in the Council , to the way in which judges are to be appointed and to the number of Members of Parliament , I voted against the report in the final vote ( 238 votes in favour , 147 votes against and 73 abstentions ) .
Because the report is far-reaching in its scope and because there is considerable disagreement about it , Parliament ' s point of view will be of little significance .
That concludes the vote .
( The sitting was suspended at 2.02 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

I would just like to ask whether Mr Berlusconi ' s name was included by mistake in the attendance register in the Minutes of yesterday ' s sitting .
I do not remember Mr Berlusconi being present .
Mr Frassoni , the department responsible will , of course , check up on this in the simplest way : we will ask Mr Berlusconi or his assistants directly whether he was present yesterday .
Mr President , with reference to Mr Frassoni ' s intervention , we sent a letter to President Fontaine this morning .
We , too , would like to know how Mr Berlusconi , who is tied up in an electoral campaign in Italy , came to be included on the attendance list ; we would like to know the identity of the joker who played this trick , which is in appallingly bad taste , or whether there is something going on which has nothing to do with politics .
We therefore asked the President of the Parliament , Mrs Fontaine , to carry out an internal enquiry , which we hope will take place during the mini part-session at the beginning of May .
This is certainly a most regrettable incident , Mr Fiori , and I hope that the internal enquiry will shed some light on the matter .
Topical and Urgent Debate
The next item is the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
Iraq
Mr President , it is very important to point out that sanctions are themselves a form of warfare .
They are targeted at the most innocent civilians , at the innocent people in societies , especially children , the most vulnerable .
The sanctions on Iraq have become a weapon of mass destruction against the helpless people there .
Over 200 children die there every single day .
This is not acceptable .
We cannot allow this to go on .
Denis Halliday , who resigned his position as Director of the UN Humanitarian Mission in Iraq in protest at the sanctions , confirmed the UNICEF statistics that 5 000 to 6 000 children die every month as a direct result of sanctions .
Mary Robinson , the High Commissioner for Human Rights , has been speaking out against sanctions for a long time .
She said you cannot expect her to condemn human rights abuses in other parts of the world and let the United Nations itself be responsible for what is happening in Iraq following the sanctions .
In February Mr Hans von Sponek , the United Nations humanitarian coordinator in Iraq , followed in the steps of Mr Halliday when he also resigned in protest at the on-going sanctions and the bombing of the Iraqi people .
Within hours of his resignation , the head of the World Food Programme in Iraq since January 1999 also resigned in protest at the sanctions .
These resignations must cause the world community to reconsider the justification for the continuing sanctions policy and also the bombings .
I would like to point out that 70 Congressmen sent a letter to Bill Clinton in the United States asking him to lift the embargo , asking him to de-link economic sanctions from the military sanctions that are currently in place in Iraq .
It is not just here in Europe that people are concerned , but right across the world .
If anyone looked at the very good documentary by the world-famous journalist , John Pilger , they would see what is happening there .
Can we allow this to go on without saying something about it ?
It is a blatant violation of international human rights laws .
The sanctions are targeting the most vulnerable in society and making them suffer yet , at the same time , the elite in that society and the people who are part of the Saddam Hussein regime do not suffer from the sanctions .
It is the ordinary people who suffer .
We cannot allow this to go on .
It is not right and the US Congressmen who sent the letter to Bill Clinton are quite right : we have to de-link economic sanctions from the military sanctions that are currently in place .
We also have to address the bombings that are taking place without any UN mandate .
That is absolutely unacceptable .
A whole family was wiped out by these bombings , as shown in Mr Pilger 's documentary .
This is something we cannot ignore and we must push for an end to this inhumane policy .
Mr President , firstly let me say to my colleague and friend , Ms McKenna , that there is nothing in what she said that I do not agree with .
No Member of this House can remain unmoved by the harrowing situation in which so many Iraqi people find themselves .
The facts have been presented by respected international bodies such as UNICEF .
We have no reason whatsoever to doubt their veracity .
There are shortages of essential foodstuffs and agricultural infrastructure resulting in severe nutritional deficiencies .
Iraq , once one of the most economically advanced countries of the region , is being reduced to underdevelopment .
But let there be no illusion as to the role of the Iraqi regime in the suffering of its people .
The consistent refusal by the regime to fully implement United Nations resolutions has led to a situation where the sanctions remain firmly in place almost ten years after the invasion of Kuwait by Iraq .
Furthermore , the refusal of the regime for five years to accept the oil-for-food programme has certainly contributed to the humanitarian situation .
We , in Parliament , are well-intentioned towards the people of Iraq and are serious in our desire for a peaceful and lasting solution .
We must concentrate our efforts on convincing Iraq to implement the United Nations resolutions .
We must make it very clear in this forum that United Nations resolutions are legally binding on all members of the United Nations .
The European Parliament must not be seen to undermine the legitimacy of such resolutions in any way .
Any such action would be grist to the propaganda mill of the Iraqi regime .
It is within the power of the regime to have the sanctions imposed by the United Nations lifted .
To date , the regime most regrettably has preferred to allow its people to be threatened by disease and starvation than to respect international law .
Full implementation of Resolution 1284 obliges Iraq , among other things , to cooperate with the Red Cross in overseeing the repatriation of detainees .
Let us recall that last January this House voted unanimously a resolution calling on Iraq , as a minimum , to provide answers to the Red Cross as to the whereabouts of the missing Kuwaitis for which there is documented evidence .
I too have met some of these people .
I have shared their suffering with them .
Let us clearly understand that is a tragedy in itself .
We are caught between a rock and a hard place .
It is heartbreaking to see innocent children being sacrificed by their own leaders for purely personal , political motives .
Mr President , during these last few days , Parliament has been watching an extraordinarily powerful documentary on the effects of the sanctions on Iraq , and I would like to thank Patricia McKenna for this .
Civilians , men , women and children are dying because of the sanctions .
I will not repeat the figures , for we are all aware of them and they have been quoted many times in this Chamber .
But what a contradiction . What a tragedy .
In the name of the protection of human rights , the rich , powerful countries of the West are killing communities and starving them to death .
During the war in Yugoslavia , American aircraft continuously bombarded towns , killing civilians .
It is better to tell the truth and admit that the interests of the United States take precedence over those of communities .
Today , we are going to vote on a motion , a very important motion for a resolution calling for an end to the sanctions , an end to the embargo .
I feel that we must then act in order to give practical effect to our resolution .
There is no doubt about the fact that it is important for Iraq to change its policy and that the existing arms must be monitored and decommissioned , but , in this regard , there is abundant documented evidence that the nuclear and chemical weapons have already been decommissioned .
And that is essential .
However , I also feel that a clear policy must be developed for the decommissioning of nuclear weapons where they exist in the Middle East .
For example , Israel is full of nuclear weapons and no one is asking Israel to decommission .
Unfortunately , even the resolution called for by Egypt was not supported by the European Parliament in Cairo .
We must do everything possible to free this world from the nuclear threat .
Today , I would also like to pay tribute to Dennis Halliday - mentioned by Ms McKenna as well - who was responsible for the oil-for-food deal .
In a world of hypocrites and careerists , Dennis Halliday had the courage to speak out over the implications of the sanctions on the Iraqi people and to condemn the lies of the United States departments .
Saddam Hussein is certainly responsible and guilty , but we are also incurring a great deal of responsibility and guilt in continuing with a policy which maintains the population of a country in extreme poverty , a population such as the Iraqi people , with a rich history and culture , a population made up of people , women , children , who want to live .
I hope that when the embargo imposed on Iraq is lifted , this will be the end of all embargoes everywhere throughout the world .
This is important for all of us .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , here we are debating a tragic issue - a source of shame to all of us - and Mr Ford is not here .
Not one of Parliament ' s noble spirits is here , and yet the sanctions against Iraq are already ten years old , ten years !
People think the war , the missiles and the gassings are over , but the filthy effects of this war , which was never clean , go on .
There is still bombing in the North and in the South .
Cornfields are being burned in a country which invented agriculture ; date palms are being burned daily .
In the Strasbourg newspaper yesterday , there was an interview with a priest who risked his life just to go to the Babylon area , in Ur .
For people who go there , taking ambulances and medicines , like me and the National Front , Iraq is a vast concentration camp .
18 million women , children , old people , men , a whole Arab people , are being held captive in their own country by the West , with millions of deaths every day , hundreds of children dying , a systematic , scientific , meticulous , planned , cynical , perverse genocide .
It is not just their bodies which are under attack by being deprived of food , milk , meat and fruit . Their minds are under attack as well .
There are no books .
Even pencils are banned , on the pretext that their graphite could be used as coolant in the nuclear power stations .
There are schools but there is no paper .
There are doctors , but there is no medicine .
There are hospitals , but there is nothing inside them .
It is perverse .
They were promised food in exchange for oil .
But they are asked to practically give their oil away and then buy food .
Ladies and gentlemen - especially Members who are not here - by what right is this happening ?
Do not keep silent !
Do not be accomplices !
UN officials are resigning .
We should not have to go there in thirty years time , like the Belgians in Rwanda , and say sorry , or like the Holy Father , who is prostrating himself all over the place .
The honour of Europe depends on our speaking out for these young Arabs , for this great people being consigned to the night .
It is all very well being afraid of imaginary dangers in Vienna , but it is in Baghdad that the violation of human rights is taking place .
Let Washington ' s Nebuchadnezzar let these people go , these slaves in their own country .
They must be released from this poverty .
I appeal to your consciences !
Europe is denying itself !
Just as people kept silent about Spain in 1936 , just as people kept silent about the camps , they are keeping silent about Iraq .
There is no time to lose ; this people could cease to exist .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I ask you to act quickly .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Parliament will shortly be voting on a joint resolution and that is certainly not just because we are determined to have a clear conscience and actually condemn the perpetuation of sanctions which have never achieved their goals , as everyone agrees .
It is also because we think there is a real possibility of preventing a new risk of military force being unleashed there , given the experience of our colleague , Mr Buttiglione , who has been to Iraq and has alerted us to the fact that there is currently a significant risk of renewed bombing .
He had the opportunity of meeting representatives of the Iraqi government , from whom he was able to obtain a commitment to respect the United Nations resolutions .
So he undertook to ensure that Parliament would send a strong signal to the Iraqi people , given that its government agrees to implement the United Nations resolutions .
We have committed ourselves to ask for the immediate lifting of sanctions .
That is the purpose of this joint resolution and all the groups have agreed that , to show Parliament ' s unanimity on this distressing issue , there should definitely be no amendments .
Mr President , I can only endorse the speeches that have just been made , especially Mr Morillon ' s .
We certainly cannot continue to accept this situation .
But we can feel gratified that we are voting in Parliament today on a resolution on the situation in Iraq which has , for the first time - and I hope we will take advantage of this to change our style a bit - won the approval of almost all the political groups .
That unanimity is reassuring , because all the signatories to this resolution are in agreement on the essential point . That has happened because we all now know that the essential point is a certain concept of humanity , relations between peoples , values - in short , civilisation , the heart of Europe ' s identity .
Mr President , this resolution clearly calls for respect for the UN resolutions , especially Resolutions 687 , 688 and 1293 , and also Resolution 1284 on which we are seeking clarification .
I would mention , too , that only two members of the Security Council voted for it , against the advice of the three other members who abstained .
Mr President , this does not mean we are releasing the Iraqi regime from its responsibilities and obligations .
It means that , for the first time , the international community is being asked to show consistency with its own principles , because the various UN committees agree that these resolutions have been virtually all applied by the Iraqi regime , except for some minor points of interpretation or detail .
And here I differ slightly from Mr Collins .
The fact is the discrepancies between Iraq and the international community do not justify maintaining the embargo .
Remember , the Iraqi people are innocent .
But it is they and not their rulers , who were never democratically elected , who are now paying the price of these sanctions in human lives .
Mr Hans von Sponek , the former head of the UN Oil for Food Programme , mentioned by Ms McKenna just now , said that , as a human being , with a heart and a soul , he could no longer tolerate what he was seeing in Iraq .
He decided to resign .
The disproportion between the constantly reiterated demands of certain members of the Security Council for the sanctions to be ruthlessly maintained and their consequences for the Iraqi people is - I am weighing my words - truly terrifying !
UNICEF estimates that half a million children have died as a result of nine years of sanctions , to the utter indifference of the civilised world .
It must be remembered that the rules of war involve respect for civilians .
The right of coercion over populations - it must also be remembered - should not lead to the right to starve them .
That is also one of the great principles of Western civilisation !
Mr President , our resolution is very consistent .
It calls for respect for all the UN resolutions first and foremost , clarification of Resolution 1284 and , consequently , the lifting of sanctions and constant vigilance against the Iraqi regime , respect by all for the rules of the UN Charter , including the members of the Security Council who are carrying out military action contrary to international law and , finally , the search for a global political solution .
Mr President , that is the only way dictatorships can really be weakened and concord between all the peoples of the region promoted .
For once , Europe must speak with a European voice !
Mr President , Mr Morillon has already explained my Group ' s position , which is in favour of this joint resolution .
For my part , I would refer to the procedure which seems to me in this case to be important .
This is a debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance , which has been devalued insofar as we are not getting a declaration from the Council , as Parliament had requested , on including this point as a Council declaration .
I would like to say that , without presenting any valid argument , this attitude on the part of the Council seems to me to show a lack of respect towards Parliament , especially when Parliament offers the Council the opportunity to make any declaration on any subject , as laid down in Rule 37 .
It is truly contradictory that this Parliament cannot obtain a Council declaration on an issue as sensitive as this .
Therefore , Mr President , I would like to say that my Group intends to ask the Committee on External Affairs , at its next meeting , to present , pursuant to Rule 42 , an oral question to the Council so that the Council will reply .
If this initiative is not successful , my political group will present , pursuant to the same article , an oral question to the Council so that the Council really takes seriously the worries and concerns of this Parliament and really does what is laid down in the Treaties , that is to say , to inform and cooperate with Parliament in all those areas which affect and concern the citizens of the European Union .
Mr Salafranca , you and those who are of the same opinion as yourself could also make the Conference of Presidents aware of your views .
The Conference of Presidents is shortly to meet here in Strasbourg in order to establish the programme for the forthcoming part-sessions , and it could issue a request along the lines that you have suggested .
Mr President , I am as concerned as anybody in this House about the suffering of the people of Iraq as the result of sanctions but also of the actions of their own government .
We should all remember that sanctions are sometimes better than the alternatives that we may have to consider .
If we are to support this resolution then Iraq must most definitely honour its obligations under all the United Nations resolutions .
We , as a Parliament , must stand by our resolution of January this year , calling for the release of all Kuwaitis and other non-Iraqi nationals who are still imprisoned in Iraq .
I had the opportunity to visit Iraq last month .
I met the families of the Kuwaiti prisoners .
I can tell you that fathers do not forget their sons , brothers do not forget their brothers , children do not forget their fathers ; nor should this House .
We should remind Saddam Hussein that he must honour his obligations to the international community and we shall then honour our obligations to Iraq .
Mr President , the Commission shares the concern expressed during this debate .
It regrets Iraq ' s decision not to accept United Nations Security Council Resolution 1284 .
As Mr Collins and Mr Morillon in particular have pointed out , this decision delays the application of the new instrument of control and hence the relaxation of sanctions .
We think the Oil for Food Programme is still the best short-term solution to ease the suffering of the Iraqi population , and the Iraqi government should reverse its policy of non-cooperation and comply with all the United Nations Security Council resolutions , as has been said .
Since the Gulf War , the Community has been the principal source of humanitarian aid to Iraq , with at least EUR 240 million provided to reduce the considerable sufferings of the Iraqi people .
And we could have done even more if the Iraqi government had not imposed restrictions on the activities of non-governmental organisations , hindering the delivery of humanitarian aid in Iraq .
Given the situation we cannot pretend that humanitarian aid can do any more than alleviate some of the effects of this awful economic and human situation in the short term .
The economic situation in Iraq can only improve as economic activity develops after sanctions are lifted . This involves engaging the Iraqi government , perhaps more than we are doing today , in a dialogue on the implementation of the Security Council resolutions .
In this regard , we agree with the draft resolution .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place this afternoon at 5.30 p.m.
Chechnya
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
( B5-350 / 2000 ) by Mr Markov , Mr Vinci , Mr Papayannakis and Mrs Ainardi , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on Chechnya ;
( B5-0363 / 2000 ) by Mrs Malmström , Mr Haarder , Mr Maaten and Baroness Nicholson of Winterbourne , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on Chechnya ;
( B5-0366 / 2000 ) by Mr Oostlander and Mr Posselt , on behalf of the PPE ­ DE Group , on Chechnya ;
( B5-0375 / 2000 ) by Mr Sakellariou and Mrs Krehl , on behalf of the PSE Group , on Chechnya ;
( B5-0387 / 2000 ) by Mrs Schroedter , Mr Cohn-Bendit and Mr Gahrton , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on the armed conflict in the Republic of Chechnya .
Mr President , Parliament has been dealing with the situation in and around Chechnya for some time .
We have followed with concern developments in the fundamentalist Islamic forces ' attempts to split Chechnya away from the Russian Federation .
We are categorically opposed to any form of terrorism and we support the fight against terrorism in every country in the world .
I believe that the territorial integrity and sovereignty of every country is an inviolable and fundamental principle .
However , for several months a war has been raging in Chechnya which none of these arguments can justify .
I spent over six years of my life in Russia and have very close ties with that country .
So I feel it all the more that Russia is totally overreacting in its use of military force in the Chechen conflict .
I find it totally unacceptable that we are witnessing violations of international humanitarian law by the Russian army .
It is a matter of deep regret and profound concern to me that militaristic thinking has now again taken hold in Russia .
It has long been recognised that military might never permanently resolves any conflict , and this needs to be remembered now .
It is high time that this war ended and that a political solution to this conflict was found , no matter how difficult and complicated that might be .
Furthermore , an enormous effort is required to restore this devastated region for the people who have lost all their possessions in the war and to make it habitable once again .
In the long term , this is the only way to remove this focus of conflict .
My Group supports this motion for a resolution , and we consider it essential that this Parliament , in conjunction with the members of the Russian Duma , should seek means of restoring peace in Chechnya without delay .
Mr President , ten days ago , the UN ' s Commissioner for Human Rights , Mary Robinson , returned home from a visit to Russia where she was to investigate the situation in Chechnya in regard to human rights abuses .
Mary Robinson obtained limited access .
She was not allowed to meet the Russian President and was treated in a most humiliating way .
In her report to the UN ' s session on human rights in Geneva , Mrs Robinson reported on individual testimonies concerning very serious crimes which had been committed in Chechnya .
The witnesses she had met had told of murders of civilians , summary trials , executions , rapes , torture and kidnappings .
Domestic affairs can never be pleaded as an excuse for atrocities of this kind .
We have a global responsibility to defend basic rights .
Abuses of these cannot - must not - be seen as internal matters .
The UN ' s High Commissioner must continue to be supported in his work .
The European Parliament has , on a number of occasions , expressed concern about the situation in Chechnya .
We support the Council of Europe ' s decision of last week to suspend Russia if no appropriate measures are taken .
For a liberal , considerations of trade and short-term benefits cannot come before the defence of human rights .
We would therefore react vigorously to these atrocities , but we also see it as very important to cooperate with democratic forces in Russia and with the new government .
We therefore hope that we can organise a joint delegation from the European Parliament and the Russian Duma to travel to Chechnya and , there on the spot , engage in discussions , conduct investigations and bring about a dialogue .
We presume that Russia will be of assistance and allow the delegation to travel freely .
We also hope that the EU can eventually contribute to a reconstruction programme in the region .
Mr President , what has happened in the war in Chechnya has shocked us all .
A guerrilla war is being fought without the civilian population being spared , in fact , the civilian population is also suffering the dreadful atrocities that can occur in wartime .
The first war in Chechnya may have evoked sympathy from us as a battle for autonomy and independence and setting things right in their own territory , but we now have to say that , although this war really ended quite well for the Chechens , the intervening period was not used to best advantage and Chechnya became a country of complete chaos , where kidnapping was commonplace and where the citizens were no longer safe .
At one stage , Chechen generals even invaded Dagestan , an action which merited absolutely no sympathy whatsoever .
This illustrates that there are various movements within Chechnya .
On the one hand , there are the military who tend to play the Afghan card or count on Iran for support .
The other two groupings seek more of a political solution .
One of them is seeking a solution more in terms of what we in Western Europe would also wish to achieve and the other is again seeking to strengthen relations with Russia .
Mr President , the President of Chechnya has limited control over the troops in his country .
We are pleased to hear that Maskadov does not support the actions of his military .
We are also delighted to hear that the Russians are at long last admitting to the fact that Mr Putin is contacting the Chechen authorities indirectly .
We have also noted hat the Council of Europe has adopted a position in this regard .
We know from the Russian delegation that was here until yesterday that this has hit them exceptionally hard and we spoke about it with them in detail .
We have also heard that there is the possibility of a joint parliamentary delegation undertaking a fact-finding mission on an ad hoc basis under the best possible conditions with a view to looking around the territory of Chechnya wherever it sees fit to do so .
A mission of this kind must take place soon and I believe it is important that in the resolution tabled on the basis of the liberal text , an amendment is included to this effect .
Mr President , we support an exceptionally brief resolution in that regard , perhaps even the briefest ever made in this House , consisting of the first two recitals of the liberal resolution , followed by the recital in which the decisions of the Council of Europe are mentioned .
We shall vote against Article 1 because once again it involves support for this statement and we could substitute a better statement of our own .
We shall willingly support Article 2 of the liberal resolution and then Amendment No 2 as well which refers to the joint parliamentary delegation which may be more useful in the future , because it is the future that we must concern ourselves with here .
The delegation will have to examine what can be done to preserve the defence of human rights in the region , but also examine what we can do in the future to help Chechnya become a democratic constitutional state .
Who knows whether with help from the European Union and Russia , a Stability Pact for the Caucasus region can ever be achieved .
Mr President , for these reasons we support this resolution , which initially was not to our liking , but which , at the moment , provides the best basis for a statement from this House .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I do not want to repeat what the three previous speakers have said , with which I totally concur .
In addition , my colleague , Mr Swoboda , will also say a few words about the reasons behind this war.There is a very broad consensus within this Parliament condemning both the war against civilians in Chechnya and the terrorism which started in Chechnya , and this same consensus applies to the desire to maintain good and special relations with Russia .
On the other hand , we are determined not simply to stand by and watch whilst Russia violates one international convention after another in this war in Chechnya .
We support the proposal from Mr Lukin , the Co-President of the Interparliamentary Delegation of the European Parliament and Russian Duma to send a fact-finding mission to Chechnya to gather information on the ground .
We want to make use of this information at a later stage , that is after the delegation has returned , as the basis for a major debate in this House , involving the Council and the Commission , and leading to the adoption of a really well founded resolution .
For this reason and this reason alone we , the Group of the Party of European Socialists , urge you not to adopt a motion for a resolution today - which would in fact bring the total to seven - and instead wait until we have the information we need for an in-depth debate resulting in a joint resolution .
Mr President , firstly I would like to say that , through political pragmatism and through loyalty to the work that we do with the other groups in this House , we will support a joint resolution which basically supports the decision of the Council of Europe and the sending of a joint delegation from the Duma and the European Parliament .
We must also say that we do not share this kind of silence on the part of the European Parliament which is spreading to all these issues like a low mist which obscures everything .
We have even noted that the Council of Europe itself is showing more courage than this Parliament .
What has happened in Chechnya is shameful , the crushing of a whole people , and it is also shameful that this House has had to listen to ' Mr CFSP ' talking about issues such as ' the proportionate use of force ' or recommending that the Russian authorities lessen the intensity of the conflict .
What is a proportionate use of force in a case such as Chechnya ?
What proportion are we talking about ?
This is unacceptable .
What is meant by lessening the intensity of the conflict in Chechnya ?
Perhaps stopping the massacre of women and children ?
Perhaps stopping the bombing of hospitals ?
Please explain this to us .
Of course , we still believe that there is sufficient reason to suspend the partnership and cooperation agreement on the basis of the human rights clause .
I would like to end by saying that I fully agree with what Mr Cohn-Bendit said in this House : in this Europe and this World which we want to build , let us have no more masking of attacks on entire peoples on the grounds of their being internal matters . We have had enough of excuses of this type .
There is no such thing as internal affairs in this world we want to build .
Either we have human rights or we do not have human rights .
Mr President , our Group firmly supports the short resolution tabled by the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , which largely goes back to a proposal on our part , because we want to see threefold solidarity : solidarity with the people of Chechnya , which is still imminently threatened with genocide , because that is what all this is about , together with energy interests .
Just now we heard about the issue of maintaining order . The history of the twentieth century is littered with strong men who used secret services and other means to create chaos so that they could then present themselves as a force for law and order .
Let there be no mistake , we should not let Mr Putin get away with that .
We must not allow the people of Chechnya to become victims of a genocide motivated principally by raw materials interests .
Secondly , we want to show our solidarity with our colleagues on the other side of the River Ill , with our colleagues in the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe , who have taken a courageous step and who we should not lag behind in fighting for human rights .
Thirdly , we would like to demonstrate our solidarity with the Russian people , because the war in Chechnya is threatening to become an instrument of nationalism , which will be used to lever out the rule of law and freedom of the press , which are still very weak in Russia , and to turn the clock back in that country .
Anyone who wishes to defend the Russian people must work to ensure that attempts to remove press freedom , as evidenced by the Babitsky case and by many other cases , do not succeed , and that Russia continues on the path towards greater freedom and towards closer links with the European Union .
That is why we must say a resounding ' yes ' to steps against these wrongdoings and why we believe that it is important for representatives of this Parliament to visit Chechnya as soon as possible , following the example of the Council of Europe and the UN Commissioner for Human Rights , Mrs Robinson .
This joint delegation needs to set off without delay .
It would be a great step forward if this succeeded .
And , as I have already said , it is vital for us to make it crystal clear that we back human rights for the people of both Chechnya and of Russia .
We wish to help both peoples and both peoples have the right to advance towards freedom and towards taking their proper place in the international community .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , foreign policy needs to be based not only on fundamental moral values and principles , but also on success in achieving its aims and objectives , and this should not be confused with opportunism .
I therefore support everything that has been said here about condemning the barbaric war being waged by Russia , which is a war that recalls the darkest days of the Soviet Union .
What we want to see is a new Russia , not a seamless transition from the Soviet Union , but a new Russia .
To my mind , it very much remains to be seen whether the new President Putin can guarantee this , certainly on the basis of what we have seen so far .
So there is no alternative to condemning this war and saying that although we certainly condemn terrorism we regard Russia ' s reaction as being totally disproportionate , inappropriate and unacceptable .
That is what we should condemn .
But we should not fool ourselves into imagining that in this case we simultaneously want to achieve something important for peace in Europe and throughout the world as whole , that is to say a dialogue with Russia and ultimately a partnership with Russia .
Unfortunately , Russia is only accepting this in words , not in deeds .
That is why I think it is important that this interparliamentary delegation exists .
It is the job of the Council Presidency and the Commission , whilst at the same time defending moral values and condemning this war , to endeavour to ensure that we support those forces which are all too poorly represented in Russia , but who nevertheless wish to pursue a European path , a path towards a European partnership , a partnership with the European Union .
This is the formula we need : condemnation of the war and a visit by the delegation , after which we must take whatever steps are necessary .
And if those steps have to be harsh ones , then we should , in full awareness of the facts , not shrink back from taking them .
Mr President , once again we are discussing the situation in Chechnya .
In the last few days the Commission and the Member States have held several meetings with their Russian counterparts : the ministerial troika with Mr Putin and Mr Ivanov on 7 April in Moscow , and the Cooperation Council with Russia , last Monday in Luxembourg .


During these discussions , we have reiterated our main demands : cease-fire and political dialogue , access for , and presence of , international and humanitarian organisations , and independent inquiries into any human rights violations .
All these demands are also in the European Parliament ' s resolution and the recommendation from the Council of Europe ' s Parliamentary Assembly .
As the European Parliament has emphasised , the Russian authorities have failed to respond satisfactorily to these requests .
All that can be said is that Mr Ivanov finally accepted the European Union and ECHO embassies at the last Cooperation Council .
Recent discussions in the Council of Europe , the Committee on Human Rights in Geneva and this Parliament reflect growing concern amongst the European public .
For our part , we support the United Nations Human Rights Commissioner , Mary Robinson ' s request to Russia to set up a broad independent committee of inquiry into any violations of human rights , based on recognised international criteria .
Last Monday ' s General Affairs Council stressed the importance of maintaining an open and frank dialogue , including on this subject , with the Russian authorities .
We think Russia should pursue implementation of the partnership agreement in terms of its elements - I do mean all its elements - and provide more concrete results than we have at this stage .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place this afternoon at 5.30 p.m.
Human rights
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
Jewish prisoners in Iran
( B5-0340 / 2000 ) by Mr Belder and Mr Van Dam , on behalf of the EDD Group , on the Jews persecuted in Iran ;
( B5 ­ 0351 / 2000 ) by Mr Sylla , Mr Brie and Mrs Morgantini , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the prisoners charged with spying in Iran ;
( B5 ­ 0362 / 2000 ) by Mr De Clercq , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on 13 Iranian Jews and 8 Iranian Muslims persecuted in Iran ;
( B5 ­ 0367 / 2000 ) by Mr Morillon , Mr Trakatellis , Mrs de Sarnez and Mrs Maij-Weggen , on behalf of the PPE ­ DE Group , on the Iranian Jews who may be condemned to death ;
( B5 ­ 0378 / 2000 ) by Mr Titley , Mr Zimmeray and Mrs Karamanou , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the prisoners in Iran charged with spying for Israel and the United States ;
( B5 ­ 0383 / 2000 ) by Mr Jonckheer , Mrs Sörensen and Mr Cohn-Bendit , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on prisoners in Iran charged with spying for Israel and the United States .
Akin Birdal
( B5 ­ 0352 / 2000 ) by Mrs Uca , Mr Marset Campos , Mr Korakas , Mr Papayannakis , Mrs Morgantini , Mrs Ainardi and Mr Miranda , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the rearrest of Akin Birdal in Turkey ;
( B5 ­ 0358 / 2000 ) by Mrs Malmström , Mrs Thors , Baroness Ludford and Mr Duff , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the arrest of Akin Birdal in Turkey ;
( B5 ­ 0368 / 2000 ) by Mr Salafranca , Mr Sánchez-Neyra and Mr Morillon , on behalf of the PPE ­ DE Group , on respect for fundamental democratic rights in Turkey ;
( B5 ­ 0379 / 2000 ) by Mr Sakellariou and Mr Schori , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the imprisonment of Akin Birdal ;
( B5 ­ 0385 / 2000 ) by Mr Cohn-Bendit , Mr Ceyhun , Mrs Frassoni and Mrs Flautre , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on the imprisonment of Akin Birdal , President of the Human Rights Association in Turkey and Vice-President of the International Federation of Human Rights .
Tibet
( B5 ­ 0343 / 2000 ) by Mr Messner , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on the issue of Tibet within the framework of the 56th session of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights ;
( B5 ­ 0353 / 2000 ) by Mr Sjöstedt , Mrs Eriksson and Mrs Morgantini , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on Tibet ;
( B5 ­ 0361 / 2000 ) by Mrs Malmström , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on Tibet ;
( B5 ­ 0369 / 2000 ) by Mr Thomas Mann , on behalf of the PPE ­ DE Group , on Tibet ;
( B5 ­ 0373 / 2000 ) by Mrs Muscardini , on behalf of the UEN Group , on Tibet ;
( B5 ­ 0377 / 2000 ) by Mr Sakellariou , on behalf of the PSE Group , on Tibet .
Death penalty in the United States - ( B5 ­ 0341 / 2000 ) by Mrs Frassoni and Mr Wuori , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on the abolition of the death penalty in the United States , with particular reference to the sentence of Mr Juan Raul Garza ;
( B5 ­ 0354 / 2000 ) by Mrs Boudjenah , Mr Brie , Mr Di Lello Finuoli , Mr Manisco , Mrs González Álvarez , Mr Miranda , Mr Korakas and Mr Papayannakis , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the application of the death penalty in the United States ;
( B5 ­ 0359 / 2000 ) by Mr Haarder , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the abolition of the death penalty in the United States , with particular reference to the sentence of Mr Juan Raul Garza ;
( B5 ­ 0370 / 2000 ) by Lord Bethell , on behalf of the PPE ­ DE Group , on the abolition of the death penalty in the United States ;
( B5 ­ 0376 / 2000 ) by Mr Titley , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the abolition of the death penalty in the United States , with particular reference to the sentence of Mr Juan Raul Garza .
Zimbabwe
( B5 ­ 0381 / 2000 ) by Mr Corrie and Mr Elles , on behalf of the PPE ­ DE Group , on the situation in Zimbabwe ;
( B5 ­ 0382 / 2000 ) by Mr Mulder , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on Zimbabwe ;
( B5 ­ 0386 / 2000 ) by Mrs Maes , Mrs Lucas , Mr Rod , Mr Lannoye and Mr Schörling , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on Zimbabwe ;
( B5 ­ 0389 / 2000 ) by Mr Van den Berg , on behalf of the PSE Group , on Zimbabwe .
Jewish prisoners in Iran
Mr President , what is the purpose of this joint resolution ?
Surely it is to establish a proper and public judicial process against the thirteen members of the Jewish community in the Southern Iranian town of Shiraz ?
The European Parliament in no way disputes the right of the Islamic Republic of Iran to react against foreign attempts at espionage and where the burden of proof is decisive , to punish them accordingly .
The point is , however , that the arrest and imprisonment of the thirteen Jews from Shiraz up to now has been a real caricature of a normal judicial process , a process that the constitution of the Islamic Republic itself actually provides for .
What fundamental objections are we actually raising against the judicial action taken by the Iranian authorities ?
To start with , a variety of scarcely plausible accusations have been levelled at the accused .
For example , proselytising against Islam and the joint teaching of boys and girls , a violation of the customary separation of the sexes in education in that country .
The latest accusation was scarcely credible to the orthodox Jewish community in Shiraz .
Finally , the official accusers raised the almost stereotypical subject of spying for ' America and the Zionists ' , which means the state of Israel .
And so these thirteen Jews are being threatened with the death penalty .
And remember , this has been the case for over a year as they were arrested in March 1999 .
The whole affair in the meantime smacks of the unremitting power struggle between the reformist camp around President Khatami and the conservatives around revolutionary leader Khomenei - by trampling on a defenceless Jewish minority of about 30 000 people .

What position should the European Parliament take in this tough , domestic political struggle with regard to the specific case of the thirteen Jews from Shiraz ?
Of course , it goes without saying that we should support those Iranian powers that publicly declare that they are striving for a society based on the rule of law and human rights and who are open to contact with the West .
This fundamental choice involves , at the same time , not giving the hard-liners in the Islamic Republic any excuse to undermine this promising path of reform .
Our amendment in paragraph 5 is based on this very consideration .
Iranian fundamentalists will immediately attack the European request to Teheran to support the complete abolition of the death penalty - note that this is a provision that runs directly counter to Islamic law , the sharia , as a renewed attempt at the pernicious westernisation of their own Islamic Republic !
And , in their view , the abolition of the sharia is equivalent to the abolition of the present Iranian form of government .
In short , this addition does nothing to support the case of the thirteen Jews from Shiraz .
The European Parliament must not , therefore , give ammunition for propaganda in this matter of life and death to the ultra-conservatives in Iran , who , in the last few years , have quite simply been pushed onto the defensive by Khatami and his followers .
What we have in mind is a clear legal settlement of this tragedy , ending we hope with the release of all prisoners .
That would really add a happy chapter to the almost 2500 years of history of the Jewish community in the land of the Persians .
God willing , that is what we shall see !
Mr President , the trial of thirteen Iranian Jews accused of espionage has opened today in Teheran .
The trial is taking place behind closed doors .
These people have been in prison for months under conditions we know virtually nothing about .
Their lawyers , some of whom are state appointed , were only allowed to look at the files the day before yesterday .
There is no guarantee of the right to a defence .
I am afraid this may only be a mock trial . Yet the charge is so serious it could lead to the death penalty .
When the case started , we had the privilege of hearing some leading government dignitaries publicly call for the prisoners to be put to death straight away .
This case , which was built up from nothing - I think we are all convinced of that - has mobilised international public opinion powerfully .
With strong feeling all over the world , including in Strasbourg today , the international pressure has had some impact because the Iranian leaders have softened their position , in particular announcing that most of the accused would no longer be appearing on the charge of espionage , tantamount to execution .
Three have been freed on bail . Finally , the court announced this morning that the trial was being adjourned until 1 May , which is a step forward , at least .
But some of the accused are still facing the death penalty and the others face heavy sentences .
The government ' s various changes of attitude illustrate their embarrassment very well .
They were incapable of stating the charges clearly until the very last minute .
It is also clear that the outcome of this trial partly depends on how the Iranian political situation evolves .
In the last parliamentary elections , in February , the reformist tendency defeated the conservatives who include the most extremist elements .
So this trial is starting at a significant moment : on the one hand , Iran is signalling openness and progress , on the other , the conservatives are trying to hang on to power by every means at their disposal .
There is consequently a risk that this case of the thirteen Iranian Jews will be used by one faction against another , in step with domestic conflicts .
Justice has little place in that kind of battle , and human rights even less .
So it is imperative that we react .
The European Union is based on the values laid down in the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
As a member of the UN , Iran should be applying them too .
That is why we must demand the release of the prisoners : the thirteen Iranian Jews , but also the other eight Moslem prisoners and the students we know absolutely nothing about .
We must also call on the Union governments to do the same .
We also demand that observers be permitted to attend the trial , because public hearings are fundamental to holding a fair trial .
Finally , we must make it absolutely clear that the development of our relations with Iran will be subject to respect for human rights in that country .
Mr President , Commissioner Lamy , ladies and gentlemen , since 1979 , fifteen Jews have been executed in Iran . The charge was espionage , but their real crime was being Jewish .
Today , a new trial is starting in Shiraz , in the South .
Thirteen Jews and eight Moslems have also been detained for a year in Iranian jails , facing death by hanging .
The youngest is only sixteen years old .
Back in September , Parliament resolutely called for respect for the fundamental rights of these prisoners in terms of a fair , just and public trial , with their own lawyers and with international observers present .
When the more moderate elements won the last elections , we thought our call had been heard .
But now there is this parody of a trial , a summary procedure behind closed doors before a revolutionary court presided over by a single judge , and a cleric at that .
As for observers , so far Teheran has not granted any visas .
In other words , we are disappointed , disappointed and alarmed .
We are continuing to insist that the international community be able to follow the proceedings from start to finish .
Furthermore , at the request of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , the European Parliament is urgently calling on the Council to send an official delegation to visit the prisoners .
There is no such thing as an internal matter where human rights are involved .
Our feelings are as strong as our concern .
We must make ourselves perfectly clear .
Iran ' s possible return to the bosom of the international community has a price today .
We hope the Council and the Commission will rally unequivocally to our position .
We must remain intransigent on this point - human rights are not negotiable .
Mr President , Commissioner , if voices other than ours had not been raised in the last few days , to give the Iranian Government a warning , thirteen Iranians charged with espionage just for being in touch with relatives in other parts of the world would , at this very moment , be facing trial behind closed doors under summary procedure , leaving them no chance of their most basic rights to a defence being guaranteed .
You have just heard confirmation , from Mr Sylla , that this planned mock trial is at least going to be adjourned for a few days .
That means there is the utmost justification for dealing with Parliament ' s second joint resolution on this issue under urgent procedure .
It also means there is a chance this resolution - expressing our indignation - might be heard in Iran , where the results of the recent elections have raised the hope of progress there on fundamental human rights . As everyone who has already spoken has said , it is our duty to ensure that those rights are respected .
Mr President , when we learned a few months ago that thirteen Iranian Jews had been imprisoned a year earlier , we were concerned for their fate .
At that time , in an effort to reassure us , the Iranian Government told us it was not a racist trial because many Moslems had also been arrested and indicted on the same charge along with the thirteen Jews .
But the trial opening today only involves the Jews . They are being tried separately from the Moslems charged with them , which proves , if proof were needed , that this trial - which we are told is to be adjourned - is no genuine trial .
You will remember , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , and it has been mentioned , that some Iranian Jews were arrested for spying for Israel a few years ago .
They were put on trial for it and hanged .
Who are the accused ?
We should point out that they include a cobbler , a cemetery caretaker , a boy who is not even sixteen yet , and two old men .
It is hard to understand how these people are endangering Iranian democracy .
What are they supposed to have done ?
No one really knows !
We do not have the right to know what they are supposed to have done .
A letter to a family in Israel may have been enough to set this case in motion .
In a previous resolution and in repeated letters supported by the President , we asked to be allowed to visit the prisoners .
That was refused .
We then asked to meet the families who are not sworn to secrecy , as far as I know .
That was also refused .
We asked - in a unanimous resolution - to be able to attend the trial .
Up to now that has been refused .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we must recognise the immense risk run by these thirteen people and strenuously reiterate our requests to send observers to this trial and be given access to the evidence in the case . We must also make clear our intransigence on relations with Iran .
I hope we are not going to wake up , some day soon , and find that these thirteen people have been executed because they were Jewish .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance wholeheartedly supports the joint resolution that will be put to the vote today .
I agree with all the previous speakers .
But I also support the massive protests that have been taking place for some time throughout the world in connection with this affair , such as today at 6 p.m. in Brussels in front of the Iranian embassy .
Today is a special day , 13 April 2000 , the date of the so-called ' trial ' .
In 1979 , 1993 , 1998 and 1999 , resolutions were sent from the European Parliament to Iran , but what happened to them ?
Via Amnesty International , Jewish families and organisations , we learned that , on 8 March 1999 , thirteen Iranian Jews and Muslims were arrested and detained .
The youngest is sixteen years old and the oldest forty eight .
The reason : espionage .
Yet again .
Requests have been made to send letters , but to no avail .
The Israeli Minister for Foreign Affairs , David Levy , sent a letter to various ministers , including the Belgian Minister , to point out that these people are in no way guilty of spying .
They are Hebrew teachers and perform religious rituals , among other things .
Three of the thirteen have been allowed to choose a lawyer and the others have had lawyers forced upon them .
I heard today at 11.30 a.m. that the forum of Jewish organisations in Belgium says that there will not be a trial .
The Jewish communities are afraid .
What is likely to happen ?
People disappear , they are locked up , but for how long ? Either that or they are used for cattle trading .
It is very worrying and must be followed up .
I hope that Iran will act wisely and responsibly and not with hatred .
Mr President , we should be clear that already some 17 Jews have already been executed in Iran for charges of espionage , which basically involves no more than contacting anyone in the outside world , certainly anyone in Israel or the United States .
That seems to me an unacceptable position for any country that claims to respect human rights .
These 13 who were arrested were arrested in secret ; nobody knew of their whereabouts for two or three months .
In addition , these 13 were all religious leaders or leaders of the Jewish community .
Therefore , we can only interpret this trial as a deliberate attack on the Jewish community in Iran .
We know that there will not be a free trial ; it will not be open to the public and we have no idea whether these people will have representation .
Let us send our message very clearly from this Chamber . If Iran claims to respect human rights , trials like this should never be allowed to happen .
- ( EL ) Mr President , we were most satisfied to see President Khatami ' s forces of modernisation strengthened during the recent elections in Iran .
At the same time , however , hopes were raised that there would be an acceleration in the processes of democratisation , respect for human rights without discrimination on the grounds of gender , religion or nationality and stronger dialogue with the European Union .
Unfortunately , the case of the 13 from the Jewish community , including a sixteen-year-old boy , is yet another link in the long chain of prosecutions , usually on trumped-up charges , intolerance and discrimination against minorities living in Iran .
Greece has started using its good relations with Iran to wage a campaign and to take steps to rescue the 13 .
We are using diplomatic channels to try and ensure that the death penalty is not imposed or , more to the point , is not carried out .
We feel that such an occurrence would put both relations between Israel and Iran and stability in the already sensitive Middle East to the test , which is why the European Parliament must send a strong message to Iran today , a message stressing the need to respect human rights , respect the international conventions which Iran has signed and grant a moratorium on the death penalty .
Akin Birdal
Mr President , Turkey is now standing at a crossroads .
It can choose the past , it can choose oppression and barbarity , or it can choose the future , freedom and humanitarianism .
Akin Birdal has now been imprisoned for such a statement , in spite of his ill-health .
We are faced with a country which apparently fears its own citizens so much that it is willing to violate the most basic human rights and place the unity of the state above the freedom and rights of the individual .
We must say to the Turkish Government that the policy which the country is conducting belongs to the past .
This type of behaviour does not belong to the future , where we hope that human rights will be foremost .
Such a country will never achieve the unity which it desires .
My advice to Turkey must be : choose the future and free Akin Birdal and his colleagues .
Mr President , in Helsinki , the EU countries confirmed Turkey ' s status as a candidate state .
The Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party supported this proposal .
We hope that we shall one day be able to welcome Turkey into the Community .
We believe that this message gives an important signal to the Turkish people .
But - and it is an important but - before negotiations can begin , a good many changes are required in Turkey , especially with regard to human rights .
Many of us had hoped for improvements in this area .
It is therefore all the more distressing to study all the reports about atrocities which arrive on an almost daily basis .
Turkey has signed international agreements on human rights but , as has become bitterly apparent to journalists , writers , human rights activists and opposition politicians , these are not observed .
We in the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party wish especially to express our concern about the chairman of Turkey ' s Human Rights Foundation , Akin Birdal .
He had scarcely received a just trial and had been sentenced on flimsy grounds .
Following a period of freedom , he has again been imprisoned and is being denied the proper medical care he needs following the severe injuries he suffered in the attempt on his life in 1998 .
He must be released immediately .
In the EU , we are proud not merely to be an economic club .
The EU is a Union founded upon values , respect for human rights , democracy and the principles of the constitutional state .
Everyone , both existing and future members , must respect these criteria .
Unfortunately , Turkey still has a long way to go .
Mr President , during the debate the day before yesterday with the Council and the Commission , I mentioned the savage reaction of certain Turkish leaders to the fear that the European Union might try to interfere in internal Turkish affairs on the Kurdish question , at the very moment when a new path to membership is opening up for Turkey .
I can only repeat here as firmly as possible what I said in Ankara on my last visit there .
The European Parliament has no intention whatsoever of allowing the micro-nationalist miasma which has just drenched the Balkans in blood to develop in Turkey .
Turkish public opinion need have no fear of our being tempted to encourage any separatist claims whatsoever .
On the other hand , the values we subscribe to include respect for human dignity the world over and the right of European citizens to keep their roots in their native soil and in the culture of their upbringing .
At any rate , that is my interpretation of minority rights .
We are not trying to tell anyone what to do , but we must constantly reaffirm that the European Union - as Mrs Malmström said - is not just about creating wealth at home . There are many of us in this House who believe we must go on building Europe to promote and uphold its fundamental values , in the spirit of the founding fathers .
That is the purpose of the draft resolution we will be voting on shortly .
Mr President , two weeks ago , we met Akin Birdal in Ankara at the offices of the EU delegation .
These were his words to us then : " For five months we have had a new Turkey .
Now that the country has acquired candidate country status , we see opportunities for democracy and freedom in our country .
In addition , the internal armed conflict has ceased and our relations with Greece have improved " .
Those were Akin Birdal ' s words .
Akin Birdal was free at just that particular time because of what was termed ' ill health ' .
However , he would shortly be forced to return to prison if he were too healthy .
He also , of course , forfeited the right to be chairman of the Human Rights Foundation .
His so-called crime was that he had spoken about the Kurdish people on World Peace Day .
Because of this crime , and in accordance with Article 312 of the law in force , he was sentenced to one year ' s imprisonment and ordered to pay fines .
Akin Birdal is a gentle and peaceful man .
He still suffers from the after-effects of the attempt upon his life in the spring of 1998 .
In the course of our conversation , he said that he wanted democracy and a peaceful solution to the Kurdish question and that he saw the value of EU membership .
He also commented on how important it was to abolish 152 laws and articles which limit freedom of expression and cause so many people to be put in prison .
Mr Birdal was re-imprisoned the day after our conversation and after we had spoken with Prime Minister Ecevit about him .
What we are seeing in this case is how an undemocratic system imprisons , persecutes and oppresses democrats .
That is why , in our resolution , we are demanding that measures be taken swiftly to guarantee freedom of expression , reform the judicial system and release all political prisoners .
Mr President , the previous speaker made it easy for me because he spoke in detail about Akin Birdal who was the leader of the human rights organisation in Turkey and who is mainly known for calling for a peaceful solution to the Kurdish question .
In 1998 , he survived an assassination attempt by right-wing extremists , but since then his health has greatly deteriorated .
He is now in prison again , at the very time that a number of our MEPs visited Ankara .
From Mr Schörling ' s statement , it appears very clear that this is in no way coincidental .
It is real provocation .
Through this kind of action Turkey alienates itself from Europe .
The gulf becomes deeper instead of the other way round .
If Turkey wishes to heed our call , then it can only respond by releasing Mr Birdal because this is out-and-out provocation .
This is not the only instance of human rights violations that concern us .
I understand that a press bureau in Amsterdam has been ransacked and that this was formally sanctioned by the Belgian judiciary .
In the meantime we also know from incidents in Belgium who is really behind this .
Human rights are unambiguous , human rights are the same everywhere and Turkey must also be aware of that , otherwise it will never become a Member of the European Union .
Mr President , once again we protest and call upon the Turkish Government to release a prisoner who is guilty of the desire to live in a country where democracy , rights and freedom are truly respected .
Akin Birdal is not a Kurd .
He is a Turk , a man of peace , condemned for speaking out about the Kurdish issue and calling for an end to this dirty war .
His imprisonment is the product of an illiberal legal system , the abolition of which Turkish democrats are fighting for , a legal system which has made hundreds and hundreds of citizens suffer .
No one who has met him could forget his smile and gentle nature . And yet he has had to endure great suffering .
This is not the first time he has been arrested and an armed attack has been made on his life ; he escaped with his life , but he was unable to leave the country and was rearrested .
Leyla Azan is still in prison , and so are thousands of Kurds .
When will this end ?
There is no justification for the behaviour of the Turkish Government .
The KWP has stopped fighting and its leader , Mr Öçalan , is calling from jail for peace , reconciliation and recognition of the cultural identity of his people .
The European Union has accepted Turkey ' s candidacy and now the Turkish Government must respect our agreements and conventions .
We must explore every possible avenue , save military interventions and embargoes , starting with a refusal to sell Turkey any more arms , so that , at last , democracy and freedom can be established in Turkey .
Tibet
Mr President , from all accounts , the human rights situation in China has deteriorated considerably .
This is especially true of Tibet , where , for the time being , the Dalai Lama ' s reasonable five point plan has no chance of finding its way onto the agenda .
The European Union cannot continue to turn a blind eye .
The United States presented a resolution on the violation of human rights in China at the fifty-sixth session of the UN Commission on Human Rights .
We are extremely concerned by the fact that the Council of the Union has also not yet announced its intention to support this resolution , and this may not be coincidental , since the EU-China dialogue on human rights is at a complete standstill .
We call for an end to this policy of turning a blind eye to events in China , and for the European Union to join the American initiative without worrying about losing choice economic opportunities , and to cease this silent and tolerant stance towards the continuous violations of human rights in China , and , in particular , Tibet .
Europe is laboriously and extremely inconsistently shaking off her lethargic attitude to the horrors taking place in Chechnya .
I sincerely hope that she will follow the example of the United States and , at last , wake up to the human rights situation in China .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , two weeks ago an interparliamentary conference on the human rights situation in China was held at the European Parliament in Brussels .
We Members of the European Parliament agreed , together with the Foreign Minister of the Tibetan government in exile , the US government official responsible for Tibet and members of national parliaments , that it is time we put an end to shady compromises with China for the sake of maintaining purely economic relations .
The Chinese are still refusing to enter into a constructive dialogue with His Holiness the Dalai Lama , and political repression is on the increase .
People are being mercilessly persecuted , and religious freedom and freedom of speech are being curbed .
Tibet ' s culture and identity are being systematically obliterated .
These continual violations of the most fundamental human rights must now become an issue .
The United States needs the support of the European Union at the 56th UN Commission on Human Rights in Geneva .
The European Union must use its inherent authority to work for human dignity and minority rights .
If it takes the first step , other countries , including the candidate countries , will certainly follow suit .
My own group , the Group of the European People 's Party , is firmly convinced of this .
Commissioner Lamy , Europe needs to stick its head above the parapet .
The Commission and the Council belong at the head of a movement fully supporting the Dalai Lama ' s five-point peace plan .
Point one : Tibet must become a peace zone .
Point two : China must finally renounce its policy of expulsion .
Point three : democratic civil rights must be guaranteed for all minorities .
Point four : Tibet ' s culture and environment must be protected .
Point five : genuine negotiations must take place on Tibet ' s future autonomous status .
Commissioner , all our economic agreements with third countries need to be based on the same premise : respect for human rights .
You demonstrated in Seattle , Commissioner Lamy , and I was there to see for myself , that you know how to build bridges .
How did a Tibetan delegate put it ?
" We will survive because of your moral support , but above all because of your solidarity " !
Tashi delek !
Mr President , as you are calling on each Member in his own language , perhaps you could address me in Bavarian !
Eight years ago I was rapporteur on Tibet .
In 1992 , I presented a motion for a resolution that was unanimously adopted by the European Parliament .
It is with some dismay that I have realised today that eight years later the same motion for a resolution could be presented on the same grounds , lamenting the same poor , nay appalling , conditions in Tibet .
The Tibetans ' human rights are being trampled upon and their cultural and spiritual heritage is being threatened with complete extinction , especially in Tibet itself .
Nature and the environment are being polluted and damaged to an extent never seen before .
Millions of Tibetans have no human rights , let alone civil rights . Above all , they have no right of assembly , no freedom of association , and no right to freely practise their religion .
For this reason we are calling on the Chinese Government as a matter of the greatest urgency to seek a political solution for Tibet through discussions with Tibet ' s political and religious leaders , on the basis of the proposal made by His Holiness the 14th Dalai Lama .
Mr Mann has made it unnecessary for me to reiterate this .
But I would like to stress this point : if a people is prepared to fight for its autonomous status without questioning borders and without separatist tendencies , then we should really be supporting them , as they are setting an example for our own European Union model !
Mr Sakellariou , unfortunately , the seriousness of this subject prevents me from responding to your introductory comment with some Bavarian humour .
This subject is so serious that I think it would be out of place .
A great many people are involved here .
Mr President , today we are discussing Tibet , but we have also discussed Chechnya , Kurdistan and Taiwan , and we will continue to do so .
In my opinion , the reason for this is that when we talk of human rights , we always focus on individual rights and too often disregard the rights of peoples .
The fundamental right of self-determination is all too often ignored , possibly for reasons of political convenience .
It may be easier to act in defence of a person who has been wrongfully imprisoned , tortured or denied freedom of speech than in defence of an entire people .
But this is the crux of the matter : until the right of self-determination is declared and applied everywhere , we will continue to witness such situations and we will continue to debate and adopt resolutions , but , as Mr Sakellariou said , sadly , nothing will change .
We must change our perspective completely and progress from the protection of individuals to the protection of peoples , for it is not fair for the inhabitants of East Timor alone to be able to exercise this right : all peoples must have the facility to exercise this right if they so desire , from the Sahara to Chechnya , from Taiwan to Kurdistan , and , of course , in Tibet .
I am sure a large majority of the House agrees with you .
Death penalty in the United States
Mr President , as I am sure you are aware , at the moment there is much talk of the reform of the urgent debates , and there are certain influential members of the larger groups who see these debates as unnecessary and consider our resolutions to be somewhat superfluous .
And yet I would argue that no topic more than the death penalty in the United States has proved that this type of humble debate can , over time , play a major role .
Things are changing in the United States .
I would not presume for a moment to think that this is entirely due to the European Parliament , but I feel that it is partly the result of the attention constantly paid to the matter by our institution .
I do not see the motion for a resolution that we are about to vote on as simply yet another resolution , but as further proof that things can change .
Moreover , I believe that the three elements which are highlighted as positive in this resolution - the stances adopted by Janet Reno , the governor of Illinois and the U.S. Justice Department - should be brought to the attention of the Americans .
From this point of view , I feel we can congratulate ourselves .
Mr President , you could say that there is something of a feeling of helplessness in standing here yet again and talking about the death penalty in the USA , since it is certainly not the first time we have discussed it , not even the first time during my short period in Parliament .
Most recently , we discussed the Mumia Jamal case , and now it is the Juan Raul Garza case , among others .
However , these men are just examples as there have been so many that you could say that the USA , in its legal policy , is almost waging war against its most destitute and most marginalised people .
In this way the USA has brought itself into line with China , Congo and Iraq .
You may well feel that it is strange to sit in a near half-empty chamber , apart from the visitors , and discuss such an important subject , but I think it is a subject which we must continue to take up , and I would ask the Member States to also respond to it here , to respond swiftly and in no uncertain terms to this so-called friendly state which repeatedly violates the most basic human rights .
Mr President , the European Parliament has , on various occasions , approved texts which state that the death penalty is an assault on human dignity , on human rights and it is a great pity that we have to establish once again that the death penalty still exists among our American friends and that , regrettably , the number of executions is increasing - there have been 350 since 1990 .
What I find particularly distressing is the fact that young people as well , people under 18 , can also be sentenced to death , and even the mentally handicapped can be sentenced to death .
Those are particularly depressing aspects of the text now before us .
Every execution is an irreversible act and that makes it so extraordinary .
In the case we are discussing here it was not life imprisonment that was imposed , but the death penalty , and that is on the basis of facts that were not proven beyond any doubt .
For that reason even the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights asked for time to re-examine the case and to be able to issue an opinion , and it also asked that no date be set for an execution .
We must urge the Americans to act not only in this specific case , but to ensure that the death penalty is abolished in their country .
Together with a few other countries where democracy is a long way off , they are the only ones where the number of death sentences is rising .
This is by no means an enviable record .
Our Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party has repeatedly argued in favour of the abolition of the death penalty , not only in this specific case , but in general .
More specifically , I would ask our American friends to abolish it once and for all .
Mr President , we should be clear as to why this resolution today is so important .
Firstly , we all know that there is a wave of judicial executions across the USA - over 600 since 1977 - but this would be the first federal execution since 1963 .
Secondly , it is important because this is the only case since executions resumed in 1977 in which the evidence of unsolved , unadjudicated crime in a foreign country has been used to secure the death sentence .
Juan Garza 's death sentence came as a result of murders in Mexico , which he was never charged with .
Thirdly , there are 21 prisoners currently in federal death row : 14 are black , 5 are white , one is Asian and one is Latino .
We know that in state trials black defendants are four times more likely to be sentenced to death than white defendants .
Fourthly , Governor Ryan of Illinois , as we have heard already , has imposed a moratorium on the death sentence in his state because of its appalling record of wrongful convictions .
When we bring all those factors together we see that the death penalty in the US is an arbitrary process and is fundamentally a racist process .
That is why we constantly demand that the death sentence should not be carried out in the US .
In this case it is particularly important because it is a federal execution and will be the first since 1963 .
That is why we urge President Clinton to grant clemency in this case and a moratorium on federal executions .
There is a presidential campaign under way .
In a presidential campaign executions , regrettably , become a political football in the US .
President Clinton has the opportunity - he is not standing for re-election - to make a stand on this issue today .
Mr President , I join with previous speakers in demanding the immediate and unconditional abolition of the death penalty in the United States , and everywhere else in the world .
The death penalty is a political arm used by the American Government apparatus to settle accounts with militants like Mumia Abu Jamal .
Like the whole prison system , it is also an instrument of social discrimination because Afro-Americans , ethnic minorities , and more generally the poor , are far more at risk than others of being condemned to death .
It is also a penalty whose irreversible character makes any reparation impossible if a mistake is made - and mistakes are often made .
A government which makes legal assassination one of the pillars of its justice system is infinitely more criminal than those it claims it is protecting society from .
The death penalty expresses all the barbarity of a society organised in a way that also condemns so many children and adolescents , even in the richest country in the world , to die from drug use or insecurity , actually from material and moral poverty , simply because they had the misfortune to be born in a poor area .
On a planetary scale , that barbarity condemns millions of human beings to die of hunger or disease when they could easily be cured - but they are not cured because they do not get the medicine they need .
In rising up against the death penalty we also rise up against all that barbarity , against the barbarity linked to permanently organising society so that all the wealth is concentrated in the hands of a minority and the great mass of humanity is condemned to poverty .
- ( PT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the death penalty was abolished in Portugal over a century ago .
So for the Portuguese , being opposed to the death penalty is inherent in our culture .
I would like to remind you of another reference : the US Declaration of Independence , an inspirational text which defines the three rights on which the United States war of independence was based : " the right to life , to liberty and to the pursuit of happiness " .
Some two hundred years on , the right to life has still not been fully recognised in the US legal system and this deserves a strong reaction on our part .
Mr President , my Group firmly supports this resolution .
We owe a debt of gratitude to the USA for defeating two totalitarian regimes , for defeating national socialism and communism , and for establishing democracy and the rule of law throughout our continent . Nevertheless , the existence of the death penalty in the USA means that they could not join either the Council of Europe or the European Union .
That means that we should tell even such an important partner as this one , in no uncertain terms , that they should finally abolish the death penalty at individual state level and all the more so at federal level .
The American election campaign could provide a unique opportunity to send a strong message about this .
Sad to say , just the opposite has happened , and the candidates are vying with each other in a populist way on this issue .
However , we believe that the Atlantic Alliance is founded on democracy and the rule of law , so that the right to life should form the centrepiece of the legal system in both the USA and in Europe .
That is why we want to state unequivocally in our Charter of Fundamental Rights that we support the right to life and that we are opposed to a culture of death as typified by the death penalty .
Zimbabwe
Mr President , this short debate takes place against a background of increasing tension in Zimbabwe .
All of us who speak should remember that every word of our speeches and the resolution will be eagerly read in Zimbabwe within the next 48 hours by all sides .
We must , therefore , all encourage Zimbabwe to move towards elections in May .
The old parliament was dissolved on 11 April and President Mugabe pledged at the EU-Africa Summit in Cairo that the elections would go ahead .
It is therefore worrying that constituency boundaries have yet to be set .
This could take up to three months .
I hope that , when the elections are called , observers from Europe will be invited to Zimbabwe to monitor the proceedings .
This would show real transparency .
It is not for Europe to meddle in the internal affairs of any nation .
African countries must work together to consolidate their future .
However , the old Lomé Convention made democracy , human rights and the rule of law a requirement for development aid .
The new Partnership Agreement goes further and asks for good governance .
All we ask is that disputes of any kind be settled through courts and not in open conflict .
I particularly highlight land issues .
Zimbabwe has much to gain from the Partnership Agreement and urgently needs aid and debt relief .
Much of this could go to rural areas for agreed land resettlement .
It is disappointing that Zimbabwe feels the need to be involved in the war in the Democratic Republic of Congo at a time when precious resources could be spent on domestic requirements , such as education and health .
We all look forward to the rule of law being strengthened and a democratisation process fully operating under an independent judiciary to allow civil society to express its wishes through a fair and open press .
The Zimbabwean people must be given a chance to choose their future .
Mr President , in the last few decades Southern Africa has formed the subject of much attention in this House .
We have fortunately been able to witness a democratic regime that seems to function well coming to power in South Africa .
At the moment we are receiving very alarming reports from Zimbabwe .
There are clear signs that democracy in that country could be in jeopardy .
The court rulings were ignored .
I sincerely hope that the ruling that was taken about an hour ago , that the police must act against those occupying the farms , will not be ignored this time , as was unfortunately the case with other court rulings .
What is more serious is the fact that innocent people are being beaten for no apparent reason .
The only possible reason for this is that they oppose the government of President Mugabe .
All this , Mr President , is a recipe for anarchy and a threat to democracy that could endanger the entire region .
We therefore believe that elections must be held as quickly as possible , preferably under the supervision of international observers so that everyone can be satisfied that they are held as fairly as possible .
Land reform is necessary .
There are many landless farmers and unemployed people in Zimbabwe .
It must , however , take place lawfully .
Above all , it should not occur along racial lines and it must certainly not be the case that holders of political office of whatever party be given priority in the distribution of land .
Finally I should like to say something about the war that is currently raging in a certain part of Africa .
I agree with Mr Corrie that the money for this war could be better spent on development in Zimbabwe , on education , training and health care .
One can think of a whole range of things .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by expressing my confidence in the people of Zimbabwe .
These people have , over the last few years , shown that they deserve our confidence .
Zimbabwe is a country which , since independence in 1980 , has steadily chosen the path of peaceful development under the leadership of President Mugabe .
Not only in the economic sphere , but also politically , with a degree of press freedom in which the leadership of the country has also not been spared from criticism .
As one of the leading SADEC countries it was at the forefront of the battle against apartheid in South Africa .
It would be particularly sad if this country of all countries became the victim of war , racism and civil strife .
Zimbabwe does , of course , still have considerable problems , but the European countries and the Union will continue to assume their responsibilities as partners of Zimbabwe in jointly tackling the problems of poverty , ill health and under-development .
These problems will not be resolved by letting the Zimbabwean army fight in the Congo .
The country cannot afford such a drain on its resources , as is evident from the economic situation .
Neither will the occupation of the land of white farmers resolve the problems .
Land reforms can be introduced through legal channels by a lawful government , and a lawful government comes to power after normal elections .
These have been announced for June at the very latest .
I hope that nobody will use the current problems as a pretext - by exaggerating and increasing these problems , for example - to postpone the elections and heavily influence the spontaneous development of this movement .
In my view , Zimbabwe deserves our confidence .
The population has chosen the path of development .
I hope that nothing whatsoever is done to put an abrupt end to this .
With this in mind , we support the resolution .
Mr President , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , I should like to agree with the comments made by my fellow MEPs .
I believe that we have a reasonable common position .
Land reform is one of the most important issues throughout southern Africa , so it is therefore not surprising to see that it is again being exploited by Mugabe to his advantage , just prior to the elections , exactly as he has done in previous elections .
After all , this issue is so important for so many black and poor people .
The elections are therefore necessary .
The rule of law is necessary .
You need to have faith in the people and in the law for the system to function properly .
I support what other speakers have said about the SADAC countries who will no doubt be looking upon this situation with great concern and who are undoubtedly working behind the scenes to maintain a democratic climate .
It is also true that they are continually pressing for the withdrawal of troops from the Congo .
Could the Commission and the Council help us , as the European Parliament , to remain involved as observers at these elections , because if things go wrong in Zimbabwe , there will be more trouble in the region .
After South Africa and the democratic government there and the sound developments that have taken place in the region , we very much need to see the positive side .
Let us express our complete confidence in the Zimbabwean people and wish them successful elections for 1 June .
Mr President , it is five to midnight in Zimbabwe .
Everything points to the country sitting on a volcano that could erupt at any minute .
In the run up to the elections , Mugabe will not hesitate to use violence against his political opponents .
At the beginning of this month , peaceful demonstrators were attacked by his followers while the police looked on .
What is more serious is the fact that the demonstrators were arrested and the attackers left alone .
Similarly , Mugabe will not recoil from provoking anarchy and racial hatred by encouraging the illegal occupation of white farms .
Whites are being systematically intimidated and driven from their land through violent means to punish them for their support for the opposition and to buy the votes of the landless farmers .
The government systematically disregards the rulings of the Supreme Court .
In fact , the public prosecutor warned that any attempt to remove the occupiers could lead to civil war .
It is clear that Mugabe , who has become unpopular through his mismanagement of the economy and his exploits in the Congo , intends to do everything necessary to stay in power .
Some people even fear that he is inciting the chaos in order to be able to proclaim a state of emergency and postpone the elections .
At long last , the European Union has this week threatened to suspend aid if the President does not keep his promise of free and fair elections .
But it is already clear that the elections have been rigged .
A quarter of the names on the electoral lists are fictitious or duplicates .
The President is still not allowing any foreign observers in .
What else has to happen before structural aid is suspended ?
I would urge the Council and the Commission not to wait until it is five past midnight .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think it is a shame that this resolution was not adopted at the March part-session , just as I think it is a shame that the recent EU-Africa Summit did not tackle this subject head on .
These are subjects which should be at the forefront of political action by the European Union .
We cannot hide the seriousness of what has been going on in Zimbabwe for many weeks now .
The fact is that Hitler is on the loose again - Hitler is out and about again there .
It should not go unnoticed that the leader of the band that is encouraging these arbitrary acts in Zimbabwe chose the name Hitler as his own name .
He is a gentleman by the name of Chenjerai ' Hitler ' Hunzvi .
We know that the instigator is the President of Zimbabwe himself , but the leader of the movement took this name , a name that we know all too well from the horrors of our own history .
This is what is happening in Zimbabwe .
That is why we have to take more vigorous action .
The chaos , the threats and the intimidation taking place in that country are unacceptable and it is also unacceptable that this is being encouraged by the person holding the highest office of state , the President of Zimbabwe himself .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Lamy .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
World education forum
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B5-0355 / 2000 by Mr Miranda and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left ;
B5-0357 / 2000 by Mr Andreasen and Mrs Sander , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party ;
B5-0371 / 2000 by Mrs Banotti and Mrs Pack , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and the European Democrats ;
B5-0380 / 2000 by Mr Van den Berg and Mrs Kinnock , on behalf the Group of the Party of European Socialists ;
B5-0384 / 2000 by Mrs Lucas and others , on behalf the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance
on the World Education Forum .
Mr President , The World Education Forum in Dakar is a follow-up to the first conference of Education for All held in Thailand eleven years ago .
There has been some progress but , unfortunately , not enough as yet .
As we speak there are 125 million children in the world who do not go to school .
There are 880 million illiterate adults , two-thirds of whom are girls and women .
The Community is the largest donor to many of these countries .
It is regrettable that we are not sending our highest official to attend that conference on behalf of the Community .
We also regret that there has not yet been a communication on children 's rights from the Commission .
A prominent African leader made a very pertinent comment .
He said that education is the only existing vaccination against AIDS .
One of the main problems with providing education in many countries is the catastrophic effect AIDS is having on the lives not just of children , many of whom are orphans because they have lost one or both parents .
In several of the African countries which I recently visited , I was informed that in order to have one teacher , the colleges must train three , because by the age of 30 so many teachers are already dead from AIDS .
This underlines the seriousness of the problems .
Many of these children who are not in school are working .
Future plans for education programmes and commitments on the part of the donors to the developing world will have to take this into consideration .
Unfortunately , only 2 % of the aid we send to these developing countries is actually being spent on education .
We hope very much that this conference will raise the issue again and bring to it the urgent attention that is needed .
Mr President , for about ten years I have been involved with campaigns to promote education throughout the world .
A hundred and twenty-five million children , mainly girls , do not receive any education .
I am extremely pleased that I am now a Member of the European Parliament and can take specific action and that in this resolution all Groups are saying that the EU development cooperation budget should be doubled .
We are not talking about more money for the development budget but about redistribution within that budget .
According to Commissioner Nielson , we spend 5 % on education as a whole and an estimated 80 % of that on primary education .
Because I am also rapporteur for the budget for the year 2001 , I hope that we as a Parliament , in consultation with Commissioner Nielson - who has , moreover , said that he wants to move in this direction - will be able to double that budget next year .
That would really be a concrete step forward , because so much of the money that we spend simply does not reach the poorest people and is not a step towards real development .
Finally , we cannot develop others , they must develop themselves , but this is a wonderful opportunity to help them and Parliament , together with the Commission , will soon be able to translate this resolution very specifically into real action in the 2001 budget .
Mr President , it is incredibly sad and , in fact , humiliating for us all that , in the year 2000 , there are still children who do not receive any basic education or schooling at all and that there are still adults - almost a billion of them - who cannot read or write and who are thus also prevented from participating in the political and democratic life of their society .
It is , of course , also a waste of human resources that this is the way things are .
Unfortunately , it is also those countries which most need educated people to participate in the democratic development of civil society which lack resources for education .
As has been mentioned , the world ' s governments agreed in 1990 that steps should be taken to ensure that everyone received a basic education by no later than the year 2000 .
At the Copenhagen Summit , the deadline was changed to 2015 .
Now , a new summit looms , namely the World Education Forum in Dakar , Senegal in April .
We know that education is the key to combating poverty , promoting respect for human rights etc .
We cannot accept a situation in which the deadline by which everyone is to receive a basic education is moved forward once again .
I am pleased with this resolution .
I hope that the decision will be a unanimous one and that the clear message will be : ensure you establish a specific framework for a global action plan for prioritising educational needs in the world .
Make resources available .
This is also our message to the Commission .
Mr President , the recent Euro-African Summit in Cairo has made poverty one of our central concerns .
As the author of the general report on poverty approved in the Bahamas by the EU-ACP Joint Assembly a few months ago , I would like to say that the fight against poverty must become one of our objectives and , in many cases , our main objective .
In this context , education , together with health , is the tool with which we can implement an ambitious programme to win the fight against poverty in the world .
Education is a universal human right and the key to sustainable human development . It is the basic responsibility of the States and , above all , an achievable objective if we mobilise the necessary resources .
For this reason , we are supporting this initiative and we urge the Commission to mobilise the necessary budgetary and economic resources and to adopt the relevant institutional initiatives so that this objective may be achieved .
Mr President , I want to preface my remarks by saying that whenever there is lack of respect for children ' s rights , there is violence .
And the first form of violence is failure to provide education .
Children from families with problems suffer and often do not have access to proper education .
They will have far less chance of success in life and the conditions are all present for their children to experience the same situation .
So it is time to prioritise prevention and by creating a different family framework finally make it possible to avoid pointless social and individual suffering and implement a real policy of inclusion , socialisation and education from birth .
We need to invent new responses and new social attitudes .
It is our duty to take an interest in these children , particularly the girls , because in some countries they are still regarded as domestic slaves .
The importance of the early years and education must be recognised in order to provide young people with forms of self-expression other than rebellion due to deprivation in childhood .
Human beings are born in a state of dependency .
Defenceless , babies have no duties . They cannot have any .
Duties follow awareness and awareness awakens with education .
So in parallel with the implementation of processes to promote literacy and education in general , we must also engage in some collective thinking about the living conditions of children in the various countries , especially in urban areas , and assist in projects to look after street children in third world countries , and also in our own countries , developing pilot schemes inspired , for example , by the family pre-school proposed by ATD Quart-monde .
It involves reaching out to families and helping children within the family , as well as cooperation and funding to help families in difficulty , especially single-parent families and vulnerable children .
In fact it is our duty to launch an extensive review of the education of children on our planet if we want a better future for all .
Mr President , the Commission has participated actively in the Forum ' s preparation process through the ' Education for All 2000 ' evaluation and the regional preparation meetings , particularly the one in Johannesburg in 1999 . The Commission will be represented at the Dakar Forum by the director-general for Development .
In line with these international commitments , Community investments in education have primarily targeted basic education and primary education , especially in the context of cooperation with the ACP countries .
Thus , a majority of the education programmes financed under the 8th EDF have been devoted to primary education .
The funds allocated to this heading represent 80 % of the total amount devoted to education .
The Commission has incorporated the recommendations of the Jomtien Conference on Basic Education into its policy and , in the framework of indicative national programmes , 35 ACP countries out of 71 have made education a priority .
However , I have to specify that , while a balanced approach means prioritising basic education , as has been said , other levels of the educational system must not be neglected as a consequence .
We agree that the effectiveness of our approach on education requires very close coordination between the Community and the Member States as well as with the other backers .
But we believe we must also establish a dialogue with civil society and that will be the Community ' s approach to supporting national education action plans in ACP countries .
We are also pursuing the target of eliminating disparities affecting people by the year 2005 , in line with the OECD Development Aid Committee ' s strategy and the conclusions of the European Union ' s social affairs summits .
My last point is the question put by Mr Van den Berg on the doubling of the basic education budget in 2001 .
In our view , the Community and the Member States should all allocate more resources to education overall and to basic education in particular .
Nevertheless , we also know this cannot have the anticipated effect unless the recipient countries have the necessary absorption capacity and the resources to ensure the sustainability and durability of the system .
Consequently the answer is not ' no ' , but it is not entirely ' yes ' either .
We think the issue needs to be examined country by country to ensure adequate analysis adapted to each case .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Lamy .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
Taiwan
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B5-0347 / 2000 by Mr Collins , on behalf of the Union for a Europe of Nations Group ;
B5-0356 / 2000 by Mr Haarder and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party ;
B5-0372 / 2000 by Mr Jarzembowski and others , on behalf the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and the European Democrats ;
B5-0388 / 2000 by Mr Nogueira Román , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance
on Taiwan .
Mr President , the elected Vice-President of the island of Taiwan has been called " the dregs of the nation " by the government in Beijing .
Extra troops have been sent to the Chinese province of Fujian , which lies across the water from Taiwan .
This elected Vice-President , Annette L , said last week that although Taiwan and the mainland are very close to each other geographically , they had become distant relations over the course of history .
China reacted furiously .
Lü had shown her true colours as an extremist and incorrigible agitator for the independence of Taiwan .
According to Beijing , with her poisonous words she wanted to stir up her Taiwanese comrades to hate their fellow countrymen in the mother country , i.e. Beijing .
Lü said that these slanderous comments reminded her of the way in which the Kuomintang had treated her - during the long dictatorship of this party she was imprisoned for five years - and that she is only interested in improved relations with Beijing .
That is indeed the case .
We know Annette Lü and the new President of Taiwan Chen Shui-bian .
Their election is the crowning glory of the democratisation process in Taiwan .
Is that a threat to China ?
Yes , indeed , after all it is clear that the Chinese people are quite capable of building a democratic system with respect for human rights .
The Taiwanese have shown that .
For the old man in Beijing the internal developments in Taiwan must be a nightmare .
Do they really think their threats will bring results ?
Beijing ' s behaviour confirms our opinion that the future of Taiwan lies in the hands of the Taiwanese themselves .
As Europeans we do not need to interfere .
Our business is to ensure that this great and independent island is properly represented on the world stage , at the World Health Organisation , the World Trade Organisation , and such like .
The idea that Beijing could represent the Taiwanese in such organisations is absolutely ridiculous .
It is extremely important for this Parliament to forge closer links with the elected representatives in Taiwan .
Democratisation in that part of the world is also important for Europe .
China will only be able to be reunited if both Taiwan and the mainland adopt democracy , human rights and the rule of law as their guiding principles .
Mr President , Commissioner , as European Parliament observers , my colleague Georg Jarzembowski and I were able to follow the presidential elections in Taiwan on 18 March on the spot , ' live ' as it were .
On the basis of numerous conversations with various parties and visits to the polling stations , we satisfied ourselves that the election was free and democratic .
We had the impression that the elections in Taiwan were marked by a mature awareness of democracy amongst the population .
This was evidenced both by the high turnout , which , as compared with the presidential elections , had risen by 6 % to 82 % , and by the result itself .
After a very long period of supremacy by the party in government up to that point - a period lasting over 50 years - the political scene has been revitalised .
The opposition candidate was elected the new President and , for the first time in Taiwan ' s history , a woman was elected Vice-President .
These results alone mark a historical turning point .
The people of Taiwan viewed any attempts by outsiders to influence them with enormous sensitivity .
The result was primarily an expression of the internal policy debate , and the newly elected President , Mr Chen Shui-bian , based his election campaign almost entirely on internal issues , and the high-profile , aggressive and provocative noises emerging from the People ' s Republic of China , from a variety of sources , had , if anything , the opposite of the desired effect .
Nevertheless , everyone involved was aware of the circumstances .
Chen Shui-bian was also elected because the previously governing Kuomintang party was split by the presence of two candidates .
However , the Kuomintang still has a majority in the Taiwanese Parliament .
Chen Shui-bian is very well aware that a radical pro-independence policy would have been condemned to failure .
The region needs security and stability .
The only way to achieve reconciliation and lasting peace is through positive cooperation and a constructive dialogue between mainland China and Taiwan .
Healthy relations are also needed for economic development .
We therefore welcome the fact that both sides in this conflict are seeking a peaceful solution .
In this respect we welcome Chen Shui-bian ' s initiative to commence bilateral talks , and we also welcome the cooperative approach announced by the People ' s Republic of China .
The PRC is officially endeavouring to reach a peaceful solution , subject , of course , to Taiwan renouncing its efforts towards independence .
Our resolution is intended to further democracy in Taiwan , but the People ' s Republic of China is taking it as an affront .
That is why I seriously ask myself whether we should not perhaps adopt a different approach , based on reconciliation instead of polarisation .
Mr President , thank you very much for letting me speak for the second time today .
The recent presidential elections , which not only observed all democratic norms but also marked the end of the 50-year rule of the Kuomintang , secured the presidency for Mr Chen Shui-bian .
The newly elected President reflects Taiwan ' s democratic maturity .
This makes the behaviour of the People ' s Republic of China all the more worrying for us , as before , during and after the democratic elections in Taiwan the Republic did not cease to make in some cases totally unacceptable threats towards its little brother .
I realise , of course , that the People ' s Republic of China does not understand the word democracy .
Nevertheless , there is no need for them to start panicking just because democratic elections are taking place in a neighbouring state .
Unfortunately , democracy is not infectious !
Mr President , like you , we are delighted that the people of Taiwan have been able to express a democratic choice for the second time .
As the Union has stated through its Presidency , most recently in July last year , in principle we are in favour of one China , but we also want the tension which breaks out from time to time between Taiwan and the People ' s Republic of China to be resolved peaceably within a constructive dialogue .
We call on both Beijing and Taipei to take the path of dialogue as quickly as possible .
We are encouraging intensification of economic relations with Taiwan and we think that should happen if , as we expect , Taiwan joins the World Trade Organisation .
Finally , we note the request in your draft resolution , also mentioned by Mr Knörr Borras , for an information office to be opened in Taipei .
We are hoping to do that , but we have not set any timetable because we have other priorities in Asia and worldwide , and you know how limited our resources are in this field , so we are forced to make choices .
We hope to open an office , but it is not one of our priorities at the moment .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
( The sitting was suspended at 5.25 p.m. and resumed at 5.30 p.m. )

We shall now proceed to the vote on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
Relating to the joint resolution on Iraq
Mr President , there is a drafting error in Paragraph 2 of this resolution .
I would like to propose - and this is in fact correct in the German version - that we should forward this resolution to the High Representative for the CFSP .
But it then continues : " forward this resolution ... and the governments of the Member States " .
I would like to propose an oral amendment so that it reads " and the governments of the Member States , of the United States and of Iraq " .
This is an oral amendment .
Are there any objections ?
If there are no objections , Mr Sakellariou ' s motion will be adopted .
Mr President , I should like to clarify whether this resolution is compatible with the resolution that we passed in January of this year , drawing attention to the problems of the prisoners of war who are still in Kuwait , or whether this resolution is to be taken as contradictory to our resolution of January of this year ?
Mr Perry , your objection is political , not procedural .
Mr Sakellariou tabled a motion ; nobody opposed it and so the motion has been adopted .
Mr President , this morning we had a debate on whether or not , in future , the House should meet in plenary on Fridays .
A possible justification cited in favour of change was that the agenda is generally relatively uninteresting and that something should be done about this .
For that reason , and in order to establish whether a quorum is guaranteed on Thursday afternoon when there is an interesting agenda and very important votes , I request that you establish the quorum .
Mr Markov , you cannot make this request on your own .
The request has to be made by 32 Members .
If this request is made by 32 Members , I can check on the quorum .
Thirty-nine or 40 Members appear to have stood up , and so we must check on the quorum .
Mr President , given that agreement was reached on this subject , I find this a rather crude method of avoiding such an important vote .
Mr Naïr , the method may be crude as you say , but the problem is that , according to the old Rules of Procedure , a certain number of Members could request the quorum and then leave the Chamber .
The current rule is that whoever requests the quorum has to remain in the Chamber .
Other Members could have requested the quorum and then not voted .
Consequently , all this may well be crude but it is just a touch more practical .
Mr President , I think it is terribly sad that when we are about to take such important votes some people are trying to obstruct this .
I have heard that some Parliamentary staff worked until 4 a.m. so that we could vote on the Dimitrakopoulos / Leinen report .
I would like to sincerely thank those staff on behalf of my Group , and , I hope , on behalf of all of us .
They work very conscientiously and we should be just as conscientious when it comes to voting !
( Loud applause )
Thank you , Mr Swoboda .
However , this is a possibility provided by the Rules of Procedure , and any Member has the right to avail himself or herself of it .
Mr President , I think we should vote .
Just one comment if I may : I understand that on various occasions colleagues may want to test the quorum .
Would you ask the President to invite the Committee on Constitutional Affairs to consider a change to the Rules so we can check it electronically ?
Mr Cox , do you really think we can make this change to the Rules of Procedure now ?
Mr President , I can understand the reasoning behind not being able to do it electronically , because you cannot check whether everyone uses their card .
I can understand why you would have to take a head count .
I would like to know exactly how many people you counted in the chamber today ?
Straight in front of me I can see at least four people , just in this row here , who are Group staff - not Members .
How can you , from up there , see exactly which people are Members and which are staff and what the actual figures are ?
Ms McKenna , the services of our Chamber are quite familiar with us Members , and also with the collaborators who are authorised to enter the Chamber : they recognise each and every one of them very well .
If you are in agreement , I would like to proceed with the vote .
Other Members are asking for the floor , but if we continue we will be opening a debate which is completely unrelated to the matter in hand .
Let us proceed to the vote .
Relating to the joint resolution on Chechnya
Mr President , I rise to speak about the vote on the Chechen resolution .
During the debate and also during the efforts to agree on a compromise amendment , it emerged that there is a large majority who are of the same view as regards policy and substance .
It can only be a matter of tactics if , at this stage , having adopted six resolutions already , we say the same thing , or virtually the same thing , once again without any serious debate with the Council and with the Commission .
For this reason I would like to make this appeal to Members in the other groups : first of all , let us send the joint delegation to Chechnya .
Everyone has agreed to this specific proposal .
And then , when the delegation has returned , we can hold a major debate on Chechnya in conjunction with the Council and the Commission , and at the end of that debate .....
( The President cut the speaker off )
At the request of Mr Sakellariou , the motion for resolution B5-0350 / 2000 has been withdrawn .
Vote ( continuation )
Mr President , I wish to request a suspension of the sitting in accordance with Rule 69 ( 2 ) and I wish to ask the Commission if their attitude towards the amendments has changed following this vote .
No , it has not changed .
In that case there is no need for us to hesitate any further .
I therefore request that in accordance with Rule 69 ( 2 ) the vote on the legislative resolution should be postponed .
I am requesting this in my capacity as committee chairman and in agreement with the rapporteur and the various political group chairmen .
( The matter was referred back to the committee responsible )
Report ( A5 / 0069 / 2000 ) by Mr Lagendijk , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on the communication from the Commission on the stabilisation and association process for countries of South-Eastern Europe [ COM ( 1999 ) 235 - C5-0124 / 1999 - 1999 / 2126 ( CNS ) ]
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0059 / 2000 ) by Mr García-Margallo y Marfíl , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the Commission communication on implementing the framework for financial markets : Action Plan [ COM ( 1999 ) - 232 - C5-0114 / 1999 - 1999 / 2117 ( COS ) ]
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5 / 0053 / 2000 ) by Mr Kuckelkorn , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the communication from the Commission " Towards a single market for supplementary pensions - results of the consultations on the Green Paper on supplementary pensions in the single market " [ COM ( 1999 ) 134 - C5-0135 / 1999 - 1999 / 2131 ( COS ) ]
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0098 / 2000 ) by Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , on the Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament and the Council : " The Strategy for Europe 's Internal Market " [ COM ( 1999 ) 464 - C5-0212 / 1999 - 1999 / 2167 ( COS ) ]
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , since this voting session is a continuation of the lunch-time voting session , would I be correct in thinking that the few roll-call votes in which we have participated this afternoon will count as part of our daily count , and that this has direct relevance to the earlier vote on whether we had a quorum or not ?
Perhaps you could let me know later .
Mr President , I just wanted to ask why we are not voting on Ethiopia now .
Mr Swoboda , the vote is scheduled for tomorrow morning .
Mr President , now the vote is over , I would like to come back to the issue of a quorum .
I do not think you would need a head count unless you did a test with cards and got below what is required .
It would save time if you tried that first .
For example , today there were 226 in the first vote after the issue of the quorum was raised .
If there had been a check with cards , maybe we could have avoided the problem of having a head count .
Ms McKenna , this is not an issue that can be resolved right now in this Chamber .
Both your interventions - this one and the one you made earlier - have been recorded .
We will have to evaluate whether it would be appropriate to amend the Rules of Procedure .
It is not an issue that we can deal with now .
Mr President , I voted for the definition of the " Youth " Community action programme , as agreed in the Conciliation Committee , mainly because it will finance and implement the European voluntary service programme , which has a large number of young people involved in community actions , including the provision of assistance for the elderly .
Having said this , I would like to put forward a suggestion for future discussions on the " Youth " project and point out something which concerned me in the vote , although the report was adopted , and that is the definition of the word " youth " .
Mr President , do you feel young ?
I think you are saying that you do .
In my opinion , it would be appropriate to establish that " young " means those who are young at heart , and therefore give those who are no longer young in years but who are young at heart the opportunity to take advantage of these services .
. ( PT ) We have been discussing this programme for too long , with all the consequences that that delay implies , as all this effort has not been reflected in the budget agreed in the conciliation procedure - EUR 520 million for seven years , whereas the European Parliament ' s original proposal was for EUR 980 million - which is quite frankly less than the programme requires .
On the other hand , whilst the accession of the candidate countries will give more young people access to the YOUTH programme and there will be an even richer exchange of experience , I have some doubts about whether the budget for the programme is enough to guarantee the success of this initiative .
Although the initial phase of this programme has been positive , its scope is very limited , as it relates to just one facet of the youth policy that we need , which should actually tackle the various issues affecting young people - such as education , employment , housing , health and culture - across the board .
The references to ways of solving the problems of discrimination and to the age range for participation in the programme - 15-25 , although there are some exceptions - are also inadequate , given that the average age for completing higher education is very close to the upper limit , which should be raised to 30 years .
Lastly , it is important to strengthen the role and obligations of the bodies responsible for promoting the programme in each Member State , to make sure that it is promoted as efficiently and as quickly as possible .
- I was disappointed to see that in the decision of Parliament and Council establishing the " Youth " Community action programme , reference to the family has been removed in final conciliation negotiations .
This reference , which was accepted by the Culture and Youth Committee as well as Parliament , referred to the need to examine the role of the family among those factors which have promoted and hampered the social integration of young people .
The importance of the family in promoting or hampering social integration among youth is clearly recognised within society today , as well as through various studies .
The Council of Europe , in its report Coherent and Integrated Family Policies , states , " Families play a primary role in socialisation because they communicate the values , standards , customs and behaviour of the social groups to which their children belong " .
It is inexcusable that this reference to the family has been removed .
In a report designed to assess and support our young people in the best possible way , the deletion of reference to the family , the single most important influence in a young person ' s life , is incomprehensible .
- I wholeheartedly endorse Mrs Gröner 's recommendation to approve the agreement reached with the Council on European youth action programmes .
The previous youth programmes , Youth for Europe and the European Voluntary Service , will be grouped together in a general medium-term programme which will run from 2000 until 2006 , as the European Parliament has demanded .
A longer-term programme will ensure young people have the opportunity to benefit from such schemes for a guaranteed time .
Every participant will also have full access to health services and social security , therefore allowing as many of our young people as possible to become involved .
Although the funding of these programmes of EUR 520m is well below our original demand of EUR 980m which is necessary for new Member States after enlargement , there will be a possibility of increasing this figure , following extra demands on the budget by enlargement .
These programmes will certainly benefit our young people and give them invaluable opportunities to learn about themselves , about others and about Europe .
Not only is this crucial for their personal development , but in a fiercely competitive world it will vastly improve their chances on the job market .
Increasing our young people 's skills has always been one of our priorities and we must continue to support this aim .
Our young people are Europe 's future .
We must encourage them to learn about others and about the European Union , as well as developing their own values , ideas and skills .
It is important that they are able to participate in voluntary work abroad , school exchanges and learning languages .
Funding for these types of programmes are a fundamental step towards this objective of opening the eyes and minds of our young people and preparing them to be part of a flexible , skilled workforce .
Our society does not have enough confidence in young people .
In my political life I have always been struck by the fact that the future of young people and their concerns are not at the heart of public debate , and neither the political world nor the power of the media really tries to help young people .
That is especially true in Normandy , the region I represent , where too often youth is associated with deviance and delinquency , forgetting the vast majority of young people who work , dream , love and live , the bearers of all our hopes .
The European ' Youth ' initiative is a first step in that direction , and bears witness to a growing awareness of young people in the EU institutions .
But it is essential to maintain this effort over time if it is to bear the desired fruit , in the interests of young people and therefore of Europe .
So I am convinced that other initiatives , especially aid to youth associations , should be massively encouraged and financially supported by the European Union .
Graça Moura report ( A5-0099 / 2000 )
Gasòliba i Böhm ( ELDR ) .
( ES ) Mr President , we would like to express our satisfaction on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party at the approval of the Graça Moura report on the European Year of Languages 2001 .
We believe that it is a magnificent initiative on a European level to dedicate a special year to languages in Europe , to knowledge of them and to the recognition throughout the whole of the European Union of the importance of languages as a reservoir of cultural and historical wealth and an expression of the very identity of the societies which make up the Union .
We have supported this report but there are two aspects which we are not happy with .
I am referring to some amendments which we have presented , both on behalf of the Liberal Group as well as the group of MEPs headed by Mrs Ferrer , in order to incorporate in a clear and specific way the official languages which are recognised in the Member States so that they may participate directly and in an institutional sense in the development of the European Year of Languages .
This amendment has not been taken up , and we regret the line followed by the European Commission , with the participation of the Member States , because it leaves aside , at risk of marginalising it , a form of participation which is particularly important in this field .
I would like to remind you that this Parliament recognised Catalan as a European language and gave it a specific personality .
It is this language , together with others , which must be taken into account in the application and celebration of this European Year of Languages .
Mr President , I voted for the establishment of the European Year of Languages 2001 .
This is , without any doubt , a major , positive step , although , in my opinion , every year should be a year of languages .
It is of paramount importance for the European Union that the citizens of the 15 States learn to speak the languages of their fellow citizens of the European Union .
I would like to take this opportunity to call for language teaching for the elderly to receive just as much attention and funding as language teaching for young people , which receives an extensive amount of aid .
In this respect , the elderly are all too often forgotten and they would love to visit the other States of the European Union .
Mr President , I would like to give an explanation of my negative vote on the report on the European Year of Languages .
Firstly , language occupies an important place in European civilisation and culture , irrespective of numerical considerations regarding the size of the population .
This statement is thoroughly valid for lesser-used languages .
Secondly , the target year for this decision is 2001 ; European citizens could become proficient in other languages as is shown by the fact that all people who speak minority languages , without exception , have in common an excellent training in this field .
All of them are already bilingual .
It is completely wrong to exclude minority languages from this initiative .
It is regrettable that this House has not accepted the important services that lesser-used languages could contribute to the success of this initiative .
I am glad the European Parliament and the Council have agreed to make 2001 the European Year of Languages .
In a European Union of fifteen Member States , committed to enlargement , with eleven official languages and a multitude of regional languages , it is actually very important to make the citizens of the Union aware of the advantages of understanding and speaking other languages and of the many opportunities that exist for learning to do so .
Speaking a language other than one ' s mother tongue undoubtedly broadens the mind .
So , from primary school and kindergarten , children should be encouraged to start learning languages , as an instrument to raise awareness of cultural diversity .
Some European countries , especially the Scandinavian countries , already have very advanced policies in this field and the resulting advantages are evident .
This practice needs to be disseminated to the other Member States .
Of course , we must ensure that this knowledge is not confined only to the better off in society .
Boosting the learning of foreign languages will bring European citizens closer together by giving them the means to communicate , and thus get to know each other and forge the links to make the concept of European citizenship a reality .
Opening up to other cultures and finding out about the traditions of our European neighbours are essential ways of combating intolerance and racism engendered by fear of the unknown .
At the practical level , it needs to be made clear that the European Year of Languages is in fact a joint European Union / Council of Europe project .
To show that , it would be better for the two partners to use an identical logo and slogan .
The same concern for visibility and transparency leads me to support the creation of an interactive Internet site so that people can access useful information about the project .
I am in favour of people being multilingual , but I am sorry we are not trying to develop the teaching of Esperanto in parallel .
It is a language with European roots and easy to understand , but also rich and subtle .
As an auxiliary language , it can provide one means , amongst others , of facilitating communication between all European citizens .
I therefore regret that it is not mentioned in this proposal .
The undersigned members of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left agree entirely with the point of view of both the Commission and the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport that language is a rather crucial component of human communication , whether it be the spoken or written language , sign language or body language .
There are people who prefer Esperanto as a form of communication across national borders .
There are also professional jargons , different dialects in one and the same country and minority languages which are now being recognised by democracies .
It is also important for posterity to carry out research into languages which are dying out .
In short , we believe that an understanding of the importance of language is invaluable and that the European Union ought to be acknowledging this beyond the mere one year of the present campaign .
We hope that this view of ours is also shared by the Council and by national parliaments both within and outside the Union .
The sums proposed by the Commission ( EUR 8 million ) and by the Committee ( EUR 10 million ) are too modest , in our opinion .
It ought to be possible to spend the proposed sums of money on other things , for which reason we are completely abstaining from voting .
- ( NL ) I am pleased with the report by Mr Graça Moura , the rapporteur , and I am grateful to him that my amendments have been adopted .
In the frame of this European Year , most of the amendments aim to establish closer cooperation with the Member States at all levels of policy , not only at national level but also at regional and even local policy level .
An essential requirement for this is that the Member States earmark sufficient funds to set up activities that can then be cofinanced by the European Union .
If not , the European Year of Languages is likely to remain a PR exercise , just a lot of hot air .
The second aim of my amendments was by means of the activities set up in the context of this European Year to pay special attention to socially vulnerable groups , migrants and semi-skilled and unskilled workers .
This is something very close to my heart : learning to have an active command of foreign languages should not become the umpteenth barrier to the integration of this target group , a privilege for the already privileged members of our society .
Foreign language learning is indeed the key to integration .
A third series of amendments that I have tabled concerns the availability of language courses and accessibility to them in the respective Member States .
It is an open secret that this situation differs greatly from one Member State to another .
Smaller Member States with a correspondingly small language area must ipso facto make much greater effort , whereas in the larger Member States and larger language areas respectively the economic incentive is not so great .
The Member States are therefore inherently asymmetrical in this regard .
I hope that the Council will endorse this initiative and that we shall be able to start the specific activities as soon as possible , because there is a lot to be done .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , giving Europeans the best training for the future , from their earliest youth , whatever their origin and level of education , above all means giving them the ability to speak languages other than their mother tongue .
Haute-Normandie has one of the youngest populations in France , but also one of the highest levels of youth unemployment .
Speaking another European language can clearly be a key to success for those young people .
Making 2001 European Year of Languages will make Europeans aware of the linguistic diversity of the European Union . It is an excellent decision and has my full support .
But I do not think we should only devote one year to this aim . Lasting commitment is needed .
Indeed , it is our duty to be ambitious and to demand that all our young people are able to speak another language fluently , offering them bilingual education whenever possible .
In this respect , IBIS ( Institut Bilingue Interuniversitaire de la Seine ) , which first saw the light of day in Haute-Normandie , is most exemplary .
I am convinced that other operations of a similar nature should be massively encouraged and financially supported by the European Union .
Dary report ( A5-0093 / 2000 )
Maes ( Verts / ALE ) .
( NL ) Mr President , we not only voted with enthusiasm for this report , but also for the amendments that the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development tabled .
We are sure that in our partner countries of the ACP , substantial investments are being made in order to be able to compete with regard to quality on the world market .
The problem , however , is the price .
Many of these countries are still battling with excessively high costs and I believe that a long transitional period , which I would insist on , is very important for these countries .
I think our ACP partners will also be pleased with the outcome of this vote .
- The British Labour members have a strong commitment to the producers in the Caribbean and wish to see an early settlement of the dispute within the WTO .
These are delicate negotiations and at this stage the UK does not rule out an eventual tariff only system .
This is the context in which we have supported the Dary report while being against Amendments Nos 6 and 7 .
- ( NL ) It is clear from the debates once again that there is still considerable disagreement in the Union about the length of the transitional period , the level of the quotas and the system for granting licences .
The vote on the Dary report has demonstrated once again that the European Parliament does not respect the internationally agreed trading rules .
It is unacceptable that in the Dary report again a transitional period of ten years is proposed , without putting a definitive ruling first .
Taking account of the internationally agreed trading rules within the WTO , the GATT Agreement and the internal market strategy of the European Union , we should be arguing in favour of introducing a tariff only system as quickly as possible .
We could possibly agree provisionally on a tariff quota ruling that is WTO compliant , but on condition that a date is specified on which the tariff only system will be introduced .
Belgium has always argued in favour of the immediate adaptation of the banana regime to comply with the WTO , but with a concession to the ACP countries .
Preference should indeed be given to a tariff only system because this option respects the trading flows best and is most clearly WTO compliant .
The vote today is a sham because the real decisions have been taken in secret deals between the great capitalist groups of the United States and the European Union . Their banana war is just one aspect and , like banana production , just one factor in a complex of conflicts of interest .
This war , which is presented as a conflict between producer countries , Latin American and dollar area countries against Lomé Convention countries and European overseas dependent territories , is actually a war between capitalist groups .
Three large American capitalist groups , including Chiquita , the new name for the notorious United Fruit , dominate the dollar banana and are supported by the American Government .
Behind the producer countries the European Union is claiming to protect , however , there are some large families of wealthy French-Creoles and , indeed , powerful English and French groups .
Our position is this : while we do not want to give the mighty dollar banana sharks any awards , neither do we have any intention of providing backing through our votes to the smaller sharks protected by the European Union .
However , it is essential to take measures to protect the small producers who work their own plantations without exploiting anyone , and for them to be guaranteed a decent minimum income , regardless of market fluctuations .
We demand protection for agricultural labourers , who should not be the victims of the commercial war raging on the world market .
If a guarantee fund is created , it must underwrite the wages of these workers and the incomes of small producers , and not allow banana magnates to increase their wealth just to invest it in other , more profitable , sectors .
- ( FR ) This report gives us the opportunity to welcome the European Parliament ' s becoming aware of the need to defend the banana producers of , on the one hand , the ACP countries ( to whom we have made commitments in the course of renewing the Lomé Convention ) and , on the other hand , the outermost countries of the Community .
Although the WTO ' s dispute settlement body condemned certain key elements in the competitivity of ACP operators , the validity of the principle of tariff quotas has not been challenged in any way .
The fact is that we are , as is often the case , witnessing the overzealousness of the Commission which , in the context of the negotiations initiated within the WTO , has gone too far .
In attempting to reconcile the contradictory interests of all parties , in the end it has not been able , or has not wished , to achieve this .
It therefore seems curious , to say the least , to note the paradox of acknowledging that operators are all in favour of a tariff quota system , while adopting the solution of a single rate system !

We therefore congratulate Mr Dary and the members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development who are attempting to restore a little order to the Commission proposal which we find simply unacceptable as it stands , because it is selling off Community interests for the benefit of American multinationals whose manufacturing standards are obviously not comparable with EU standards .
While it may , admittedly , be quite laudable to seek to obtain the most advantageous prices for consumers , we must still be able to compare like with like , particularly in terms of manufacturing conditions ( social legislation , child protection ) .
We must therefore ensure that we do not tend towards harmonising these social conditions of manufacturing to the lowest common denominator , and , instead , let us pursue , as a priority , the objective of better product quality , without GMOs or pesticides or anything else .
Developing better quality products will cause a consequent increase in demand , and thus in the volume of production , with a concomitant reduction in prices !
After years of difficulty due to the economic crisis in industrialised countries and the decline in the economies of Eastern Europe , the Commission ' s solution would be likely to cause the untimely disappearance of these producing countries whose economies would not , for want of time , be able to restructure and diversify production .
It is clear today that , without actively seeking confrontation , the EU must champion its own point of view , a position which is all the more tenable as present and future European consumers represent a major proportion of the banana market .
We are therefore satisfied with Mr Dary ' s report , even if we feel it does not go far enough , particularly in terms of the ACP tariff system , the transition period extended beyond ten years , and the definition of a new system for the allocation of import licences , or additional European aid .
- ( SV ) The EU ' s system for importing bananas - which the WTO panel declared to be discriminatory on 7 April 1999 - must be reformed .
There is justification for showing consideration for banana producers in the ACP States and in the extremely peripheral areas of the Union , but there is no reason for special treatment in the field of trade .
Import duties and production subsidies are incompatible with our liberal values .
In our view , it is only through a system of free trade that long-term , sustainable , global economic development can be created .
For that reason , the Commission ' s proposal for a rapid transition to a system with fixed uniform rates of duty is a step in the right direction .
Lagendijk report ( A5-0069 / 2000 )
Fatuzzo ( PPE-DE ) .
( IT ) Mr President , it was with great pleasure that I voted for this measure on the communication from the Commission on the stabilisation and association process for countries of South-Eastern Europe .
This is one of the measures adopted in this Chamber which I have most appreciated , for I am sure we all remember the serious problems which arose in this area just over a year ago during the NATO military intervention .
I feel that the only way to prevent wars is precisely to be closely aware of the tangible problems of other peoples .
In all probability , it is only this initiative and those which will be approved and supported by the European Parliament which will truly succeed in preventing disasters in this region and any other regions that find themselves in a similar situation .
In this communication from the Commission , the European Union sets out its claim to impose itself as protector on the countries of South East Europe .
But throughout the century which has just ended , that region of Europe has known nothing but suffering because of that claim , whether made by rival European powers or by a Western Europe which likes to think it is united .
While it is easy for the rapporteur to denounce nationalism and local chauvinism , which are indeed intolerable , who can forget that the great European powers have always played on these nationalisms , setting them against each other according to their interests as great powers ?
The economic and political rivalries between European powers have led to two world wars : the first started in that region and the second was particularly destructive there .
As to the newly united Europe , it has principally distinguished itself first by contributing to the carve-up of former Yugoslavia , and then by bombing Serbia and Kosovo .
As the entire current situation illustrates , that war has further aggravated the situation in the region , both in material terms and in terms of relations between communities .
Under the circumstances , entrusting the stability of this region to the European powers is the same as having the wolf look after the sheep .
Our vote against this report expresses our opposition to the past and present policies of the European powers .
I am delighted to welcome this report calling for the European Union to play a leading role in the context of the stability and association pact for the countries of South-Eastern Europe .
People are always saying that South-Eastern Europe is the European Union ' s crisis-riven back yard .
The political context in this region is extremely sensitive and came to a climax in the Kosovo conflict .
That conflict demonstrated the potential political effects of instability on the neighbouring States , threatening to destabilise the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia ( FYROM ) , Albania and Montenegro .
Other countries in the region like Bulgaria and Romania have also suffered serious economic repercussions .
It is easy to see that the European Union has every interest in the stabilisation of the region and that interest will grow with future enlargement .
The European Union was traumatised by its powerlessness in the face of the process of violent disintegration at work in the Balkans .
It was incapable of doing anything likely to stop that disintegration because it lacked a common political will for action , but it also lacked a political approach and appropriate instruments which would have allowed it to manage the crisis effectively at the international level .
It can be said that the Balkan crisis was a turning point which had the effect of stamping a decisive orientation on European defence and security policy .
The decisions of the European Councils of Cologne and Helsinki on creating military and civilian capabilities for independent European Union crisis management are proof of that .
The outcome of the Cologne Council was the establishment of the Stability Pact for South-Eastern Europe on 10 June 1999 , a pact involving not only the Member States of the European Union and , of course , the countries of the region , but also the United States and Russia .
The pact is part of the global stabilisation approach the European Union has been developing since 1996 .
The stabilisation and association agreements to be signed by Bosnia-Herzegovina , Croatia , the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia , the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Albania are the keystone of that approach .
Negotiations are currently taking place with Macedonia .
Croatia , where positive political changes have recently occurred , should be involved in the near future .
These agreements constitute an entirely new contractual framework for the countries of the region ; they draw great inspiration from the institutional arrangements and conditions attached to the European agreements linking the European Union with the CEECs .
These agreements are individually tailored to take account of the specific situation in each country .
They hold out the prospect of long-term integration into the European Union on the basis of the Treaty of Amsterdam and in compliance with the Copenhagen criteria .
Above all , they give the countries of this crisis-riven region an important political signal and a definite incentive .
These agreements also encourage stronger regional cooperation , which seems to me indispensable to the creation of an axis of stability in the region .
García-Margallo y Marfíl report ( A5-0059 / 2000 )
Fatuzzo ( PPE-DE ) .
( IT ) Mr President , I also voted for the measure on the Commission communication on implementing the framework for financial markets : Action Plan , because it is clearly important for the European Parliament , the Commission , the Union and the Council to make progress in terms of competition , using networks and electronic money , which are the latest forms of economic activity .
I would have been happier with my decision to vote for the measure if it had included the intention to present every pensioner with a computer when he draws out his first pension payment .
The elderly need to familiarise themselves with new commerce techniques as well as young people .
. ( PT ) This report comments favourably on the Commission ' s proposal for an action plan on financial markets , the objective of which is to liberalise capital markets .
It is also in line with the Lisbon Summit , which declared that this and other liberalisation programmes should be speeded up .
But the truth is that this process increases financial instability and encourages concentration of capital markets and financial institutions , and for this reason we are opposed both to the position adopted by the Commission and to the rapporteur ' s position .
However , with a view to introducing specific measures to combat the volatility of capital markets and to control capital movements in the EU , especially those of a speculative nature , and also with a view to minimising the risk of financial crises , we attempted , by means of an amendment to this effect , to persuade the Commission to include in its action plan corresponding concrete measures . These included , in particular , the presentation of a report on the introduction of a tax on capital movements , especially speculative movements .
We regret that our amendment was not approved .
The resolution tabled by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs is certainly much better than the original version , and I want to thank the rapporteur , Mr García-Margallo y Marfil .
However , I have not been able to vote for it because it still contains inconsistencies after the plenary vote .
Thus , as regards the idea of the creation of a commission for stock exchange operations , I recommend a green paper on the establishment or gradual creation of such a commission , preceded by a feasibility study .
Moreover , the subsidiarity principle requires that , at a time of remarkable boom in the craze for cross-border investments in securities , we bear in mind that the interests of the issuing companies and investors will be better served by proximity of supervision and monitoring of international investments , with more efficient channels for cooperation between the monitoring authorities .
Supervision of the securities markets can be carried out better by people close to the markets and with in-depth knowledge of them .
In this context , comparison with the commission in place in the United States , the SEC , is particularly inappropriate , because the SEC is the corollary of a financial system resulting largely from a segmentation of the profession between commercial banks and investment banks , and in Europe we have chosen the universal bank model , which has strengthened the role of the banks in the European financial system .
It would be equally aberrant to include the stock exchange listing rules in the remit of such a commission , when at most it should ensure respect for them .
The establishment of a pan-European equity listing would also be aberrant .
Harmonised yet competitive listings guarantee a diversity of investment products .
A pan-European listing would make it impossible for national stock exchanges to concentrate on niche markets and would restrict opportunities for specialisation which may emerge from a competitive situation , even though it is convergent .
Instead of focusing on the listings - already largely harmonised anyway - to the detriment of diversity , we should emphasise rapprochement or even harmonisation of existing dealing systems and environments should be emphasised .
On prudential supervision , I made a direct appeal to the Commission and the Council yesterday not to cling to the crazy idea of entrusting supervision of all the credit establishments in the fifteen Member States to the European Central Bank .
Governments control banking activities , hence the need for financial sector supervision by government authorities , not the European Central Bank .
I have not voted for paragraph 26 which is mostly incomprehensible in French anyway .
Kuckelhorn report ( A5-0053 / 2000 )
Fatuzzo ( PPE-DE ) .
( IT ) Mr President , considering that we are discussing supplementary pensions , the representative of the Pensioners ' Party could not let the occasion pass without explaining why he voted for this measure .
I am convinced that the future of pensioners can only lie in supplementary pensions . These pensions should , however , be optional and replace compulsory State pensions , which are a veritable sieve and lose water from all sides .
When we cook spaghetti , which is a delicious Italian national dish , we use a colander , a container full of holes which drains the water off the spaghetti .
Well , instead of a colander , we could use the national State schemes , which , I am afraid , also lose water from all sides , except that , instead of water , it is the hard-earned money of all the working citizens which drains away .
For this reason , we must replace the national State pension schemes with private supplementary and alternative pension schemes .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of Amendment No 39 by mistake .
In fact I reject it for the following reasons : this amendment is based on the assumption that neither the Commission report nor the European Parliament ' s Kuckelkorn report give any impetus towards structural reforms in the Member States of the European Union as regards reforming retirement pensions .
The opposite is true of course .
Right now there is a considerable need for reform in Member States ' retirement pension systems .
I therefore believe that any impetus given by the European Union and by the European Parliament will assist debate in the Member States , where we still have more questions than answers .
.
( PT ) We voted against this report because we consider that in content it differs little from the Commission ' s proposal , which aims to put social security totally in the hands of the financial markets , thus weakening or even replacing state pension schemes by stock market speculation . This makes it quite clear what the " modernisation of social protection " agreed at the Lisbon Summit is meant to be .
As we stated in the amendments we tabled , creating a single market for supplementary pension funds is not an adequate response to future demographic problems . What we need are expansionist economic policies which help to create permanent jobs , thus expanding the pool of contributors to the state pension fund .
The state social security system , which is financed on a solid footing independent of commercial interests and financial profitability , and which is based on a spirit of solidarity between generations , is in a position to guarantee the right to a dignified retirement and to security in old age for workers who have paid contributions to state pension schemes .
I spoke yesterday on the Kuckelhorn report as draftsperson of the opinion of the Committee on Women ' s Rights .
The committee expressed an opinion on the outcome of the consultation on the Green Paper on supplementary pensions in the single market , just as it did on the Green Paper itself .
We believe this very broad consultation should rapidly conclude with a proposal for a framework directive to ensure the development of a genuine single market in supplementary pension funds , under the second and third pillars .
The first pillar , covering biometric risks , must still continue to be the cornerstone of social protection in the European Union .
The targeted directive we are seeking for the second pillar of supplementary pensions should , in particular , define the context for eliminating obstacles to free choice of pension fund , free movement of persons , free provision of services and double taxation .
As regards taxation , the only acceptable solution is one based on the principle that contributions should be tax deductible , at least up to a certain ceiling , and that supplementary pensions paid out should be taxable in accordance with the income tax legislation applying in the countries of residence .
As regards the controversial question of whether supplementary pension systems should cover biometric risks , I want to point out that , from the fiscal point of view , pension funds which do not cover these risks cannot be discriminated against as compared with those which do cover them , it being understood that the need to cover these risks depends on the extent of the first pillar in the various countries .
Subsidiarity and free choice require this .
Prudential rules must not be disproportionate to ensuring that the funds are secure .
They must be differentiated according to whether a scheme is internal or external to the enterprise .
They must allow managers to determine the best investment strategy .
In the absence of agreement on certain essential points , I am unable to vote for the general framework .
I regret this all the more as almost all the relevant conclusions from the Committee on Women ' s Rights and my recommendations are included in the motion for a resolution , in particular those considering that
as regards supplementary pensions too , the preservation of acquired rights is essential when a spouse interrupts or abandons his or her work in order to devote himself or herself to his or her family or look after close relatives who are in need of assistance ;
for the purpose of calculating pensions , certain periods devoted to the upbringing of children or care of family members ought to be taken into account ;
it is desirable to provide for the possibility of continued voluntary or optional insurance to preserve and improve pension rights and guarantee a right to payment of the capital under certain conditions .
We should obviously take advantage of this opportunity to ask the Member States to implement more consistently the principle of equal pay for equal work , because wage discrimination against women has repercussions on women ' s pension levels .
Any legal or contractual provisions infringing the principle of equality of treatment of men and women should be invalid .
Finally , I want to reiterate my long-standing demand - disregarded by the Commission for many years - for revision of the existing directives on equality of treatment of women and men in terms of social security , in the same way as it applies in legal and professional systems .
And let us not forget assisting spouses , those millions of invisible workers , the large majority women , on whose behalf this Parliament has demanded an upgrading of the half-hearted 1986 directive to give assisting spouses proper status and compulsory membership of social security schemes , especially pension schemes .
On 28 March President Prodi and seven of his colleagues met with members of the Committee on Women ' s Rights , the European Women ' s Lobby and the Equal Opportunities Consultative Committee . I hope he and the committee responsible will now stop ignoring those demands of the European Parliament I have just mentioned .
Palacio Vallelersundi report ( A5-0098 / 2000 )

Mr President , I also voted for the Communication : " The strategy for Europe ' s internal market " , despite the fact that the text did not include the opinion drafted by Mr Medina Ortega on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , page 20 of which states that from the point of view of social security , the ideal of supplementary pensions requires the creation of a genuine European social security system - and I repeat , European social security system - to replace the current approach , which is based on the harmonisation of national systems .
I am not , therefore , alone in hoping that , tomorrow , the 15 governments will at last decide to take social security and pensions in hand at European level , for this is the only way to prevent the current breakdown of the systems .
. ( EL ) According to its communication , the Commission intends over the next five years to continue the same internal market strategy , but to apply it more strictly and extend it to new areas .
Not only does the European Parliament report support this approach , it also calls for the relevant measures to be speeded up .
The starting point for the proposed objectives are what are typically referred to as the ' enormous benefits ' of the internal market .
However , no explanation is given as to who will benefit from , and who will suffer under , this procedure .
Without doubt , the only outcome of all the measures to implement the principles of free establishment and free provision of services , the measures to liberalise the markets , the measures to promote the free movement of goods and the numerous concomitant laws is to strengthen the huge multinationals whose potential to extend and mobilise on new markets at greatly reduced costs has been facilitated and which have benefited from deregulation measures . These multinationals have seen their profits increase and their position consolidated .
Unfortunately , the same does not apply to small- or medium-sized businesses in small Member States , where much stiffer competition has resulted in an increase in the number of bankruptcies , shrinking business and job cuts .
The problem for these companies is not , of course , that they are ' hampered in exploiting the opportunities afforded by the internal market ' ; their problem is precisely the measures used to implement the internal market , the principles which constitute the EU 's competition legislation and the reduction in demand in the middle and lower classes as the result of anti-grass roots austerity policies .
And , of course , the solution does not lie in venture capital and the financial markets , which increase the risks for most small businesses , due to their limited resources , but in a different economic development policy which supports productive investment , increases demand and makes it easier for small businesses to trade .
The report calls for new , improved arrangements for companies by ' simplifying the legal , administrative and fiscal environment ' and for ' laws ... which do not involve costs and other burdens for businesses which would otherwise lose their competitive advantage over foreign competitors ' .
In other words , even less accountable capital transactions and even fewer legislative specifications .
At the same time , there is not a word about workers ' rights , about the fact that fewer obstacles mean less protection under labour legislation and less accountability during mass redundancies , mergers and transfers .
It is not by chance that neither the individual Commission proposals nor the European Council guidelines make any reference to the need to limit these phenomena , control speculative movements of capital and impose a tax and other measures on capital .
The report calls for greater liberalisation of sectors such as the pharmaceutical market and a reduction in the tax burden on employment , thereby proving that the measures being taken are paving the way for greater liberalisation of and less accountable capital transactions and profits with exceptionally dangerous consequences for the entire social protection system .
The report under discussion is fully in line with the anti-grass roots economic and social policy exercised within the framework of the single internal market and EMU and we shall , of course , be voting against it .
The sub-text of Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi ' s report is recognition of the deadlock between national governments , which fail to transpose Community law when it does not serve their interests , and companies , normally the principal beneficiaries of the single market , which have to be convinced of the benefits through information campaigns and ' incentives ' .
In the light of the success of earlier campaigns on the euro , the results of these are still to be established .
This is another illustration of the ' soviet-style ' procedures of the Community institutions which are now trying to invent the new consumer and the new businessman , after the new citizen of the Ludford report .
So while the rapporteur supports companies , especially when faced with the difficulties SMEs encounter because of ' administrative obstacles ' and complexities , I have considerable reservations about certain provisions in the final text .
The report underlines the vital importance of making infringement procedures faster and more efficient and ' welcomes the proposals to the Intergovernmental Conference ' along those lines . Because Community centralisation is failing to demonstrate its validity and its contribution , we are now forced to insist on repressive procedures , where cooperation would have made it possible to draw up flexible rules more easily acceptable to those involved .
Then , the Commission should , and I quote , ' pay special attention to creating internal-market mindedness ' in national governments , ' while monitoring national implementing measures ' .
When we know the political context surrounding officials in Community institutions , this desire to brainwash officials in our governments alarms me .
Finally , the report regrets that the advantage to businesses of treating the whole of the EU as a single market rather than as a collection of national markets is not always apparent to them .
To remedy this lack of awareness which is additional to administrative obstacles and consumer behaviour , the report envisages ' mass information campaigns similar to those conducted in the case of the euro and incentives to encourage the private sector not to treat partners from other Member States unfavourably ' .
These points do not seem to undermine the confidence of this House in the chosen Community construction model . People are going to be made happy , whether they like it or not .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
COM in milk
The next item is the report ( A5-0081 / 2000 ) by Mr Pesälä , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1255 / 1999 on the common organisation of the market in milk and milk products ( COM ( 1999 ) 631 - C5-0339 / 1999 - 1999 / 0254 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , this is indeed a matter of an amendment to a Regulation by means of which competence would be transferred from the Council to the Commission .
With this amendment to the Regulation , the Commission would be empowered to amend the list of goods not covered by Annex 1 .
The Commission already has this power in the area of agricultural produce , such as grain , sugar , rice and eggs .
It would be logical if this power were extended to cover milk products .
This would be the case as a result of the amendment .
When we consider that funds set aside for aiding exports will dwindle in a couple of years from EUR 587 million to EUR 415 million , as a result of WTO agreements , it would be a good thing if the Commission had the power to examine the list of goods .
There are many goods for export that also contain substantial amounts of non-milk products , such as yoghurt containing sugar and fruit , and yet dairy products attract export subsidies .
This being the case , the question here is very much one of logic , allowing us to proceed in the same way as with grain , sugar , rice and eggs .
It is also very much a question of budgetary discipline , of being able to observe budgetary discipline consistently in the years to come , as appropriations for exports grow scarcer .
There has been some discussion that the transfer of power from the Council to the Commission might not be such a good thing .
My own view on this , and on such situations as this , is that it is what we call a zero-sum game .
We must be logical and adopt the right use of power and the right course to do our job as well and as consistently as possible .
This has nothing whatsoever to do with shifting the balance of interinstitutional power .
I think it is rooted in common sense , and a very far-reaching sense of consistency .
In my opinion , in the future , when prices and situations change rapidly in the world markets , this is the way we should be able to progress with regard to practical matters and react quickly .
I believe the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development is also unanimous on this .
This amendment to the Regulation must be made .
It will be a very good and positive move for everyone , and agricultural and dairy producers in particular .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to start by very sincerely thanking Mr Pesälä for his statement , but I must say straight away that the thrust of my comments is somewhat different .
We have a slogan in German which says ' Milk cheers up tired chaps ' .
But you can also just say ' Milk cheers you up ' , because we now have some women in key positions in the Commission and that is why I would like to put on record my view that the Commission is now cheerfully planning to abolish export refunds for milk products too .
The Commission is empowered to delete goods eligible for export refunds under the COMs for cereals , sugar , rice and eggs , for example .
In the case of goods not covered by Annex I to the Treaty the list has been amended in this way .
My question is this : is the Commission now seeking carte blanche for other products ?
I know that the Member States have taken widely differing views of this , not least in Council meetings .
Is this really what is intended for the entire milk sector ?
I would be grateful if you could give me a couple of answers in a moment , when we consider whether this really is efficient .
The Commission text indicates that additional administrative options are to be created , so as to facilitate more precise selection of those goods for which export refunds are to be granted .
Would the Commission not agree that in this context the expression ' efficient use ' is rather euphemistic ?
What does ' efficient ' mean in plain language ?
In this case , " efficient " quite simply means abolishing export refunds for milk products .
In practice it means that , for example , no export refunds will be granted for the milk part of fruit yoghurt .
So I would like to ask if there is not a danger that without the milk export refund component export refunds for yoghurt will be reduced .
Do you have real calculations and reliable figures for this ? What will the situation be then ?
The rapporteur , Mr Pesälä , has , of course , already pointed out that this will also hit other products .
There are also other export products , such as cakes and pastries , which contain milk components .
So it sounds rather crazy to me if , on the one hand , we say that we must reduce costs while , on the other , it is possible , because more milk will remain on the market , that additional costs will have to be met for storage and so on .
As I see it , excess production in the milk sector is likely to get worse rather than improve , and this gradual increase in minimum market access and the simultaneous reduction in the maximum export refund are rather contradictory .
I am sure that you will be able to explain this in your statement in a moment .
I believe that in terms of market policy there is no urgent need for this , and I can therefore see no reason why I should happily vote for this procedure or why it should be in the interests of the people I represent .
I think I might find it rather difficult to explain to the farmers at home .
So I would like to ask once more - is the abolition of these export refunds really unavoidable ?
Of course we agreed at the Berlin Summit that savings would have to be made , but surely in the right place .
I am sure that you will be able to give us some answers in a moment .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to thank you very sincerely , Mr Pesälä , for your report .
So what is this all about ?
The proposal is to transfer to the Commission the power to amend the list of processed products containing milk products which are eligible for refunds .
As the rapporteur has already explained , the Commission already has this power for cereals , sugar , rice and eggs .
Planned total expenditure for export refunds for goods not covered by Annex I to the Treaty have been reduced from EUR 610 million in budget year 1999 to EUR 551 million in budget year 2000 .
Why ?
This year , for the last time , we can exceed the WTO upper limit of EUR 475 million by the amounts not used in 1999 .
In the next GATT year , total permissible expenditure will be limited to EUR 415 million by the WTO system , and it will no longer be possible to carry amounts forward .
Let us compare : last year we had EUR 610 million , and next year will only be able to spend EUR 415 million .
We believe that it would have been unwise to make this enormous change from 600 to 400 in one go .
So we have introduced an interim stage this year .
Our WTO commitments and budgetary discipline mean that we have to adopt a selective approach .
That means that we can no longer grant export refunds for products where this is not essential to maintain their competitiveness . And that , Mrs Keppelhoff-Wiechert , is exactly what you were asking about .
We want to be in a position to adjust the list in accordance with destinations and sales opportunities , so that in future we can use the maximum permissible amount of budget appropriations to export a maximum volume of milk products .
You gave yoghurt as an example , and it is a good one , as it demonstrates how illogical a system can be .
At present , the situation is that if any sweeteners or other additives are added to a yoghurt , it is not covered by Annex I to the Treaty .
If it is a pure natural yoghurt , that is made from milk and nothing else , then it is a milk product and it is not classified as a good not covered by Annex I to the Treaty . So we have not been paying export refunds any more for natural yoghurt for years , but we still have to grant them for flavoured yoghurts .
Is that logical ?
Surely you can see that .
We really are not in the business of putting the thumbscrews on agriculture ; this is about being able to react appropriately to short-term market requirements .
So this proposal will , in future , make it possible for the Commission to adapt the list of goods eligible for export refunds swiftly , but the Member States will be involved as it will come under the management committee procedure .
In conclusion , I would like to say that I find it discriminatory if milk only cheers up tired chaps .
Why not ' weary women ' as well ?
That concludes the debate .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
COM in milk
The next item is the report ( A5-0074 / 2000 ) by Mr Maat , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1255 / 1999 on the common organisation of the market in milk and milk products ( COM ( 1999 ) 608 - C5-0047 / 2000 - 1999 / 0246 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , during the two months I have been working on the report , I have discovered that feelings run high on the subject of school milk in Europe .
There have been many responses from schools throughout the European Union and also from school children .
I found that remarkable in itself .
There has also been much discussion because the Commission says let us go over to joint financing , which means reducing the European contribution .
Many schools reacted particularly to this point and I have also noticed among my supporters that people wondered whether things would turn out all right for school milk , whether it would keep going as an instrument ?
In that regard I must say that I was very fortunate as a new Member of Parliament that , in dealing with the budget for 2001 , Parliament in any case adopted my proposal to increase the school milk budget from EUR 53 to 83 million .
The proposal now before us in the report that was unanimously accepted in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development - I would stress ' unanimously ' - and it was particularly gratifying that all parties in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development support the report - boils down to the fact that more money is needed , EUR 96 million in fact .
That does not come entirely within the budget , but the reality is such that , in view of the change in the dairy market , this small difference could also perhaps be found in the dairy budget .
It is also for this reason that I would urge Parliament most strongly to support the report on school milk , because there is every reason to do so .
It is remarkable how casual we in Europe sometimes are about food .
It is always there and in itself is no problem .
But it is clear that school milk has an added value for the dietary pattern of children and contributes to a better diet , particularly in urban areas .
This has been borne out by studies .
The European Commission has also commissioned a study .
I did find it to be rather limited , on the basis of a desk study , but in view of the considerable interest in Europe there is every reason to continue the regulation .
There is extra money for education in the field of the Internet , the electronic superhighway and there is more attention paid to the environment and much attention to safe living and to social conditions and within this we should not neglect a sound policy on the proper use of food and undoubtedly on milk as well .
For these reasons , and to see whether this regulation could be brought more up to date , I am pleased that the report has also been accepted in this sense in the Committee and I hope it will also be in Parliament .
There is an expansion in the number of products that can be used in the school milk regulation .
I am thinking of drinking yoghurt , low-fat cheese , skimmed milk and in this regard valuable amendments have been tabled by my own Group , and also by the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , among others by Mr Pesl for Scandinavia .
Many specific proposals have been made and that means that in this way we can adapt the school milk regulation in a better way and integrate it better into the current dietary pattern .
That in itself makes for a stronger case .
Anyone who thinks that the school milk regulation will rescue the dietary pattern is wrong .
You must also be realistic .
If this report is accepted by this House , every year about EUR 12 will be spent per child on subsidies for school milk and that is peanuts in my view .
This can easily be justified socially within the budget and in respect of a sound nutritional policy .
Mr President , on the basis of the information provided I shall wholeheartedly recommend this report .
I should like to thank the members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development for their unanimous support , that bodes well for the vote in this House .
I should also like to thank the Commission for its willingness to provide the necessary information and also for preparing the report .
I hope it will lead to a constructive position with regard to the implementation of this report .
I understand that in any case the Council of Ministers will meet next Monday .
It would therefore be an appropriate moment if Parliament were to approve this report and the school milk regulation .
Mr President , at the request of Mr Cunha I am presenting our statement on this debate on the school milk scheme .
For more than 20 years , the European Union has been financing the free distribution of milk in primary and secondary schools .
In recent years this action has amounted to an average annual expenditure of some EUR 90 million for more than 300 million litres of milk , benefiting around 10 million children and young people , or nearly 20 % of eligible schoolchildren .
There are two main reasons justifying this measure and why it should continue .
The first is its social impact , as it ensures a minimum balanced diet for many children and young people who otherwise would not have access to one .
The main beneficiaries are children and young people from disadvantaged social classes and poorer districts in both rural and urban areas .
The second reason is that , as there is a structural surplus in the market for milk products , this measure also represents an incentive to dispose of milk in a far more useful and constructive way than by distributing it , denaturing it or exporting it to third countries at even greater cost .
It is a pity that the European Union does not have more actions of this kind for other products , instead of dumping them on international markets by means of subsidies which are sometimes twice their price on those markets , which makes it difficult to understand the alleged objective of budgetary savings .
The United States , which is famous for having a more individualist outlook with less solidarity , spends nearly 9 000 million dollars a year on distributing foods to schoolchildren , i.e. 100 times more than the European Union .
And the European Union is now proposing to move away from 100 % financing and is proposing 50 % cofinancing , which will especially penalise less wealthy countries like Portugal .
As a Portuguese national , I would be shocked if a measure of this kind were to be approved while my own country held the presidency of the European Union .
Mr President , Mr Maat has committed himself most impressively to the issue of school milk .
That is a good thing .
I myself am a great supporter of school milk .
In fact , I think that not only children but adults too should drink more milk .
I regret therefore that there is no fresh milk available at the Parliament building in Brussels .
I do hope that Mr Maat ' s next battle will concentrate on making fresh milk available in Brussels .
Having said that , I do not support Mr Maat ' s proposals .
In the evaluation report on the school milk regulation that the Commission itself quotes , it says that if you only take account of the explicitly stated objectives of the regulation particularly to maintain and increase the consumption of dairy products and promote the sale of surpluses , the positive effects are marginal .
Nevertheless , on 10 December , the Commission decided not to withdraw the measures but to halve the subsidy .
I have asked the Commission a number of questions in this regard .
I asked Commissioner Fischler to what extent this measure corresponded with the subsidiarity principle .
I believe that this measure could be implemented perfectly well by the national parliaments and that national MPs would be quite able to do so .
I am also not convinced about the scientific basis as far as certain aspects of public health are concerned .
Moreover , when dealing with public health , the Commission must make a proposal on the basis of the chapter on " Public Health " in the Treaty .
Nor is it clear to me in the school milk regulation how much will be spent on administration costs .
It is such a small proportion of the overall milk production that I feel that this weighs particularly heavily on the European Commission budget .
I am also not sure what the financial consequences will be after enlargement .
I am not an opponent of school milk as such but I do object to the way we are going about it .
I believe that the Commission must confine itself to the core tasks and leave other matters to the Member States .
I support the Commission proposal but not the proposals of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Maat for a good report and good cooperation , namely in his raising the issue of public health .
Until now the basis for pricing has favoured fattier products .
There was strong unanimity in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development on the need to change the basis for pricing so that less fatty products might benefit more from this aid .
It has been an excellent signal from the EU to the heart of the people for decades now , and we have been able to get it across via children , school pupils , schools and homes .
In that respect it has to continue , and , as Mr Maat said , be brought up to date and this issue , which is in the common good , should be promoted .
Amendments Nos 9 and 10 specifically move the proposal towards a direction where less fatty products would be treated along the same lines as fattier products .
Mr President , I am pleased to have the opportunity of speaking in the debate and I congratulate the rapporteur for his work .
One clear result , of course , of the proposal before us to curtail or remove this subsidy on school milk will be decreased availability of milk and a drop in the consumption of milk in schools .
I ask you sincerely : is that what you want to see happening ?
The nutritional aspect is surely the central element here and the continuation of the consumption of milk by schoolchildren is what we should be working towards .
The proposals before us definitely militate against that .
Can I suggest to you what might happen as a result .
There are two possibilities .
Children will switch to consuming non-nutritional products or , God forbid , we will move closer towards a situation where children will have to pay for milk consumed , thus discriminating against poor children from deprived communities .
We all acknowledge the aim here .
It is to cut milk subsidies .
But to use schoolchildren as the means towards that end is a sinister way to go about it , especially in a world that is becoming far more health-conscious by the day .
This is the age of non-GM food and organic products , and the proposals before us represent a major step backwards .
Let us be clear . Several Member States will not operate this scheme at all if the present subsidy is withdrawn or decreased .
That is the reality of the situation .
This would be a catastrophe , not only for the health of schoolchildren - our future citizens - but to the viability of communities also .
I come from a part of Wales , where GDP per head of the population is less than 75 % of the European Union average , in other words , an Objective 1 area .
I am not proud of that .
It is an indication of our deprived status .
Cutting the subsidy , however , would make my community even poorer , a community whose farmers have lost 80 % of their income in 2 ½ years .
This is not the European Union that I thought my nation had joined .
We were looking to a Europe of cohesion that seeks to bolster its deprived communities and help its poorest citizens .
There is also the misconception that Member States will somehow foot this bill and make up the deficit on the basis that it is their responsibility to deal with health and social policy .
Can I tell you that my Member State , the UK , is already prevaricating on the provision of additional money for Wales and for Scotland to match European funds , a point that I and my colleagues have already highlighted previously in this Chamber .
This is not unique to my nation .
Sadly , it affects other nations as well .
Farmers then are told to diversify , to become multifunctional .
These are the buzzwords now in the European Union .
Yet they have already diversified .
They have already become as multifunctional as humanly possible .
It is time we rewarded them , particularly in the peripheral and deprived communities of the European Union .
Cutting this subsidy would destroy an industry already on its knees .
We need to give a window of opportunity to these people and provide them with the assistance to sustain themselves as they undoubtedly face the most difficult period economically they have ever faced .
It is clear to me that the proposals before us are not merely a means to curtail the subsidy , but rather , in the event of a lack of participation by Member States in the wake of the subsidy cut , to terminate it entirely .
This continued erosion of the milk industry is , I am afraid , part of a general trend that we are witnessing throughout the agricultural industry .
Without people farming in our villages and communities , there will be no rural communities ; nobody left to service the needs of those of us that sometimes visit rural areas for recreation .
The process of amalgamating farms and the buying-up of farm units by consortia pushing up prices unrealistically is already well advanced in my nation of Wales and is becoming the sad pattern in other regions and nations as well .
I believe we should call a halt to this general erosion of our rural communities .
At the present moment in time , that requirement transcends the need to cut milk subsidies .
Defending communities is far , far more important .
We must keep our milk farmers farming and the communities where they earn their living as viable entities .
The Agricultural Committee deserve every support in this regard .
Mr Maat has done well in a very difficult situation and I wish him every success .
Mr President , Mr Maat ' s report quite properly defends the right of millions of European children to receive subsidised milk in school .
The Commission is proposing to reduce the level of Community aid , by amending the regulation on the common organisation of the market in milk and milk products .
The choice of cofinancing involves the risk that certain Member States might be reticent about supporting the project , mainly because of financial constraints , and the effect would be to reduce the amount of the available budgetary appropriation and thus establish discrimination between European schoolchildren .
Milk distribution in schools contributes to the maintenance of consumption of milk products , and those same milk products are vital to healthy nutrition for children , so that they can grow up healthy .
Subsidising milk means teaching children balanced eating habits at an age when lifelong eating patterns and tastes are being formed .
That role finds particular resonance in this age of eating disorders and unhealthy diets .
For example , the increase in the number of obese children in Europe as a result of the culture of sweet , highly coloured fizzy drinks is alarming .
Must we remind people that milk provides a crucial part of our protein , calcium , vitamin and mineral requirements ?
It strengthens the capacity of young children who drink it to protect themselves against diseases caused by nutritional anarchy .
Mr Maat rightly mentions the way eating patterns change with our changing lifestyle .
Increasingly young people go off to school without eating any breakfast or without having any milk in their morning meal .
Nor do we forget that some children from very deprived backgrounds skip breakfast for financial reasons .
These children are exposed to dietary deficiencies and have difficulty concentrating at school .
The Commission is washing its hands of all this , while heading up lots of other programmes that cost a great deal more .
Why undermine the very one which affects the health of European children ?
At a time of upheaval in the role of our schools as a training workshop for life , the distribution of subsidised milk ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , first of all I should like to congratulate the rapporteur for bringing forward a report that not only looks at the problem but puts forward new ideas for the future .
In many countries and areas - such as where I come from in Northern Ireland - young children might not have had the opportunity to have that nourishment and that nutritional support supplied by milk if it had not been for the milk provided to them in schools .
I also hope and trust that they will begin to appreciate and to continue to drink milk .
One thing which amazes me , especially when the agricultural community and dairy farmers are going through such difficult times , is that people are prepared to buy many other products and pay substantial amounts of money for them , but they are not prepared to pay the same amount of money for milk , either for themselves , or for their children .
Milk provides a very healthy and balanced diet , something we should all support .
The European Union should take that on board .
It is good value for money .
We do not always achieve that .
We are in a situation in Europe at the moment where we are pouring millions of euros into the agricultural industry , yet the farmers have never been worse off in their lives .
We have to go back to the drawing board and ask ourselves what our priorities are .
I want to thank Mr Maat .
He has challenged us to look to the future , not just in relation to milk itself , but also to milk products and ways in which we can encourage children to drink milk .
Mr President , for years I have been calling for the school milk scheme to be changed .
I think it is complete nonsense .
It is totally wrong from a nutritional point of view and it is impossible to administer .
Currently , full-cream milk is fully subsidised , semi-skimmed milk is semi-subsidised and skimmed milk receives no subsidy .
The aim of schemes such as this is to do away with surplus stocks , and since full-cream milk contains the most butterfat , it receives the highest subsidy .
We should instead award subsidies per pupil .
I would have preferred it if we had set milk prices lower so that we could abolish the bureaucratic milk quotas .
In the longer term we must change the EU 's agricultural policy so that we can put an end to artificial excess prices and surplus stocks .
However , the school milk scheme is one of the better schemes .
It is not just beneficial to farmers .
The scheme is also to the advantage of children and their parents , especially if it is changed so that it offers subsidies to low-fat products .
Children do not need so much fat .
Furthermore , a scheme with subsidies per pupil would be much easier to administer .
There is an enormous amount of administration involved in the present scheme .
I have received many complaints from schools which cannot work out how to administer the scheme .
It is a real science calculating the fat percentages in milk and cheese .
The schools often end up having to pay back large sums .
It is not that they are out to cheat ; they simply cannot work out how to administer the scheme .
I think , therefore , that we must vote for the amendments of my good colleague and friend , Niels Busk .
The scheme which he is recommending is administratively and nutritionally the only correct one .
Mr President , I would like to start by thanking the rapporteur , Mr Maat , for his report , which I support in its entirety .
And thanks as ever for the usual good work of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
I would also like to thank my good colleague and close friend , Freddy Blak , of the Socialist Group , for his support for my amendment .
The school milk scheme concerns health and nutrition .
Children and infants must learn healthy eating habits , and milk , with its protein and calcium content , is a very important part of this .
On behalf of the Liberal Group , Mr Pesälä and I put forward three amendments which basically aim to make the school milk scheme a lot easier to administer , but which also seek to make the scheme more flexible with regard to the products which are subsidised .
There are various traditions relating to which dairy products are consumed , and the scheme is simplified by awarding the subsidy on the basis of a quarter of a litre of milk per pupil per school-day .
For products other than full-cream milk , the subsidy should be calculated on the basis of low-fat solids or a maximum butterfat content of 50 % .
In this way the scheme takes account of the differences in the milk traditions which exist in the different Member States .
Mr President , Commissioner , the Commission proposal to henceforth fund the school milk programme by means of 50 % cofinancing has evoked a furious response in the Council and in Parliament .
As soon as the term cofinancing is mentioned in terms of agriculture , people ' s hackles rise .
Many see cofinancing as the renationalisation of the common agricultural policy .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development is also against the Commission ' s plans .
With such a viewpoint , Parliament can make the most of it .
Will we read in the newspaper tomorrow " European Parliament in favour of school milk subsidies - to the rescue of the dairy sector " ?
Are we not kidding ourselves and the sector with this attitude ?
Is massive opposition to cofinancing in the interests of the sector in the long term ?
I do not think so .
We shall have to make do with the financial package established in Agenda 2000 and to deal with the enlargement of the Union .
If agricultural policy is not changed we shall not be able to pay for it .
The Union should develop its policy within this context .
The main question here is , how can we operate as efficiently as possible with the limited resources of the European Union ?
Must we continue to burden the agriculture budget with a school milk programme of about EUR 90 million a year ?
Is it not more sensible to seek possibilities of financing such programmes elsewhere ?
If we wish to guarantee the agricultural sector a reasonable level of support , then that is urgently required .
If we do not do that , then the Commission will undoubtedly try in other ways to remain below the agricultural ceiling .
What do you think about a reduction on the direct income supplements ?
Those who are against cofinancing bring such painful economies a lot closer .
We do not wish to be part of that .
Relieving the EU budget by means of creative solutions , such as cofinancing , seems to us a better option for the agricultural sector itself .
Finally , I agree with the objection to the fact that school milk is distributed to people at meetings in this building who certainly do not need it .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to thank Mr Maat very sincerely for the effort he has made to present a balanced report on the Commission proposal .
You will have seen from the debate that the school milk scheme is a very sensitive issue indeed , on which there are many different shades of opinion , and that means that he certainly did not have an easy job .
Some of the amendments proposed in Mr Maat ' s report in effect totally reject the Commission proposal .
I cannot therefore accept the amendments in question , which are Amendments Nos 1 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 10 and 12 .
I am still convinced that the cofinancing proposed would promote the commitment of state and municipal authorities - and that of school authorities and the dairy industry - which is , in turn , a prerequisite for the success of all of these efforts .
It is quite simply wrong to say that the level of aid will drop from schoolchildren ' s point of view .
The level of aid will remain the same , only the source of funding will change , and no one can seriously maintain that aid is only good if it comes totally from the Community budget .
I am also quite happy to concede that there are health , nutrition and social policy objectives here .
But there is one point I wish to make , and this is also the reason why a particular Treaty article has been taken as the legal basis here : in the field of agricultural policy , we can only justify aid that leads to additional sales .
If the real objective is to take social policy or health policy measures , then these should be financed under health and social policy and not , as it were , through the back door .
Amendments Nos 2 , 4 and 9 are designed to cover a broader range of milk products under the scheme .
In this respect the Commission would like to maintain the existing scheme , in which the selection of subsidised products is a matter for the Commission .
Although I cannot therefore accept these amendments , I have no problems with the underlying message , which it is worth conveying , and that is that the current range of products needs to be reviewed , and I will ensure that this issue continues to be dealt with and discussed in the Management Committee for Milk and Milk Products .
Lastly , Amendment No 3 is in the form of a statement , so that I do not think it would be appropriate to incorporate the text into the regulation .
As regards the practical side of the proposal , I fear that this amendment would lead to varying levels of support in different Member States and to dramatic fluctuations in the level of aid within a short time .
And as I am sure that no one would want that , it would be better to keep the existing provision , which is clear , based on objective criteria and which guarantees general stability .
For the same reasons , I am unable to accept Amendments Nos 8 and 10 , which are designed to link the level of aid to milk components other than fat .
Finally , Amendments Nos 8 and 9 are intended to make it clear that the aid will be paid for a fixed quantity of milk per schoolchild per day .
This would essentially mean maintaining the existing position , so that is in fact another argument as to why these amendments cannot be accepted .
Thank you for your attention .
That concludes the debate .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
Vertical Restraints
The next item is the report ( A5-0077 / 2000 ) by Mrs Thyssen , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on draft guidelines on Vertical Restraints ( C5-0009 / 2000 - 2000 / 2003 ( COS ) ) .
Mr President , this debate on the guidelines on vertical restraints is the last in a series of four on an extremely technical subject , for now anyway .
Industry is all too aware of the importance of the Community competition policy for its operations , but let us also not forget that fair , enforceable and sound competition rules also affect the consumer .
I have the impression that for people who are not familiar with the competition policy , the whole question of vertical restraints between companies seems a rather strange business , but the fact is that a large proportion of daily distribution is made , managed and organised on the basis of the rules of vertical restraints .
I did intend , Mr President , to provide my colleagues with a bit more information on this subject , but I can now see how few people are in the Chamber and I think I should not waste your time and the interpreters ' time on this .
The Commissioner knows the subject and the Members who are still to speak on this matter know at least as much as I do about it .
I shall therefore just say that I think that we as a Parliament , and as the rapporteur on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , can say that it is a good thing that the Commission draws up guidelines and that it publishes them .
The Commission is the European competition authority par excellence and everyone and certainly legal security will benefit if it explains its new policy in detail beforehand .
Secondly , I hope the Commission will incorporate the comments listed in the report by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , which I shall not repeat here , in the final version of the guidelines that will soon be published and I should also like to hear that from you personally , Commissioner .
I should now like to ask a few questions .
First of all , are we going to receive the evaluation which we asked for after three or four years of new policy in the sphere of vertical restraints ?
Secondly , when can we expect the proposals for a new policy for the horizontal agreements , a new policy that has also been announced by the Commission ?
Thirdly , the automobile distribution contracts for the time being fall outside the new policy , but the regulation for this sector expires in 2002 .
We can expect an evaluation to be made this year by the Commission .
When will we receive it and has the Commission already consulted the automobile distribution sector and particularly the small distributors ?
Fourthly , despite everything , we still have a very fundamental question , a question that we have repeatedly raised in vain and I must therefore repeat it again here ; why has the Commission nevertheless opted to apply the new policy immediately also to those sectors where the competition policy , as it was hitherto organised , operated perfectly well ?
In conclusion , Mr President , I should like to thank those Members - unfortunately they are not here in the Chamber - who also dealt with this subject in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , not only for this report , but also for the three reports that preceded it .
I wish to inform those who tabled amendments , that is , amendments tabled on behalf of the PSE Group , that I have unfortunately had to reject those amendments by reason of their content as I explained earlier in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and secondly , because these amendments had already been tabled at Committee level and rejected one by one .
Mr President , I should finally like to apologise for the fact that I cannot be present at the vote tomorrow morning , but Mr von Wogau will replace me here as rapporteur , if necessary .
Mr President , Commissioner , my colleague , Mrs Thyssen has produced some excellent work and I wish to congratulate her on it .
In this connection , I myself would like to comment just on the relevant production markets and the guidelines for interpretation regarding how market share is determined , especially from the point of view of cooperation agreements in the petrol station business .
These issues cause problems , at least in my home country of Finland , and in other small Member States .
Guidelines on vertical restraints should be designed to help us see clearly and accurately when the seller ' s market share in the relevant product market exceeds the 30 % threshold to be applied .
Regarding cooperation agreements in the petrol station business , the draft guidelines to be applied do not at present take sufficiently clear account of the special features of that industry ' s market and delivery agreements .
The 30 % market share limit provided for under the Block Exemption regulation will cause problems relating to equal treatment for existing petrol stations , at least in Finland .
Applying the new ruling might lead to situations where , for example , we will be inspecting in a different manner the contractual obligations regarding cooperation in the petrol station industry that are otherwise comparable in every respect with each other as far as their direct effects are concerned if the market share of one company exceeds the 30 % threshold .
It is important to define unambiguously the relevant markets referred to in Article 3 of the Block Exemption regulation .
The guidelines have not defined sufficiently precisely how the market share of a manufacturer and a wholesaler should be determined .
I feel this is especially problematic .
As this is a matter of regulating the right of competition in an industry in which competition takes place among brand names , the guidelines should clearly state that calculating market shares should always involve studying each stage of delivery separately .
In addition , the guidelines should indicate unambiguously that the 30 % threshold in the relevant market has been calculated to take account of sales of the supplier ' s own brand to the retailer or distributor .
Mr President , I am pleased that you knew I was here and that I was going to speak . You know that I do not usually speak too long .
I will simply explain the amendments presented by Mr Berenguer , who is unable to attend .
These are Amendments Nos 2 , 3 and 4 .
Amendment No 2 deals with the possibility of freeing the distributor by means of the return of contributions once the contract has finished .
The formula used is contained in section 147 of the Commission guidelines on this subject , which is known as the investment depreciation period .
The possibility should exist , in certain circumstances , of freeing the distributor by means of a reintegration of the investment .
In other words , the distributor should not be permanently bound by the initial investment of the producer .
Amendment No 3 refers to the setting of prices by the producer - the resale price - in certain cases , such as the launch of the product .
There are certain cases in which this setting of the resale price can be justified .
This is referred to in sections 38 and 39 of the Commission guidelines , but it is clear that , in certain cases , we have to provide flexibility and we are sure that the Commission will understand this .
Lastly , Amendment No 4 refers to the protection of producers against pressures applied by the distributor to force them to extend the contract .
We are talking about exclusive contracts , sections 131 et seq .
Finally , these amendments are simply intended to be a reminder of certain specific aspects , but it is clear that both the guidelines proposed by the Commission and Mrs Thyssen ' s report move within boundaries which are reasonable and practical .
We hope that the Commission will administer these guidelines in a flexible way so that , on the one hand , market competition is guaranteed and , on the other , we do not create situations of enslavement or limitation of economic activity with regard to the distributors .
Mr President , as we are short of time I will make my statement telegram style .
First of all , many thanks to you , Mrs Thyssen , for your excellent report .
Second , my thanks also to the members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs for supporting this important reform project .
The draft is an important step in the reform of competition policy in respect of vertical restraints .
Since the Green Paper was published in 1997 , the development of the institution of vertical distribution restraints has gone through various phases , including most recently the adoption of new Regulation 2790 on the application of Article 81 ( 3 ) of the Treaty to categories of vertical agreements and concerted practices .
As you know , the Commission is taking this policy as a basis for a decisive switch from a traditional approach based on formal criteria to an approach based on the analysis of economic impacts .
The objective of this is to re-establish freedom of contract for the great majority of companies and to simultaneously improve the protection of fair competition for the benefit of consumers .
Furthermore , in answer to your question , Mrs Thyssen , as to whether there will be a review , the answer is yes , there will indeed be a review of the guidelines after four years .
With regard to your question about horizontal measures , the Commission is currently drawing up a set of guidelines relating to this horizontal cooperation agreement .
A first draft of these guidelines will then be transmitted to the European Parliament before it is published in the Official Journal .
It is very likely that this will happen before the end of April .
I am delighted to report that the European Parliament and the Commission have worked together closely and constructively on this issue .
Mrs Thyssen ' s report demonstrates once more that this will to cooperate is making a valuable contribution to various relevant aspects of the reform process .
That concludes the debate .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 9 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 8.20 p.m. )
Adoption of the Minutes of the previous sitting
The Minutes of yesterday ' s sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , I should like to say that I cast a vote in error yesterday afternoon on the question of referring the bananas issue back to committee .
We in this Parliament risk setting ourselves on a course which will fail to help the banana growers and , at the same time , will continue to inflict grave injustice on small enterprises engaged in producing things like bath products and ...
...
I therefore wish I had cast my vote the other way .
I wish that to be placed on the record .
We will include this in the Minutes , Mr MacCormick .
( The Minutes were approved )
Mr President , I only wanted to report my presence for the Minutes .
I will not be signing the attendance register as I am leaving in one hour , but I wanted everyone to know that I am here .
We can all see , Mrs Van der Laan , that you are here .
It will be included in the Minutes .
Vote
Mr President , we were somewhat confounded yesterday by an action of a Member of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , but I think that what I am about to announce will not come as a surprise to anyone here , as I explained at length on Monday what I am about to request . In fact , you have also received several e-mails and I have also written to the Conference of Presidents on the matter .
The fact is that according to Members of various groups , the agenda on Fridays is too light , as a result of which many Members genuinely believe that their time can be spent more productively elsewhere .
Consequently , there are few of us here today and we cannot guarantee that our electorate is adequately represented here .
We therefore believe that a choice needs to be made : either we need to give more substance to Friday ' s agenda or to abolish the Friday sitting .
In this context , I wish to ask for the quorum to be checked .
I think that we all know the rules by now .
Mrs Buitenweg , you cannot request this on your own .
Such a request must be made by at least 32 Members .
I will check if there are sufficient Members present who wish to check the quorum .
I notice that more than 32 Members have made this request .
We will have to establish whether there is a quorum .
You will undoubtedly know that there is a quorum if one third of the MEPs are present in the Chamber .
( The number of Members present was counted )
I note that there is no quorum and that the vote on the Pesälä report will therefore take place in the next part-session .
Mr President , firstly I would like to ask you to determine an exact figure and to carry out an electronic check during the roll-call vote so that we know who is here and who is not .
Secondly , I would like to say that I share the concern of my colleagues who want to upgrade Fridays .
I am always here as a member of the so-called " Friday Club " .
I also want to upgrade Fridays , but through work and not through sabotage .
Mr Posselt , the Rules of Procedure , which I have followed to the letter , are very clear on this and do not allow the electronic voting system to be used .
They also specify that the outcome of the vote shall not be made known .
It is up to the President to establish that there is no quorum .
Report by Mr Maat ( A5-0074 / 200 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1255 / 1999 on the common organisation of the markets in milk and milk products [ COM ( 1999 ) 608 - C5-0047 / 2000 - 1999 / 0246 ( CNS ) ]
Mr President , I am pleased to say that I , together with a number of other colleagues from my Group , fully back the initiative which Mrs Buitenweg has taken .
Needless to say , we do not aim to sabotage the work . This is why we announced this action a long time ago - the Conference of Presidents were made aware of it six weeks ago - and neither is this any reflection on today ' s agenda , of course .
I think that the outcome of the quorum count is sufficient reason for the Conference of Presidents to revise the agenda for 2001 , but at the moment I would like to ask you the following : according to my interpretation of the Rules of Procedure , the request for the quorum means that none of the votes can take place .
If this is not the case , Mr President , I would ask you to check the quorum before we proceed to vote on the Maat report .
( More than 32 Members rose in support of this request )
( The President established that there was not a quorum )
Mr President , I have been trying to catch your eye for a while now .
I note that the Members who are now asking for the quorum to be checked are the Dutch Members , or a number of Dutch Members , who do not usually attend .
Mr President , we have checked when exactly these people are present on Fridays .
It appears that , evidently , no Friday is important enough for these people to turn up .
They have had their little pleasures , Mr President .
They were able to appear on radio and television last week .
Mr President , is that the only way they can think of to sabotage our work here , by soiling the nest of so many other Members who , just like me , are trying to do a decent job here today .
Mr President , I cannot accept this and would like to offer my apologies as I feel ashamed on their behalf .
I would also like to say to these Members , if they had worked like I have in recent months and if they had been given the mandate from the electorate personally , they would behave differently today .
I notice that a few other Members would like to be given the floor on this point of order .
We should , however , bring this to a close very shortly .
I am now giving the floor to Mr Schulz .
Mr President , I will not actually speak for very long , but , so far , if I disregard the comments made by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , only those in favour of the process have been allowed to speak .
We do have individual opinions within our Group .
The delegates in the Socialist Group are not unanimous here .
I would therefore like to speak as someone who is against this process .
I would ask the Members who this morning requested that the vote be postponed in the absence of a quorum to consider the following : if you want to reform the Rules of Procedure , which are indispensable in this House , if you want to improve our working practice , you cannot achieve this through impulsive actions ; instead you must initiate a full debate on reform of the House .
The delegates who are here this morning , who have done their work , who spent yesterday evening preparing for the work to be carried out today , are being punished here today , by a spontaneous action , for the fact that not everyone in Parliament has done their homework .
I do not think this is fair to these delegates !
Finally , I would ask you to consider the following , and I am addressing this to my colleagues in the Greens and in the left-wing Groups of this House , who have the somewhat remarkable impression that through the Rules of Procedure you can change the free mandate into an imperative mandate with a duty to be present for all votes . That is nonsense !
You will never be able to compel a freely elected delegate to take part in a parliamentary session or a vote if that delegate does not want to .
This is why I consider this morning ' s action to be impulsive , although it did perhaps serve a purpose , but , in terms of highlighting the key issue , it was quite unhelpful !
( Applause )
Mr President , I feel that we are making rather a spectacle of ourselves . I am reminded of the priest who berates his parishioners because other people do not come to Church .
We are here to work and those who are not here to work are preventing us from doing so .
Mr Schulz is right .
This is completely immoral .
Secondly , Mr President , I would like us to get on with the debate . Even if the fact that we do not meet the quorum means that we cannot vote , we can still debate .
Thirdly , I would like to point out the absurdity of the Rules of Procedure and ask the President to see that the matter is referred to the relevant Committee , for our Rules of Procedure state that the quorum cannot be required if less than 32 Members are present .
Therefore , if there had only been 29 Members present we could have voted and no one could have stopped us , but , because there are more than 32 , we cannot vote !
This is absurd , and we are making a spectacle of ourselves in front of the whole of Europe .
We cannot go on like this .
Mr Bourlanges , I can perhaps put your mind at rest by informing you that I will , of course , refer this morning ' s matter to the Bureau .
Needless to say , we will discuss this matter .
I think that goes without saying .
For the rest , as President , I am at your service at the moment and I , together with yourself , need to apply the Rules of Procedure to the best of my ability .
I still have many requests from Members to speak .
I am now giving the floor to Mr Medina Ortega .
Mr President , since there will no doubt be another quorum vote , I would like to remind the President and the Members of this Parliament that , during a quorum vote , it is not permitted to leave the chamber .
Four MEPs have left the chamber .
The practice often consists of asking for the quorum and then leaving the chamber .
I would ask you , Mr President , to remember this and not to allow any MEP to leave the chamber while a count of those Members present is taking place .
Mr Medina Ortega , we need to straighten a few things out .
We are now working within the Rules of Procedure .
Since the start of the new parliamentary term , it has been defined very clearly that every Member is allowed to leave the Chamber .
If , however - and this is according to the Rules of Procedure - one of the 32 Members who have requested a quorum leaves the Chamber , they will still be included .
The doors will remain open .
This is the quorum provision as it stands at the moment and this is the one I am applying .
Mr Bourlanges said that we carry on voting if there are fewer than 32 Members in the Chamber .
This is not the case .
The Rules of Procedure stipulate that if there are fewer than 32 Members in total present in the Chamber , then there is no vote .
Mr Posselt , there are many points of order to cover .
I am giving you the floor for the last time .
Mr President , I think it is genuinely important .
I appeal to the delegates to end their demonstration .
They have made their point , but now it is a matter of hunger in Ethiopia and we must vote on it .
Motions for resolutions ( B5-0345 / 2000 , B5-0348 / 2000 , B5-0360 / 2000 , B5-0392 / 2000 , B5-0395 / 2000 ) on the famine in Ethiopia
Mr President , I am very sorry but we did announce this action six weeks ago - it has not exactly appeared out of the blue .
We have given everyone , including the Presidents , the opportunity to change the agenda if this was considered necessary .
Nobody acted upon this . I have not heard of any action to change the agenda , even on the part of the Members who are now complaining .
This action , the quorum action , will continue , not only today , but every Friday in Strasbourg , until we have achieved our goal .
One of the options is a full Chamber , because one thing that creates the bad image which Mr Bourlanges is talking about is people signing up here and leaving without doing their work .
I have also done my homework and I do not want to mention any names , but we will be able to do this in future .
We will challenge the quorum for each item on the agenda today . This will cause some irritation .
It seems more sensible , therefore , to move all votes for today . We then do not need to continue with this and we can carry on with the debates and ask the Commissioner important questions .
Mrs Van der Laan , I understand that you would like the quorum to be checked .
According to the Rules of Procedure , a vote is to be taken on this .
We need to check whether there are 32 Members who wish to support you .
( More than 32 Members rose in support of this request ) ( The President established that there was no quorum )
Mr President , irrespective of whether this action was spontaneous or premeditated , it is still an act of sabotage by the anti-Strasbourg lobby .
I , too , noticed Members leaving the Chamber during the count .
This behaviour does not contravene the Rules of Procedure , but it is contrary to the notion of fair play and the proper functioning of Parliament .
( Applause )
I am just so tired of being accused of not wanting to do my job because I am taking part in this action .
If this Parliament is to be taken even a tiny bit seriously in Europe - and it is touch and go whether it will be , given that only 50 % of citizens voted at the last European Parliament elections - then it must take itself seriously , and we are not taking ourselves seriously by sitting and discussing cases when there is nobody here .
That is not a serious way of doing things .
If Parliament has to work on Friday , then people must be here .
What we are asking for is simply confirmation of whether we are observing Parliament ' s own rules .
That can hardly be called frivolous .
Mr President , the action which was taken is permitted by the Rules of Procedure , and therefore , those who , like me , acted in this way take political responsibility for it .
I do , however , consider that it is not right to criticise those who use an instrument which was adopted by democratic vote , such as the Rules of Procedure , for purposes which all may not support , but which are nevertheless permitted by the rules which we have established for ourselves .
If the rules had been different , we would have acted differently .
I would ask , rather , why it is that many Members voted in favour of working on Fridays in Strasbourg and yet are not in Strasbourg today .
It might have been better and made more sense to vote not to work on Fridays : in fact , I put it to you that to vote in a certain way and then act differently is a display of blatant disregard for our institution .

Mr President , with regard to Mr Medina Ortega ' s intervention a few moments ago , which you responded to by saying that his interpretation was incorrect , I must tell you that your reply was not correct either .
Please do not ask me to name any particular Member , but I guarantee that some of the 32 members who voted in favour of the request for a quorum are no longer here .
Therefore , some of the 32 Members have violated the Rules of Procedure .
Report by Mrs Thyssen ( A5-0077 / 2000 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the draft guidelines on vertical restraints [ C5-0009 / 2000 - 2000 / 2003 ( COS ) ]
Mr President , you will understand that I would like the quorum to be checked , but I think that there are clearly not enough people present .
I would therefore suggest moving all planned votes to the next sitting and proceeding with the discussion with the Council .
This is not the way things are done .
You can ask for the quorum to be checked but the vote is on the agenda .
Would you like to get the quorum checked now ?
( More than 32 Members rose in support of this request ) ( The President established that there was no quorum )
Mr President , two points on the Rules of Procedure : the first is that I would ask you , the chair , not just to look to the left , but to kindly look to the right also to see if anyone here wishes to speak .
My second point is an appeal to the delegates . The point which is currently on the agenda , night flights , gives us the chance to carry out a roll-call vote .
If you want that , and I consider it very reasonable , we should carry out this vote .
Mr Mayer , I can assure you , it is not just me who casts my eye through the Chamber .
I also have people behind my desk who help me in this activity .
We can monitor all corners of the Chamber .
I actually think that I have not made too bad a job of it .
Concerning night flights , these will be discussed in a moment .
We will see how the point on the agenda unfolds .
I am now giving the floor to Mrs Flesch .
Mr President , I am indebted to my esteemed friend , Mrs van der Laan , for making it clear , the last time she adopted a position , that she and her friends intended to repeat the manoeuvre every Friday morning of a Strasbourg part-session .
I am grateful to her for clarifying the purpose of this action and I agree with Mr Jacques Poos ' comments .
I would also like to express my disappointment at the absence from the Chamber this morning of Members whom I believed to be as concerned as I am for the interests of the town of Strasbourg .
Mr President , I would just like to ask all those who stood up to request checking the quorum what they think of the fact that , thanks to their action , we are not now going to vote on emergency aid measures for Ethiopia . In all honesty , I think we need to make journalists aware of what we think of this kind of action .
Everyone is , of course , free to act as they like .
Information and communication
The next item is an oral question to the Commission ( B5-0008 / 2000 ) , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , on the EU ' s information and communication strategy .
Mr President , the Union is faced with major tasks and its further development depends to a great extent on what we do here and now .
Enlargement to include the countries of Eastern and Central Europe is the biggest challenge in the Community ' s history , and if we do not tackle the issue correctly now , we are putting a lot at risk .
It is extremely important that we explain to the Union ' s citizens , and the citizens of the candidate countries , what the Union stands for .
An information and communication strategy must , therefore , be high on our agenda .
I am looking forward with great interest to hearing your answer , Commissioner Reding , because I know that information is also of great interest to you : an interest which we share , moreover , because we are both journalists by profession .
I believe that we also have the same interest in the Union ' s communication and information activities being organised in as close proximity to the citizens as possible and in our applying the policy so that the various groups in society get the information which they most need .
The keywords are coordination - partly when it comes to sharing information between the Commission and the Parliament - decentralisation , targeting and optimum exploitation of the available information technology .
I am curious as to how the Commission will go about the task . I imagine that the Commission ' s offices in the major European cities will be involved and that they will be assigned tasks and responsibilities and given resources to contact and inform the public at large .
The experts , the authorities and those who are genuinely interested in the EU should not have problems getting information , and I must admit that I am a little sceptical when I hear about an " interinstitutional " library in Brussels or similar central functions .
I would much rather that the Commission ' s office in Copenhagen was a little more accessible .
It is the Commission ' s local offices , in cooperation with Parliament ' s local offices , which must meet the man on the street , the man who always thinks that Brussels is so extremely far away .
He must understand that Brussels means all of us together , as Commission President Prodi put it .
It is a very difficult task because , in my opinion , the gap between the citizens and the institutions is wide , and with the major challenges which the Union is facing the task will become no less great .
Enlargement , the Commission ' s ambitious 5-year plan , the Commission ' s plans for reform , the Intergovernmental Conference : there is a lot to provide information about , and I think that this is an urgent matter .
I believe that you share many of my views , Mrs Reding .
Mr President , I should like to thank Mr Andreasen for his question since it gives me the opportunity to express the extent to which I share his views , as , indeed , I emphasised during my hearing before this House last September .
It is true that there is a gulf between the citizen and Europe .
It is true that we have all , not just the Commission , but also Parliament and the Member States , made many mistakes in our information policy in the past .
We must all , not just the Commission in isolation but the Commission in collaboration with the Member States and with Parliament , proceed to examine the matter in depth and develop a new information policy .
Moreover , let me tell you quite explicitly that I have taken careful note of the problems which exist .
I must tell you , too , that there are some things which are working well ; it is not all bad .
For instance , we have just started up ' Europe direct ' , a new access facility for citizens looking for information about Europe .
We have our Euro-info-points and information outlets in the Member States , which , generally speaking , are very successful .
Along with the honourable Member , I admit that we might be able to improve the way they operate , and I shall indeed make every effort to achieve this .
The honourable Member also mentioned modern technology .
Obviously , the new information policy which we are going to be implementing will have to optimise the use of all the information and communication possibilities which this new technology makes available to us .
In my opinion , one of the major mistakes of the past , in our information policy , was the fact that this was often top-down information identified , wrongly , I must say , as propaganda .
That must be taken into consideration .
We must take the psychology of the public into consideration and we must ensure that dialogue is established .
Moreover , I would draw your attention to the fact that my fellow Commissioner , Michel Barnier , and myself , have initiated dialogue on the Intergovernmental Conference which is to follow this new approach , i.e. making contact with the public , with young people and opinion formers , and discussing matters with them , and also approaching locally , regionally and nationally elected representatives on behalf of the Commission , not to make fine speeches , but to discuss things with them and to gain some idea of their general expectations .
I am , of course , counting a great deal on Parliament to play its part in this citizen information campaign . Parliament is the body which is closest to the citizens , and if all the Members of the European Parliament fulfil their task of informing citizens - and I shall assist them as much as I possibly can to do so - this will enable us to change mindsets .
We have once again started to work within an interinstitutional working party on ' information ' , in which Parliament is represented , and as part of this work , which is a tripartite effort involving the national states , the European Parliament and the Commission , I plan to present a communication to you in the near future outlining a new approach which I shall first present to the Commission , some time before the summer , and which I shall then discuss with you .
I cannot give you any details at this early stage of the actual proposal , as it is still being drawn up , but I can assure you that the main pillars of this new approach will be decentralisation , subsidiarity , closeness to the citizens , the coresponsibility of the European institutions and the national administrations and also the increased participation of civil society .
I also think we must all clarify our respective roles .
Obviously , the Parliament ' s role is different to that of the Commission .
I am deeply convinced that Parliament ' s special role must continue .
Any collaboration in the field of information must allow for the specific character of each institution .
It is possible to cooperate without the parties involved losing their own identities , but we should nonetheless all work in the same direction and we must know that the closer we are to the citizens , the greater our chances of being comprehensible , credible and effective .
In order to do so , we must seriously examine the way we are organised , the instruments and procedures we select , what is being done at the various levels , at institutional , national and regional level , and how tasks are divided between the three institutions .
We must also , openly and objectively , look at our own way of working and examine how we can avoid repeating the mistakes of the past .
That , Mr President , is what I wanted to say for the time being .
Obviously , the discussion is only just being initiated and will not be completed today , because in the very near future we shall be presenting a communication on our new information policy which we are going to discuss in detail with you .
Mr President , I would like to thank Commissioner Reding for her response to Mr Andreasen .
We have a very committed commissioner in Commissioner Reding .
She has a really tough task on her hands but I am sure that she will get the full support that she recognises that she needs from the European Parliament .
I find myself totally supportive of this motion in addressing the information deficit of the EU .
The information deficit is actually more serious than the democratic deficit that we often talk about .
In a sense , the information deficit and the democratic deficit are part of the same problem .
In the recent past , we have had the Oostlander report in 1993 and the famous Pex report in 1998 .
They have analysed the problem , suggested improvements , but sadly little has been achieved .
I wish Commissioner Reding well in getting on with this problem .
This week I had a visitors ' group from the Winchester Probus Club , mainly retired people and , in general terms , well informed about world affairs .
However , you could write what they knew about the aims of the EU on the back of a one euro note .
Before anyone tells me that euro notes do not exist , it would not make any difference : they could not write anything .
When I speak to British groups , I often start with the question : do you want to be in the European Union ?
The immediate response I got this week was : " No " .
Five or six years ago , the response would have been : " Yes , but we do not want too much interference " .
This situation is getting worse .
I know that it is a particular problem for the United Kingdom , but it is not exclusive to the United Kingdom .
It is getting worse right across Europe .
We only have to look at the turn-out in the European Parliamentary elections to see that .
Why is this so ?
Why this lack of enthusiasm for the EU ?
To begin with , we must remember that the best advertising in the world will not sell a poor product .
Even if you have a first-class product , if you do not market it properly it will not sell .
We must make sure that the product is good first and then make sure that we advertise it effectively .
I fear we are doing neither .
There can be no doubt that , when history is written , the greatest achievement of the 20th century will be seen to be the creation of the EU .
It has delivered peace and prosperity for half the continent for half the century .
Now the other half of the continent is queuing up to get in , yet my constituents want to get out .
I am not an expert in marketing ; I know there are no simple solutions ; I certainly know more propaganda leaflets are not the answer .
Let me just suggest a few possibilities .
What happened to President Prodi 's idea of a rapid rebuttal unit ?
If it is in existence , it does not appear to be very effective .
If they are giving answers , can I suggest that they e-mail their answers to the MEPs as well , so we can use the information , not just to the press , who often just spike it .
The Commissioner said quite rightly that new technology is good .
We must make more and better use of it .
We must make sure that our website address is known. we could maybe spend some of the Socrates money giving every student in Europe a computer mouse mat so that they can see the website address of the European Parliament .
With the plethora of new TV channels , with digital TV , have we got anywhere with a Parliamentary TV channel ?
I can watch the US Senate on television gavel-to-gavel . But not the European Parliament .
We must emphasise the good-news stories of when we help the citizen .
We have a Committee on Petitions that addresses a thousand petitions a year .
When did the information departments of the Commission or Parliament last attend a meeting of that committee ?
When did they past publish any of the good news that comes from that committee ?
Finally , I have to address the problem of Parliament in Strasbourg .
I am not anti-Strasbourg .
I am certainly not anti-France .
I understand that Strasbourg was the symbol of peace and unity of our continent , but that was a symbol of the 20th century .
In the 21st century , I am afraid it is a symbol of waste and inefficiency .
I ask Parliament , Commission and the Council of Ministers to address that problem .
Mr President , Commissioner , firstly I would like to thank you for your interest and dedication to the European Union ' s information activities .
We have known you for many years and we know of your commitment and dedication , not only to what we could call the European cause , but also to ensuring that the European cause really reaches the citizens .
In your political activities you have always paid special attention to the most sensitive groups : young people , elderly people , the workplace , and you paid special attention to the media .
We support the general lines which you have put forward here and which will be specified in the document which you will present and which the European Commission must approve next June .
You have mentioned two aspects which I would like to stress : the regional dimension and efficiency .
The aim of the information policy is to reach the citizens .
In order to do that properly it is necessary to take account of the regional dimension , because it is one of the fields which is a subject of great sensitivity in terms of society and its problems .
Therefore , so that the citizens may understand and participate in European construction and not see it as a superstructure reserved for politicians and technocrats , it is essential that the work of providing information is done at the level of the regional institutions and in conjunction with them .
This goes hand in hand with efficiency .
In your review of information policy , I would ask you to bear in mind the experience of certain Member States .
For example , during the euro campaign , there was an agreement at the time between the European Commission and the government of a Member State .
That government ' s decision was to commission an information campaign on the euro from a very important advertising agency .
That advertising agency made some very nice advertisements and hundreds of thousands of leaflets were distributed .
However , that it is not the way to reach the public , nor is it efficient .
It is perhaps very pleasing to the government , which gets to make fine speeches , and to the relevant Minister , who gets to appear on the television and in the newspapers , but that does not reach the public .
Therefore , it is necessary to ensure the maximum possible degree of decentralisation .
Mr President , those of us who represent Scotland in this House were very grateful when this year the Parliament decided to make its office in Edinburgh permanent .
The Commission has long had an office there .
The Commissioner has mentioned the importance of national regions , as well as the states , in its communication policy .
I am sorry to say that this week it has been announced that The Scotsman newspaper is closing down the office of its Brussels and European correspondent .
It is rumoured that BBC Scotland is about to remove its special correspondent from Brussels .
That would be a disaster .
It is not just the Commission and Parliament which need to think about their role .
Our own media also need to look seriously at the problem of adequately reporting to their citizens the issues of Europe .
May I mention one other sad case , which is of importance in the area of information and communication .
I want to draw attention , yet again , to the case of the Italian language lecturers .
New developments in the case have shown that the quality of openness in information and communication by the Commission on this sort of issue leaves much to be desired .
In these proceedings it is vital that the interested parties are fully informed by the Commission , but the practice fails to honour that ideal .
There has been some evidence this week that the former Commission has actively misled parties in cases of this kind .
During the current Parliament , I have had a number of assurances that the Commission is serious about upholding rights derived from Community law on behalf of lecturers in all issues involving non-discrimination .
That really must be taken seriously .
It is a point about openness , about being ready to communicate what is going on and about informing people how seriously we take rights arising from Community law and how seriously we take the need to demonstrate to our citizens and our public the importance of what is accomplished here .
I am glad that the Commission and Parliament have helped to make information available in Scotland and I wish our own media would do likewise .
Mr President , a distinction must be made between information and propaganda .
Mr Prodi ' s Commission has started off badly with regard to information .
I have heard that last autumn it issued an instruction to the national Commission offices to focus on the reporting of political information in place of the former citizens ' information service .
This means information and propaganda from above .
Actually , this means the spread of propaganda , not information .
The Commission has started off badly in the most important area of information reporting , that of public accessibility .
The Commission has issued a draft for a directive on public accessibility , which , by any common yardstick , is an untenable document , more conducive to secrecy than increased public accessibility .
This is the Commission ' s line on information policy insofar as it concerns public accessibility .
Public accessibility is just as important as information .
It offers our citizens and the media the opportunity to have hands-on access to documents themselves and draw their own conclusions , instead of being dependent on those of the Commission .
There is a very obvious discrepancy between the official documents themselves and the conclusions being drawn .
The documents state that the European Union ' s crisis management troops are not a European Army , but the President of the Commission , Mr Prodi , says that whatever you call it , it is one .
In an information context such as this , it is important to have access to the documents and draw one ' s own conclusions , as the documents do not always spell things out clearly either .
In addition , the way Parliament disseminates information must be criticised .
Parliament has its own information offices , but the Finnish office apparently has no money to buy copies of the EU Treaty , which would allow Members to familiarise themselves with its contents in their office at Parliament .
It has one Internet connection .
To this extent , we could conclude that the officials working in Parliament ' s own information office do not know what is going on in Parliament , although Parliament has excellent Internet connections .
To all intents and purposes , it is a war of propaganda that is going on here . In many respects , it is also a civil war .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , firstly I would like once again to point out that Commissioner Reding has announced a dramatic change in the information strategy of the EU and has thus made it clear that there are deficiencies , that fresh efforts must be made and that we must make this issue a focus of our concerns .
We thank you for this .
Secondly , I would like to point out that we too must ask ourselves whether this morning ' s initiative to prevent voting was a positive information and communication strategy for Parliament outwardly as well as inwardly ?
I do not think that it was !
The homework which we have to do we must do ourselves and we must not confuse information and communication within the framework of our work with self-promotion .
It is a matter of Community promotion and not self-promotion .
In this regard we should all resolve to understand that one of the causes of the problems of the political parties and of the institutions is a problem of communication and information .
We , and I say that very clearly , the institutions of the European Union , the European Parliament and the delegates cannot bear sole responsibility for providing information on Europe .
Without the support of the Member States , without the support of the public representatives at borough , county and national level , without the support of all the institutions , we will not get directly to the citizen , because either we are here doing our work or we are involved in communication and information processes with our citizens .
We cannot do both at the same time within the meaning of Maastricht and Amsterdam !
Commissioner , I am waiting for your master plan , your schedule , your specific measures for implementation .
The public mandataries , all persons and institutions who receive money from the EU , should be involved in this implementation .
We must increasingly involve the visitor groups and also two areas of activity which , in my opinion , are in your sphere of responsibility , i.e. schools and youth , and the staff in the offices of the Community institutions must be equipped accordingly .
Please submit to us a specific plan of action and a schedule .
Thank you , Mr President . I would like to express my heartfelt thanks for the commitment of those Members who openly support our action and are willing to further a new policy which will , of necessity , be innovative .
In any case , this is the impression I gained from the comments of the honourable Members .
May I first answer Mr Perry .
He said that the situation is getting worse .
That is a very negative way of seeing things .
Probably , the honourable Member is right .
I just hope the situation is not getting worse everywhere .
That would be terrible .
But if it is getting worse anywhere , we have to take that very seriously .
We cannot just say that it is getting worse and not do anything .
We have to act .
The new information programme which is going to be set up and which will integrate all the actors at regional and national level will do a lot of good for the future information policy .
Mr Perry has addressed three specific points .
Firstly , the website address should be better known .
I know about this problem .
On 3 April we launched the new access facility - Europe direct .
We will be distributing information about this site to schools and local authorities .
Regarding a Parliamentary TV channel , the Commission would not object if Parliament proposed such an activity .
However , I leave that initiative to Parliament .
Regarding the Committee on Petitions and creating publicity about it , the last time this was done was when I was president of that committee .
I consider it very important .
There are colleagues in this Chamber who sat with me on that committee some years ago .
It is the committee most concerned with the Europe of the citizen .
If Parliament decided to take action vis-à-vis the citizens by utilising the Committee on Petitions , you can rest assured that the Commission would support it .
( FR ) Like Mr MacCormick , Mr Gasòliba i Böhm touched on a major issue related to the fact that centralising the provision of information is not viable .
If information were to be issued solely from Strasbourg or solely from Brussels , it would not reach the public .
I am absolutely sure that , if we want to bring Europe closer to the citizens and the citizens closer to Europe , there must be a regional dimension to the information policy at all levels , including information relating to the euro .
In practice , the euro cannot be introduced by means of a television programme .
We must not forget the importance of television but , in addition and above all , we have to keep the people at grassroots informed - to approach the people and talk to them .
And there are a great many information outlets available to us in our regions , towns and villages which can play a very significant role in this .
It would be a mistake for a policy to be managed solely by an advertising agency and not implemented at grass roots level in consultation with the citizens directly concerned .
I am in total agreement with Mr Gasòliba i Böhm when he says that we must integrate this regional dimension into our information policy and , when I discuss the issue with the competent national politicians , I will ensure that this is taken into account .
( EN ) Along the same lines , I say to Mr MacCormick that I find it regrettable if the Scottish media no longer report what happens in Strasbourg or Brussels .
Of course , I cannot intervene in that respect .
It is a private decision of the media .
In any event it is important for all actors , including Members of the European Parliament , to intervene with the media so that they enhance their reporting about Europe .
Every time I meet with organisations of journalists or organisations of editors , I ask them to give more coverage to the European political level .
The information office in Edinburgh will not be closed .
So at least regional policy in this area will continue .
( FR ) Mr Seppänen said that there has been inadequate provision of information to the public and that the Prodi Commission has been too concerned with political propaganda .
I hope that the honourable Member is wrong and that the provision of information will not ultimately be perceived in this way .
In any case , the channel which I will announce in the written statement , which I am in the process of drawing up at the moment , is dialogue and direct contact with the citizen .
I would like to make it quite clear , once again , that the provision of information to citizens is not the exclusive responsibility of the Commission .
I am convinced that this information service can work properly only if there is close cooperation between the three institutions in question .
If we do not cooperate , we will fail miserably .
( DE ) I thank Mr Karas for regarding the ways and means with which we will , in future , tackle information policy as a positive approach .
I strongly agree with him that everyone must take a look at themselves to see where we have gone wrong .
I have no intention of going into the problems of the information policy of Parliament .
The parliamentarians must do that themselves , but we should all carry out Community promotion together .
Mr Karas has quite rightly said that we need the Member States .
That is also one of the focuses of the new information policy which I would like to introduce in the future .
We need not only the Member States , but also the associations , regional and national politicians .
Without them there is no way that we can get our information across .
There must therefore be a concerted action between the institutions and between the people in our regions , in our States .
I know that this is easy to say and difficult to implement .
But unless we at least make a start , then nothing will happen .
I hope , therefore , that on the basis of the new information policy , which I would like to introduce , this aspect of citizen participation and citizen responsibility for Europe will be strongly emphasised .
( FR ) Mr President , I cannot bring about a revolution single-handed .
Clearly , I need a large number of soldiers and aides , and I need you , each and every one of you individually , to assist me wherever you have influence or responsibilities in this new information campaign .
This is a joint effort . It is a great challenge , but I know I can count on your support .
( Applause )
Thank you , Commissioner .
This is probably the first time I have heard delegates referred to as soldiers , but we know what role we are playing here .
The debate is closed .
Mr President , in the heated debate on the matter of the quorum I did not get a chance to speak before about my motion for the Rules of Procedure .
Yesterday , there was a question from Mr MacCormick on the postponement of the vote on the COM for bananas .
I share the concerns of Mr MacCormick .
We requested the postponement so that we could remain involved as a Parliament in the communication process with the United States within the WTO .
Had we voted in accordance with our Rules of Procedure , we would no longer have been involved .
That is how it was , Mr MacCormick - he is no longer here .
I would like this to be recorded .
It is to do with the fact that we as a Parliament no longer have the right to codecision in the agricultural sector and so we had to choose this path .
I am taking note of this .
This will be taken care of .
I am now giving the floor to Mr Beysen on a point of order .
Mr President , I have noticed with some degree of satisfaction that the subversive action staged by some of the Members with a view to sabotaging procedures has ground to a halt .
This will probably be because they have come to realise that they cannot count on the support of at least 32 delegates .
I would just like to say , Mr President , that some strange selectivity is being practised here , that certain Members stage little acts and , after the act is finished , they leave and the game is over .
I did want to point this out because Parliament should not be mistaken for a kindergarten , and this is the feeling I will have when I leave this Chamber today .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start the debate .
Let us not enter into discussion .
I will tell you what the Rules of Procedure are so that we all know where we stand .
I am now giving the floor to Mr Van Hulten .
Mr President , our action is not finished .
I simply want to refute that our sole aim would be to disturb proceedings .
What we do want is to make sure that this Parliament can work more effectively and be more credible for the next five years .
This is what we are doing . We hope that we can count on the support of all MEPs to arrange the agenda in such a way as to actually make this happen in future , as you explained so well on television this week , Mr President .
Mr President , I may have been accused of being subversive , but other people appear to disregard the Rules of Procedure . A request to test the quorum should not be made at the start of the debate but when we vote .
Mr Speroni , let us be absolutely clear about this .
According to Rule 126 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure : " Parliament may deliberate , settle its agenda and approve the Minutes of proceedings , whatever the number of Members present " . Deliberation is always possible .
We will shortly proceed to the vote ( details will follow ) , and we will then see what happens .
I am presiding over the meeting according to the agenda as it is before us .
I am now giving the floor to Mrs Gebhardt and I hope we will then proceed to the next item on the agenda , which is night flights .
Mr President , I would like to ask a question , tongue-in-cheek , in the style of Loriot .
Where are they then ? Where are they then , those who say that we should do proper work here , who are always putting the question about the quorum and , when we are doing the real work here , are absent ?
Where are these 32 and more who stood up before and who will stand up again , but who now , when we are discussing matters , are no longer here ?
I would really like to know what kind of nonsense this is ?
Night flights and excessive noise

Mr President , to get back to the root of the problem , it has now been established by the various different institutions responsible for assessing disamenities and their impact on the people that the people ' s greatest concern is noise pollution . This is completely understandable if we consider that the majority of European citizens are exposed to uncomfortably high levels of noise .
Under these conditions , the European institutions ' delay in legislating is highly regrettable , particularly the Commission ' s failure to propose practical measures to combat noise and to set limit values for noise exposure .
A Green Paper was presented in 1996 and nothing else has happened since .
It is true that the noise problem is largely due to transport , particularly road transport , but air transport is a factor which is also giving increasing cause for concern .
The peak levels of noise during take-off and landing are specific to air transport and , of course , this problem is exacerbated by the effect of the noise at night , for it must be admitted that night flights , or rather aircraft taking off and landing during the night , make sleep almost impossible in some areas near airports .
What has been done to regulate aircraft to date ?
Standards were last established by the International Civil Aviation Organisation in 1977 .
Therefore , there has been no progress in this area for 23 years , and it is clear that aircraft replacement policies are not in any way motivated by the introduction of more stringent standards , to the extent that our aircraft are extremely outdated .
The recent Commission communication on air transport and the environment defines a noise reduction strategy based both on economic factors , such as improving air traffic control and airport access , and on fostering progress in technology .
This is a good strategy which will limit the increase in noise pollution , but in my opinion and , I would argue , the opinion of a good number of Members , it will not allow us , in the short term , to reach our objective which is that nobody is exposed to dangerously or uncomfortably high noise levels .
Faced with this situation , a number of countries and regions have taken steps to restrict access to airports at night .
Unfortunately , they have not been very organised about it , with the result that some firms , particularly courier and freight companies , have reacted badly - to my mind , dangerously .
They are threatening to relocate and this is creating economic insecurity in the regions concerned .
I therefore feel that harmonisation at European level is imperative .
Of course , this does not mean demanding uniformity , for regional differences must be taken into account , but there must be a common core in the approaches of the different Member States of the European Union .
I also feel that the organisation of night air transport activities , which are inevitably going to be noisy whatever the level of technology employed , is certainly something which must be restricted and coordinated .
I therefore call upon the Commission to take action in this area .
I made no contribution to this morning ' s debate and , with your permission , I would like to say a few words now regarding the vote .
Personally , I would prefer a vote in which a large number of Members take part to a vote which takes place at noon on Friday in which only thirty or forty Members participate .
Frankly , that distresses me , for a resolution voted in by only a small number of Members carries very little weight .
I took part in this morning ' s action and I did not appreciate criticism from Members who interpreted it as an anti-Strasbourg manoeuvre .
I am not at all against Strasbourg : quite the opposite , and I have proved it many times , despite the fact that I am Belgian .
I do not wish to see Strasbourg cease working normally from Monday to Friday .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Lannoye for this initiative and for launching the debate in this Chamber on this very important matter .
One of the goals of the Commission communication ' Air transport and the environment - towards sustainable development ' is precisely to launch the debate on the suitability of establishing a Community framework for decision-making procedures concerning the operational restrictions to be imposed on airports in the Union for environmental reasons .
In the course of this debate , which will be held in the different institutions , the Council of Ministers and Parliament will have the chance to express their views on this communication , both in general terms and with regard to specific aspects such as night flights .
As pointed out in this communication , the Commission does not see how uniform and restrictive rules governing restrictions on use , which would apply to all Community airports , as would be the case , for example , for the general ban on night flights , could provide the most balanced solution to the issue of noise pollution attributable to certain airports .
The Commission is of the opinion that decisions should continue to be taken at local level .
However , it also considers that a common framework is necessary to coordinate the procedures adopted in order to reach these decisions so that when a region decides to ban night flights , for example , it does so in the same way as a similar region somewhere else .
And this framework could make it compulsory for all the interested parties to be consulted , stipulate an appropriate timeframe for adaptation to the new restrictions and establish a common basis for assessing the efficiency in environmental terms of the envisaged measures restricting operations .
I would also like to touch on the subject of hushkits .
With regard to speeding up the withdrawal of the noisiest aircraft , the Commission is committed to the work currently in progress within the International Civil Aviation Organisation on drafting a new standard on noise and rules for the withdrawal of the noisiest aircraft .
If , as we hope , all goes according to plan , this work will result in the 33rd Assembly of the ICAO adopting new , binding international noise regulations in September 2001 .
Compared with the hushkits regulation , which is content to put a freeze on the current situation for aircraft whose certificate has been renewed , genuine international rules requiring the progressive withdrawal of these devices would have greater effect in terms of environmental protection .
Meanwhile , in view of the United States ' refusal to back down over the hushkits regulation , the provisions of this regulation on banning the attachment of these devices will enter into force on 4 May next .
Given that the provisions governing the banning of aircraft registered in third countries will only come into force on 1 April 2002 , the Commission ' s interpretation of the conclusions of the 33rd assembly of the International Civil Aviation Organisation will provide all the elements necessary to decide whether it is appropriate to replace the hushkits regulation with rules for progressive withdrawal adopted at international level .
All this is in the pipeline . The Commission is working on it and would like to thank Parliament for its cooperation on this matter .
I have received four motions for resolutions in accordance with Rule 42 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The vote will take place after the debate .
Mr President , noise pollution caused by aircraft is a very topical issue .
We talked about hushkits not so long ago .
I understand from the observations made by the Commissioner that the regulation as it has been laid down will enter into force on 4 May next .
Mr President , it is not only hushkits which are causing us considerable concern .
In broader terms too , we have to establish that , on account of the increase in air traffic , noise pollution is growing at an alarming rate , especially for citizens who live near busy airports .
At night time , in particular , this level of pollution is out of all proportion .
The number of night flights should therefore be significantly reduced .
But what is meant by night ?
At Düsseldorf airport , night falls at 10 p.m. , according to Mr Florenz .
We in the Netherlands are far more flexible in this respect .
Night does not set in until 1.00 a.m. and we do not actually term it night , we refer to it as the brink of night .
Mr President , whatever time we are talking about , it means that we need a coherent approach to noise pollution caused by the transport of civilians and freight by air , as the individual Member States are applying very different rules .
These lead to the direct and undesired effect that airports start to compete with each other . They reason that as long as they are flexible enough , they will get a lot of freight traffic .
But , at the end of the day , it is the people living near airports who suffer .
Mr President , so what needs to happen ?
First of all , all noise pollution , including pollution generated by aircraft , must be tackled at source .
This means thorough research into low-noise engines .
This means bans and international standards .
But it also means that we need European framework legislation which ensures that measurements are taken , standards set , zonal structures put in place in the same way for all European airports .
What we are asking for - not for the first time , in fact , we did this two and a half years ago in connection with the report on noise pollution which was supported by the late Mrs Carmen Diez de Riviera - is this legislation .
Commissioner and Mrs Reding - you are representing Mrs de Palacio at the moment - you are saying that this is extremely difficult , but I am not asking you for a ban , or even a night ban .
What I do want is to keep the discussion around this issue going and to continue where Parliament left off before .
It was our own amendment , tabled on behalf of the European People ' s Party .
Let us thus fight for a European directive which , thanks to Mrs Loyola de Palacio ' s new impetus , ensures that we - at long last - can give our citizens what is theirs .
That is peace and quiet at night , but this also implies a proper zonal structure , insulation and sound legislation in Europe .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the airline industry has become a growing as well as a thriving industry within the Union .
This undoubtedly brings many benefits , but there are also many drawbacks .
I would like to make it clear straight away that , if Europe does not intervene , aspects such as quality of life , the economy and social factors will very much be in the balance .
The key question is , do we want our citizens to enjoy a good night ' s rest , and even day ' s rest and , secondly , are we able to give them just that ?
If you will allow me , I will dwell for a moment on the problem of noise pollution suffered at my own country ' s national airport , an airport which , by the way , many of you frequent very regularly .
The noise pollution at Zaventem has exceeded the permitted levels for a long time .
The quality of life - and sleep - of the people living in the vicinity is appalling by any standard .
The solution to this problem has caused great uproar in Belgium and in my government .
As you know , the Belgian Government embraces people from the blue , green and red sections of the political spectrum .
Well , when the green Minister had the audacity to propose a complete night ban , all of a sudden , Belgium was not big enough for the fierce discussion which followed .
Commissioner , you may be red and green in your heart , and I can assure , this is what I am .
I too want to continue to promote life and the quality of everyone ' s existence as the supreme good .
This is all well and good on paper , but this can be very difficult to implement in practice .
What is worse ?
Having a very difficult or bad night ' s sleep , day in day out , or suddenly losing your job and your income ?
Indeed , the parcel company at Zaventem had threatened hundreds , if not many more , redundancies .
All of a sudden , the trade union and employers joined forces .
Belgium has meanwhile come up with a solution : a combination of measures which involves a restriction of noise at source , strict supervisory measures and a number of infrastructural planning measures , such as offering insulation to the houses affected .
It is an improvement , but not a solution .
Too many people continue to suffer from excessive noise in their bedrooms .
Nonetheless , Belgium , in tandem with other Member States , has taken on a pioneering role in this discussion and the question is then , will that country , with its businesses and people who work and live there , suffer as a result ?
We can only avoid this if night flights and noise pollution are tackled at European level .
This is , in fact , what we are asking for and I am delighted to see that people of all political persuasions in this Parliament are asking for the same thing . I therefore hope that the Commission will be receptive to this .
Europe will need to resolve the false dilemma that exists of having to choose between the economy and social and environmental considerations .
We would like a standardised method to measure noise pollution within the Union .
In this connection , we would also like uniform standards and an effective costing rule .
In addition , we would like criteria which determine when a night ban should be instituted within the Union .
In a recent communication from the Commission on air transport and the environment , an initial strategy has already been outlined .
This is to be welcomed , but it is not enough .
Firstly , this does not solve the current problem , as Mr Lannoye has already pointed out .
Secondly , this is simply a communication , but we want hard legislation from the Commission , so that everyone knows where they stand .
I regret that the Commissioner - the Commissioner who is standing in for Commissioner de Palacio that is - is of the opinion that it is very difficult to institute a night ban .
I think that , with a little good will , this should be feasible .
I am looking forward to her reply .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Lannoye stated a moment ago that noise is a problem with all forms of transport , but the problem with aircraft is very specific because it is so concentrated .
In its communication on airports and the environment , the Commission mentioned a few things about noise , one being - and you also echoed this yourself - that the principle of subsidiarity applies to noise . In other words , it must be possible to implement at local level without the European Union having to regulate everything .
I would , however , like the Commission ' s guarantee that distortion of competition is ruled out . An interesting concept in the communication is the drafting of classification lists , not only for aircraft , but also for airports .
This would mean that noise-sensitive airports would be distinguished from others and that certain activities could not take place at such airports but could possibly take place at less noise-sensitive airports .
Mrs Van Brempt already pointed this out : we are faced with a dilemma .
It is clear that certain businesses and a certain economic sector totally rely on night flights . If we asked them what would happen if there were no night flights , they are bound to say that they would have to close down their businesses , their activities would become pointless and they would no longer be able to offer their services .
Our question is , therefore : how can we marry the two together ?
The Commission should then legislate against distortion of competition between different airports in different Member States .
Mrs Van Brempt clearly stated what the dilemma was for the Belgian Government .
It is caught between the devil and the deep blue sea .
As it happens , the Belgian Government has taken a number of measures , but would it not be useful , for example , if the Commission were to compile some sort of list of good and bad airline companies in terms of noise , if it were to draw a distinction between those who do invest in combating noise , those who can present a good record in combating noise and those who cannot , those who do not try their best , and then combine this with measures .
Because one thing is clear : noise must be penalised .
Accordingly , it should be more expensive to fly certain aircraft and it should be impossible to fly certain aircraft at night for example .
A total ban would be ideal , of course , but can we afford this and where could this be done ?
We would like to have these questions answered by the Commission .
A European framework is lacking at the moment - and you say yourself that a framework should be in place , but when ?
When will this happen ?
We have a communication at the moment and shortly we will have the report by Mrs Lucas on aviation and the environment , but when are we getting legislation , when can we expect a framework which is sufficiently clear for each Member State , so that distortion of competition is ruled out ?
Would it not be useful , for example , to look at ' best practices ' at this stage - to use a buzz word - so that we know what certain airports get up to ? This would be some achievement .
For example , at Schiphol , there is a kind of complaints desk for noise .
Other airports do not have this but could possibly do with one .
So why not exchange ideas between the different EU airports , where all of us are faced with the same problem ?
I would ask the Commission to speed up its process and not to wait for the legislative measure alone , but to set up other initiatives in order to bring people closer together .
Mr President , Commissioner , yesterday the inhabitants of Strasbourg forced decision makers to reject the well-known air courier firm , DHL ' s , plans to set up a base at the Strasbourg-Entzheim airport .
Now the company is trying to worm its way into the Nancy-Metz regional airport , which it has targeted because of its rural location where , due to the lower population density , there might appear to be less public opposition .
But this is not the case at all .
When it comes to noise pollution from aircraft and public health in general , it makes no difference whether an airport is situated in the town or the country : all citizens have the right to a peaceful night ' s sleep .
I could also mention the inhabitants of the areas surrounding Roissy , Satolas and Milan who are protesting . Milan has fallen into the clutches of Trans-European Networks which have failed to take into account the detrimental effect of their activities on local inhabitants ' standard of living .
With air traffic booming and the new economy expanding rapidly , I can foresee a fresh increase in freight in the future .
The Union must react and the Commission must propose tangible measures in response to the legitimate concerns of our fellow citizens .
The entire transport policy needs to be revised in order to curb , or even reduce , air transport and related noise pollution .
No research has been carried out into noise pollution from airports .
It is essential to transfer short-haul air freight transport to the railways .
And personally , I am in favour of banning night flights in order to respect the local inhabitants ' need for a peaceful night ' s sleep , for they already have to put up with excessive noise all day long .
These three matters genuinely require urgent consideration .
Mr President , Commissioner , for some time the populations living close to Barajas Airport in Madrid have protested every time there has been an extension of the airport , for various reasons , but mainly because of noise pollution .
I imagine that other populations living near any airport in any large city will have the same problem .
I know that in the last two months the Government of Madrid has proposed a reduction in night flights , after 11.00 p.m. , but I also know that the measures that have been taken have not had any significant effect on the quality of life of the population .
Let us hope that it will improve .
Hence the opportunity for this debate , which we should thank Mr Lannoye for .
From the joint motion for a resolution , I would like to highlight some of the proposals - please excuse any repetition - which I believe the European Commission should take note of if it wants to reduce noise pollution : a global and integrated framework for reducing noise pollution which should lead to a framework directive with concrete and binding measures ; the uniform application of those measures in all Member States so that there are no distortions ; a Community framework for the classification of noise which will allow measures to be taken with the rigorous allocation of slots and a reduction in flights ; and progress towards the establishment of a common air space , which is not in conflict with local and regional measures .
In the fifth framework programme for research it would be necessary to carry out an investigation into the design of aircraft , with a view to reducing its influence on noise pollution .
We should also work towards the reduction and disappearance of night flights and the promotion of the railway .
In truth , Mr President , if everybody disliked aircraft as much as I do and travelled by rail as much as I do , perhaps we would have fewer problems .
All of this work should be done in conjunction with the populations and residents ' associations which are already pushing , throughout the whole of Europe , as in Spain , for a reduction in noise pollution , other types of pollution and a reduction in the enormous demand for air traffic .
We should also cooperate in the creation of a noise map in local areas which would lead finally to a serious piece of work on the part of the European Community in favour of a reduction in noise pollution which is increasing as a result of demand .
Mr President , I live 10 kilometres from Malpensa airport as the crow flies and I spent all my working life as part of an aircraft control team , and I therefore feel very strongly about this issue .
First of all , I must say that many of the problems are the result of bad planning or no planning at all .
The airports were built haphazardly and no practical assessment of the environmental impact was made as the towns , or certain parts of them , grew up around the airport structures .
Regional planning is only a recent introduction , whereas airports have existed for a long time .
The first flights to operate from Malpensa , for example , began as early as 1910 .
Of course , there are other structures which are public nuisances - landfill waste sites , for example , which are created from old quarries with no planning - but , in the case of airports , we see the consequences every day , or rather we hear them , for they fill our ears rather than offending our eyes .
In addition , provision of information is poor .
For example , many fingers are being pointed at cargo flights .
Cargo flights generate neither more nor less noise than passenger flights .
The amount of noise depends exclusively on the type of aircraft , not on what is being transported : a cargo Boeing 747 produces much less noise than a passenger Boeing 727 .
Consequently , a thorough knowledge of the facts is necessary even for debating purposes .
Then the legislative framework is also fairly complicated .
Here , we have an example of the application of the principle of subsidiarity in its entirety , even extending beyond the European Union , for the standards are established by the International Civil Aviation Organisation , which is a supranational body .
I welcomed the Commission ' s remarks regarding a European legislative framework .
For example , as has already been said , we need to establish what is intended by the word " night " .
Does night start at 10 p.m. or at midnight ?
Does it end at 5 a.m. or at 7 a.m. ?
This is something to be taken into consideration .
Another factor is the involvement of the local authorities , for every airport is different .
The noise impact differs even within the same airport according to the runway used .
For example , runway 25 of Fiumicino airport is next to the sea and hardly disturbs anybody at all , whereas if an aircraft were to take off from the right-hand section of runway 16 it would disturb half a million people or so from the Ostia and Fiumicino communities .
Local authority involvement is therefore important , although , I must stress , it needs to be within a general European legislative framework .
In my opinion , it would , on the whole , be feasible to eliminate night flights and ban them , although , I must stress , this must be done by taking specific local factors and also the type of aircraft used into consideration .
It should not make much difference whether an aircraft has a built-in silencer or whether its silencer is fitted subsequently : the engine noise can be measured and an assessment made of whether the aeroplane is excessively noisy or not , irrespective of the date of manufacture or the type of silencer used .
In any case , I would stress that we must not just concentrate on the individual factors in isolation but view the issue as a whole .
Mr President , noise pollution caused by aircraft is mainly a problem to those living near airports .
This is , in principle , a localised problem which should , as such , be solved by the competent authority of the relevant airport .
Different airports are already working on this by issuing flight bans to the noisiest aircraft or by banning certain night flights .
This solution , however , is not sufficient , since aircraft are produced on a global market .
Competition hinders such solutions , and creates the side-effect that more noise will be produced at other airports .
In short , we are simply shifting the problem .
Technically speaking , the problem is not that enormous .
By using state-of-the-art technology , it is possible to produce aircraft which generate six times less noise than aircraft thirty years ago .
Since the life-span of aircraft is about thirty years , the effect of these technical improvements are not felt for a long while .
The question is whether this long wait is desirable . I do not think so .
If we actually want to do something about aircraft noise , technical improvements will need to be implemented more quickly .
The extra cost involved will obviously be passed on to the user , who will pay more for their airline tickets .
The user should be fully aware of the actual costs of flying , including all environmental costs .
For the sake of fair competition , this should be done on a global scale .
The proposal from the resolution , which , among other things , presses for making information on the level of noise pollution around different airports available in a readily understood format , is a step in the right direction .
I also back the other proposals to reduce noise pollution .
It should be clear that , ideally , the actual environmental costs should be brought into the equation .
Mr President , Commissioner , your comments this morning on both subjects showed that we need not only rapid data highways , but also efficient air transport in Europe to remain competitive .
It is obvious that this will lead , in our densely populated States , to increasing noise pollution for citizens .
I support all those who have stated here that solutions can only be found jointly .
I come from the region around the Cologne-Bonn airport , an extremely densely populated region .
We have tried to restrict the noise pollution for citizens .
Every major attempt was simply answered by the companies with the announcement that they would switch to another airport .
The airports of Liège and Maastricht are within a radius of almost 200 km .
The companies are really not bothered about where they start and land their cargo planes , in particular .
For this reason , I would like to urgently request that we find joint solutions which achieve both objectives : a competitive airline industry in Europe and adequate noise protection for our citizens in the vicinity of airports .
However , I have surmised , Commissioner , from the Commission ' s report that some basic conditions for this have still not been met .
Firstly , it is obvious from the report that there is still no common method for calculating aircraft noise and , secondly , there is still no common method for monitoring basic data .
I therefore come to my request : you have proposed specific measures to the Commission in your report .
You have also set deadlines : the year 2001 for expiry of the old specification on noise emissions for old aircraft equipment .
You have announced a strategy , which I welcome , for how the burden on particularly busy airports can be eased on the basis of objective data .
However , you have not set any deadline for this .
My request to the Commission is that , together with the regions , you set deadlines , in the interests of both the companies and the citizens affected , which we can all work towards in a team effort .
Commissioner , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this matter of night flights and , more generally , noise pollution from aircraft taking off and landing at airport complexes is an extremely sensitive issue and embraces several areas of concern which require attention .
This sensitive issue takes us back to a recurring problem faced by all decision makers and politicians , whether they are local , national or , nowadays , European , and that is the problem of how to reconcile economic development with the need to safeguard the health and the standard of living of our fellow citizens .
In effect , this embraces the three fields of technological , economic and regulatory considerations .
Although progress has unquestionably been made on the technological side , further progress is still essential in order to renew fleets of aircraft , particularly freight aircraft .
The European Union must continue with its endeavours in the areas of research and technological development , equip itself with the means it needs to produce the standards envisaged , and give financial and technological support to all studies and programmes which make shared information available and which facilitate the modernisation of equipment with a view to limiting environmental disamenities .
However , at the same time , we have to take into account the economic aspect of the issue .
Airport complexes are hives of intense economic activity and appeal ; our intention to preserve jobs , reasserted in Lisbon , means that we do not have the right to avoid this issue .
Any use of existing structures and the establishment of new infrastructures must conform to the legal instruments - the area-specific land use plans and national and regional development rules .
Finally , in terms of regulation , in the absence of standardised European rules , strict harmonisation of air traffic control and restrictions must be achieved in order to prevent dumping within the Union , a phenomenon familiar to us , which is governed by decisions taken simply at local level .
We cannot allow this to continue . The citizens are waiting for decisions to be implemented within the relatively near future .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to make a few brief comments with regard to our joint resolution .
We are discussing night flights , noise pollution and especially sleeping disorders .
As a researcher who has examined the social effects of industrial labour , especially shift work , for years , I appreciate - and this has also been adequately proven scientifically - the seriousness of sleeping disorders and lack of sleep .
Against this background , the entire discussion is relatively serious , bearing in mind Mrs Oomen-Ruijten ' s comments on " the brink of the night " and the way we are discussing noise pollution , and the lack of harmonisation .
In the foreseeable future , we will discuss at great length the more general aspects of aviation and the environment within the committee , including the common noise classification schedules , how to provide economic incentives in connection with noise and how to achieve aircraft noise standards .
However , one thing is still lacking from the discussion , namely that we will need the political courage to talk about restrictions , bans if necessary , for night flights during a certain period and reach common agreements on this .
Mr President , it is certainly not a coincidence that so many Belgian Members have taken the floor during this debate today .
The problem of night flights in a densely populated country such as Belgium is a very topical and extremely sensitive issue , especially since the Belgian Transport Minister issued a ban on night flights in Zaventem which , following a hefty row within the government , was withdrawn soon after .
I believe that Mrs Van Brempt has outlined the dilemma very expertly .
Tens of thousands of people live and sleep a stone ' s throw away from the runway .
15 % of the population are suffering as a result of the noise pollution generated by aircraft .
Medical reports have shown that people living near airports are having to deal with health problems of an unacceptably serious nature , such as insomnia , high blood pressure , stress and depression .
Needless to say , it makes no sense to ban night flights in one Member State alone .
Businesses , such as DHL , will then simply move to airports in other Member States .
As a result , we are at risk of finding ourselves in a downward spiral , where the citizens ' quality of life is pulled down with it .
Mr Sterckx has already pointed out , with good reason , that measures to reduce the effects for those living near airports should not promote distortion of competition .
The increase in the number of noisy , obsolete and unlisted Russian aircraft , in particular , is the cause of unacceptable noise pollution , not to mention the risks for the environment and safety which such aircraft pose .
In my town , Ostend , where the airport is situated in the centre of town , there have already been over 50 incidents , so far only leading to material damage .
I therefore concur with Mrs Oomen , who advocates uniform framework legislation , which will reconcile the economic and employment interests with the care for public health , the environment and safety and which will apply to all airports within Europe .
The much publicised and promised common framework for noise classification of aircraft could not be here soon enough , Commissioner , especially given the Russian situation .
I also hope that the European Commission will not budge one inch from the position it has adopted with regard to hushkits and will not succumb to American pressure .
Finally , I would like to ask that special attention be paid to the specific problems which smaller , regional airports have to contend with .
They are fighting to remain profitable and are even unable to make the necessary investments to reduce noise pollution .
This is why I would ask Europe , where possible , to help out in order to guarantee the viability of airports , but especially the quality of life of those living near them .
Mr President , I have taken careful note of all the comments made by the Members and I will pass them on to the Commissioner responsible for transport .
Parliament ' s message was very clear , as might have been expected , for most of the Members who spoke represent the interests of citizens who live very close to airports .
On the other hand , it was pointed out , and very rightly so , that airports represent major economic factors and that , if we start to impose bans , there is a serious danger that this will have adverse implications for employment .
Of course , the question which arises is how to reconcile economics with preserving the standard of living .
Clearly , the level of noise pollution from night flights varies from one airport to another , according to the topography of the areas and population density .
This is why , for the time being , the Commission is not going to place a blanket ban on these flights .
Moreover , very few airports in the Community impose a full curfew : Paris-Orly is the only one to impose a total ban on night flights .
Munich and Berlin-Tegel limit night operations to mail freight .
A general ban on night flights would therefore seriously disrupt air transport activities .
Most large airports place restrictions on the use of the noisiest types of aircraft or employ economic instruments in order to limit their use .
There are , effectively , a number of alternatives to banning night flights used by various airports , all compatible with Community legislation on market access .
A notable example is the use of a noise quota system such as that employed by the London airports , or a ban on using the noisiest runways during the night , which one very well-informed Member referred to .
In addition , the use of flight paths which generate less noise pollution , avoiding sensitive districts during take-off and landing , and the application of differentiated airport tax , calculated according to the environmental characteristics of the aircraft , are some of the solutions currently employed .
The question now arises of how to proceed in the future , and , most importantly , when to act .
Pages 34 and 35 of the communication on air transport and the environment contain an action plan setting forth a precise schedule .
I will not bore you with the details .
You have the documents in your possession .
The Commission has absolutely no intention of postponing decisions on this matter indefinitely .
It has committed itself to precise deadlines .
With regard to the regulatory framework , we aim to present it at the end of this year , or early next year at the very latest .
This harmonised framework could include common reference points for measuring the operational noise levels to be limited or prohibited , a provision allowing operators sufficient time to come into line with the new operational restrictions and the establishment of a right for people living near airports to request consultation and negotiations on noise reduction objectives .
The economic measures proposed also provide for differentiated treatment of airlines according to the characteristics of their aircraft .
In addition , the Commission envisages the development of a code of conduct based on current best practice .
I would also like to reply to the question on the drafting of a new noise standard .
The ICAO is currently working on drafting a new standard , and this is long overdue , for the present standards date from 1977 - ages ago .
Given the long life of an aircraft - thirty years - clearly , the effects of a new standard will only be seen in the long term .
This is why we are insisting on the fact that these new standards should be sufficiently ambitious to counteract the environmental effect of the fast-growing air industry .
In the short term , the Commission considers that rules stipulating the progressive , but rapid withdrawal of the oldest and noisiest aircraft are the best solution , especially for airports whose capacity is restricted by environmental constraints .
And the best way to ensure the environmental efficiency of these rules is to act at a worldwide level within the framework of the International Civil Aviation Organisation , as the Commission is doing , in tandem with decision making at a purely European level .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
Mr President , in principle , we should proceed to the vote .
It appears that the joint motion for a resolution is approved by all the political Groups .
There are therefore no complications and there are no amendments .
I would , however , like to request that the vote be deferred , if only out of a desire for consistency with this morning ' s events , and also because it would be fitting for a resolution as important as this to be voted in by more than 40 or 50 Members .
Mr Lannoye , I understand that you are moving that the vote be adjourned .
You know very well that this motion is to be made either by 32 Members or by a group .
Are you moving this on behalf of your Group ?
Mr President , I am , of course , making this request on behalf of my Group .
In this case , Rule 146 of the Rules of Procedure applies .
This means that one speaker in favour and one speaker against may take the floor in respect of Mr Lannoye ' s motion to adjourn the vote , and the majority here in the Chamber will then decide .
- ( PT ) Mr President , I would like to support this suggestion . I do not wish to be associated with the sabotage that was perpetrated today .
I think that the person who decided on this course of action should have said whatever he wanted to , but he ought to have allowed the sitting to continue normally . He ought to show respect to his fellow Members such as myself , a Portuguese person , who will put up with a lot , but I am here to work .
I do not understand at all how , after what happened , this House can have chosen not to vote on the resolutions on Ethiopia , which are urgent , and have allowed itself to proceed to other votes .
I find this quite incomprehensible and I think that it makes this Parliament and us look ridiculous .
This is a matter which has extremely serious political repercussions !
This was the speaker against .
Is there anyone who would like to speak in favour of the motion ?
I am giving the floor to Mr Blokland .
Mr President , I would like to back Mr Lannoye ' s motion .
I think that if there are fewer than fifty Members in the Chamber , it is unfair to vote on such a significant issue .
This is why it is important that this Parliament make a clear statement , and a clear statement is only possible if a large majority of this Parliament is present , and not just fifty Members .
We have now had a speaker in favour and a speaker against .
We will now proceed to vote on Mr Lannoye ' s request to adjourn the vote on this item on the agenda .
( The request was rejected ) We shall now proceed to the vote .
Joint motion for a resolution on night flights and noise pollution in the vicinity of airports .
Mr President , various Members , such as Mr Beysen , who has disappeared and reappeared in the meantime , and Mrs Gebhardt , have already remarked that there are fewer Members in the Chamber than earlier this morning .
It is clear to us too that there are now even less than half of the Members here than there were earlier on .
The Members who have left are a mixture of Members who supported me in my request for a quorum and those who heavily protested against it .
It seems to me to be a good thing that this debate has got under way and I would like to extend warm thanks to the Members who supported me in this .
I also welcome the fact that , clearly , the choice is not about retaining or abolishing Fridays , but very much about improving the present situation .
Mrs Buitenweg , we are voting at the moment .
We will not enter into a debate on Friday sittings .
If you have a request on a point of order , I would ask you to submit it now , if not , I will now proceed to the vote .
Mr President , I accept the vote which has just been held and that a decision has been taken to vote now .
I would like to point out , however , that the voting will be by roll-call .
This is very important because it will then become clear how many Members were present and , more importantly , how many have left .
Ladies and gentlemen , we will now attempt to hold an orderly vote .
This seems to me to be in the interest of the good Rules of this House .
We are going by the Rules .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , I would like to say something about the Rules of Procedure which I think is very important given that the MEP , when she asked for a quorum , cited that it is her right under the Rules of Procedure .
That is correct , even though I do not approve of her behaviour politically .
But she has now said something which must be objected to in respect of the Rules of Procedure , namely that we will now see from the numbers how the importance of this vote is to be assessed .
I do not consider this acceptable .
Under our Rules of Procedure a vote is fully valid if it has materialised in a proper fashion , even if those who requested that the quorum be determined were no longer able to do this because there were no longer enough of them .
Even then a vote is fully valid .
Mr Posselt , you are absolutely right .
It is a fact that all votes are valid , irrespective of the number of those participating .
The legality of this vote is thus beyond dispute .
Mr President , we all have experience of trade union movements , national parliaments and so forth .
The reason for rules of procedure is that they guarantee democratic principles and obviously if , at some time , someone wishes to highlight a particular political problem , then they are perfectly within their rights to do so .
If , however , a right is somehow abused , I am not sure if that abuse has anything to do with democratic ethics .
I am speaking on a more general note here .
In other words I am not sure if , in the final analysis , it has more to do with being obstructive than with proving that there is indeed a genuine problem .
What causes me particular regret is that we all have experience of national parliaments and so on and this sort of abuse rarely takes place .
Mr President , I have already asked for the floor four times this morning in order to point out to those Members who expressed irritation at this morning ' s events that , ever since the first day of the new parliamentary term , we have requested more clarity regarding Fridays , i.e. to have either a proper meeting or no meeting at all .
I think that the problem could be solved very quickly if we could schedule the votes for the end of the session , like all the other days , and ask for everyone to sign the attendance register at the end of the day .
It would then become clear if we would be prepared to consider this a proper meeting or not .
I therefore recommend that this problem be raised in later proceedings so as solve this Friday problem once and for all .
Mr Meijer , I would thank you and other Members for their creativity in coming up with solutions to this problem .
This will not help us any further this morning .
All that remains for us to do this morning is to apply the Rules of Procedure in an honest and transparent way and , as such , I am at your service and at the service of the Rules of Procedure .
Needless to say , I will refer this morning ' s course of events to the President and the Bureau , upon which the competent parliamentary committee will deal with this matter further .
This is clear enough , I think .
I would now like to proceed with the discussion of the next item on the agenda , so that we can debate its content .
Let us move on to the next item .
The forestry sector after the December 1999 storms
The next item is the joint debate on the following oral questions to the Commission :
( B5-0217 / 2000 ) by Mr Savary and Mrs Gebhardt , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the problems in the forestry sector following the storms in December 1999 ;
( B5-0219 / 2000 ) by Mr Daul , Mr Martin and Mr Redondo Jiménez , on behalf of the Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats .
Mr President , I welcome this point of order , for foresters and the forestry sector cannot wait for the outcome of these rather irregular debates which can only have one effect today , and that is to send out a message proclaiming that the European Parliament is made up of absentee Members , whereas most of our fellow Members , including those here today , are certainly not relaxing in front of their televisions but are working in the field .
The issue is wider than that .
In reality , this is nothing more than a feature of the anti-Strasbourg sniping which has developed .
Let us be completely clear about this and not try to pretend it is otherwise or to evade the issue .
Thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak on the forestry sector .
As it happens , we already expressed our sympathy , as we are wont to do , in a resolution of 20 January 2000 , and requested that the Commission supply us with certain information and undertake to help those of our citizens - and they were numerous - who were in difficulties , for this disaster affected the whole of Europe .
Now , four months later , we are sufficiently removed from events to be able to learn both from what has been done and what has not , and we are expecting a tangible response from the Commission to this question .
Did we actually intervene ?
Did we employ the means available to us ?
This time , we are not claiming appropriations for exceptional circumstances under the " natural disasters " heading .
The sector is simply assessing the extent of its difficulties and the resulting risks - economic risks , security risks , that is to say fire risks , and also risks of non-reforestation , for if it is not possible to remove the wood in the coming weeks , many foresters would prefer to leave them where they are , and then the forestry sector will be in permanent difficulties , and with it the primary processing industry .
Four months on , the purpose of this oral question is therefore , Commissioners , to inform you , first and foremost , that the condition of the forestry sector is critical .
In the space of two days , 193 million cubic metres of timber have flooded the market .
The first question is that of price control and regulation of the market , since the cost of removing some low-quality species is now more than the market is willing to pay .
We are familiar with the regulation of the market in the context of the common agricultural policy .
We are not asking you to include timber in that policy , but it appears that Europe could have employed equivalent measures to assist the timber market during this exceptional crisis . It could have temporarily regulated the timber market for a period of several months .
The question has been put to you .
What action are you going to take ?
Secondly , what have you done and what have you achieved with the means available ?
I refer to the means which allow us to grant exemptions from the competition laws to help exporters , for the cost of transportation of timber which has been exposed to fungal or parasite risk is totally unacceptable , provided that there is a buyer .
If we want to support the market , we must support the transportation necessary for export to places further afield .
Is the Commission prepared to take steps to do this ?
To what extent has it implemented Article 87 ( 2 ) of the Treaty , which allows it to grant exemptions ?
To what extent , if at all , has it approached the WTO to request it to grant derogations ?
What has it done to set up means of remedying the natural disasters affecting the forestry sector ?
These are not virtual instruments .
We have rules , such as Article 30 of Regulation 1257 / 1999 .
If it has not done so , what action does it intend to take in the forthcoming weeks ?
The matter is urgent .
Finally , I call for the DOCUP development plans to give unequivocal consideration to the forestry sector and the timber industry .
Mr President , I would like to inform the honourable Member that the Commission is quite aware of the extensive problems caused by the hurricanes at the beginning of December 1999 in Denmark and Sweden and at the end of December 1999 in France and Germany , the devastating effect on the entire forestry industries of these countries and the implications for those employed in the industry .
May I refer you to Mr Barnier ' s speeches at the plenary sitting of 18 January 2000 , when he stressed that the Commission would willingly employ every available means to assist the Member States .
Nevertheless , with regard to forest damage , I must also remind you that the European Parliament , notably in its resolution of 31 January 1997 on the forestry strategy of the European Union , and also the Council of the European Union , have repeatedly stressed that the Treaty does not lay down any specific competence for a Union forestry policy .
Thus , the European Union does not have the necessary means to intervene in the way stipulated by the two resolutions .
In effect , timber is not among the products listed in Annex I of the Treaty . There is no legal framework and timber cannot therefore be governed by a specific market policy , even temporarily .
Although such actions are theoretically possible under WTO regulations , well-defined , solid legal , economic and commercial grounds would be necessary to persuade our trading partners to accept them .
To date , the Commission has not received a detailed analysis justifying its taking such a step .
I will come back to this point in a moment .
It is therefore , first and foremost , national aid to the timber industry which is the most appropriate means , at national , regional or local level , of supporting the worst affected forestry sites in the industry , and the Member States have to decide on the procedures for providing this aid .
The Commission is therefore currently assessing the national aid systems notified to it by the national governments for alleviating the effects of hurricanes on the forestry sector according to the effects on competition at European level .
The departments of the Commission are assessing these aid systems , particularly in the light of Article 87 ( 2b ) of the Treaty , which governs the compatibility of the aid envisaged by the Member States in the event of natural disasters .
The aid programmes notified by the French Government do , in fact , contain a general measure supporting the windfall transportation which may result in some of the timber being transported to countries outside the Union .
The Commission stresses that Article 87 , paragraph 2b of the Treaty does not constitute an exemption from GATT regulations as such , and we and our legal departments are assessing the compatibility of this measure with the Treaty on the basis of recent information .
The French authorities may be requested to provide further information .
With regard to the joint financing of aid programmes proposed by Member States under Article 30 of Regulation EC / 1257 / 99 on support for rural development from the European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund ( EAGGF ) , I would further stress that the Commission is prepared to be extremely flexible .
However , it is first of all up to the Member States to amend their initial programmes .
In the meantime , two Member States , including France , have presented their adapted programmes , which now include a substantial section on bolstering the forestry industry following the storms at the end of 1999 .
In this context , actions are proposed for the removal , storage , transportation , protection and replenishment of the devastated forests in order to support the sector .
These dossiers are currently under negotiation between the Commission and the Member States , but I can state here and now that the Commission ' s attitude is favourable .
I have received five motions for resolutions in accordance with Rule 42 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The vote will take place after the debate .
Mr President , first of all , I would like to congratulate you on the way you handled the debate this morning .
You encountered a storm and weathered it without the help of the Commission .
But Commissioner , I would also like , and I feel that this is essential , the institutions of the European Union to bear witness to the solidarity which unites the Member States , in particular in the event of exceptional disasters such as the storms of 26 December last which caused such unprecedented damage to a number of forest regions in France , Germany and Austria .
There is an urgent need for us to begin using the instruments available to the Union to assist the affected regions and support the individuals and companies concerned . The need for our support is all the more pressing given that transportation , storage and forest exploitation cannot be delayed without serious consequences in terms of both the quality of the products and the restoration and protection of forest ecosystems .
Thus , in the Alsace region alone , more than 6.5 million cubic metres of woodland has been devastated , which is essentially equivalent to one to three years ' harvests .
Clearly , the influx of timber onto the market will send prices plummeting and so further damage the industry ' s economic operators .
Once again , the way that the sector is structured may facilitate the search for joint solutions between the upstream operators which manage forestry resources and the downstream operators which exploit them .
The inter-trade system introduced in France can certainly play a major part in the search for , and development of , these joint solutions .
Indeed , since they are designed not to protect the interests of any one section of the industry , they facilitate the protection of the industry as a whole , promote the timber sector and ensure respect for the great internal balances which make it possible to consolidate the whole .
Although regional in scale , inter-trade bodies also have a local impact and are immediately efficacious in critical situations such as that of our forestry companies and the timber industry .
We should therefore favour direct contacts with potential partners , even more so given that inter-trade bodies are also the consultative partners of local governments and national authorities with regard to defining forestry policies and hence with regard to the search for immediate solutions to crises .
They are also able to identify bottlenecks in the implementation of safeguard programmes .
This is why I ask you not to disregard direct consultation with the industry ' s operators in your consultation mechanism .
Moreover , regulations can be a constraint which varies according to the State in question , as is , notably , the case with regard to grain storage , in respect of the impermeability of the ground , the water sampling limits , which are set at 5 % of the low water discharge in France and 30 % in Germany and waste disposal monitoring .
I therefore feel that exceptional measures should also be implemented .
The scale of the disaster shows that the aid pledged by the State or confirmed at local level will not be sufficient to cover the damage reported .
It is therefore essential to be able to draw on the Structural Funds to finance special measures for forests and the timber industry in the case of disasters in objective 2 or former objective 5b areas .
The same applies to rural development measures and other , more specific , economic or environmental programmes , in parallel with actions for using up workable timber , which represents about 50 % of the windfall .
It would also be desirable to promote incentive measures for using the poorer quality wood for energy production .
However , the urgency of the situation calls for flexible , simplified procedures to financially supplement the provisions already introduced by the Member States
I therefore call upon the Commission to seek consensus with the industry as a whole and the Member States concerned in order to find effective , immediate solutions , for the greater the consensus , the more effective the solutions will be .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I experienced the storms of Christmas day 1999 in my home city of Paris and only managed with extreme difficulty to return on the same day to Germany , where the forests were unrecognisable .
Further south-west , in France , my parents spent many days in the dim light of the petroleum lamp which I had given to them once as a present .
We do not know when and in what form the next disaster will strike .
Permit me , therefore , to say something about the current problems and to expand on one aspect of the comments of my fellow MEP and friend , Gilles Savary .
It concerns point 8 of the joint motion for a resolution in which we ask the Commission to create instruments which make it possible to take rapid and effective action within the European Union if we are faced with a crisis situation as a result of accidents or natural disasters .
We presently have neither the money nor the infrastructure for this .
We should not in future rely on cross-border neighbourly aid as in the case of the storms at the end of the year .
It was offered on a voluntary basis in an exemplary manner .
It is also a healthy and important expression of solidarity .
However , in itself it does not constitute a European solution .
The European Union must take full responsibility for its citizens .
The Commission must , therefore , quickly rack its brains to find instruments for rapid and effective emergency aid .
We will expect proposals for solutions soon .
We need have no qualms about making these proposals unconventional and bold .
There will certainly be no lack of support from the European Parliament .
The time has come to move on .
But first we must sort out the current consequences of the Christmas storms .
This involves three things in particular .
Firstly : we must not let the timber market collapse and must , therefore , directly intervene on behalf of the many small and medium-sized enterprises .
Secondly : we must , as an exception , also support necessary transportation and exports of valuable timber to third countries .
The Commission must urgently discuss the approval of export subsidies with the WTO .
Thirdly : we must do everything we can to counter the risks of fungus , pest and fire so that the damage does not become even worse .
Commissioner , when you say that national aid is the important thing now , then I would say to you that this also means that , in this instance , you do not want to organise the common European market .
Commissioner , Mr President , it is true that your news and your message are extremely disappointing when we think of the emotional concern shown at the damage caused by the storms last December .
Mr Barnier was very emphatic in his speech , assuring us that the European Union was , in effect , going to do something to help the victims .
By victims I mean the small-scale foresters who have been ruined , but I am also referring to the small seaside businesses who now have to face the influx of tourists .
Well , now we know that forests do not fall within the remit of the European Union .
So we are going to use part of the Structural Funds to finance emergency aid in the event of natural disasters .
Yet we are well aware that this will take time .
And , in this regard , may I say that the European Union ' s policy consists of robbing Peter to pay Paul .
We cannot support this policy , for it amounts to depriving some to provide for others , to the detriment of future projects .
In my opinion , this is really not good enough , and we expect tangible measures from the Commission .
The citizens are calling for immediate action .
Mr President , the document on the difficulties faced by the forestry sector following the storms in December 1999 only refers to the damage caused to the wooded areas in order to better illustrate the price drops in the timber sector and the implications for foresters and timber exporters .
The resolutions deal mainly with the regulation of the timber market and export subsidies .
For my part , I would like to speak up on behalf of forestry workers , who receive no mention at all , even though it is their efforts which are keeping the timber sector going .
The storms were more than just an environmental disaster for all of us and an economic problem for the profiteers of the timber sector .
They have resulted in a sharp deterioration in the working conditions of foresters and lumberjacks , whose jobs are extremely dangerous at the best of times with the very highest accident rate which will continue to rise .
The discomfort and danger involved in their profession is illustrated by the fact that there were over 100 casualties in the 1990 storms in Germany .
The forestry workers ' salary is shamefully low - a mere 6900 francs .
They are calling for a decent salary which offsets the risks involved in their job .
They are demanding to be able to retire at 55 and calling for an improvement in their working conditions , which are still antiquated and result in the physical deterioration and sometimes death of a number of workers each year .
We support these legitimate claims .
Mr President , in relation to the storms which occurred last December , the Community did not match up to our expectations during the initial emergency period and now it is late in fulfilling its promises of aid .
The Commission has a duty to learn the lessons of the storm disaster , and strengthen the effectiveness of Community texts .
Between the initial emergency period and the current challenges , with problems in the transportation , storage and sale of wood , there is a chronological gap corresponding to a gap in institutional support .
This must be remedied and the States concerned must be awarded logistical support in the follow-up to the initial emergency period .
In its resolution last January , Parliament asked the Commission to submit practical proposals if it were found that the funds available for aid were insufficient .
So what has become of these famous practical proposals ?
The Commission should use these proposals to prioritise its reaction to the slump in wood sales , for what we had feared is actually taking place , and it is becoming impossible to sell wood .
And what measures has the Commission taken or planned to promote the immediate cultivation of damaged plots of land , without which the effective reconstruction of our forests cannot begin .
Sadly , one merit of this ordeal is that it will have reminded us that wood is an industrial raw material , one that is , furthermore , essentially renewable .
The sustainable and efficient management of our forests requires an economically viable forest .
Similarly , only sustainable forestry can provide a proper foundation for a competitive wood industry , while making a crucial contribution to the development of rural areas .
The Member States are , and must continue to be , the main operators in forestry policy in Europe .
This must not , however , stop Europe pursuing the coordinated management of forestry issues .
The sometimes extremely binding regulations governing the single market apply to forestry products .
In return the Community must provide support for these products , especially at times of crisis .
Community action in favour of the forestry sector is appropriate inasmuch as it creates added value for the national action which has been undertaken .
This is an ideal justification for the principle of subsidiarity , for instance in matters of protection against atmospheric pollution and forest fires , or forestry certification , and also in matters of support for the implementation of a world convention on forests .
I support the Community initiatives in favour of the tropical forests , but I am astounded that there is not the same enthusiasm to come to the aid of our own devastated forests .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is now some three months since Hurricane Lothar caused devastating damage to forests in Europe , and in particular France and Baden-Württemberg .
In Baden-Württemberg alone the accumulation of storm wood runs to about 25 million solid cubic metres .
This equates to three times the average annual felling and this has already led to 30 % lower timber prices .
Just the cost of remedying the damage in Baden-Württemberg , the area for which I can speak as the delegate , runs to about DM 1.5 billion , of which DM 300 million are needed simply for reforestation .
However , Hurricane Lothar is not a problem specific to Baden-Württemberg .
France and other EU States have also been greatly affected .
Nevertheless , the Commission has so far refused to make additional budgetary allocations available and prefers to cite , in this instance represented by Mrs Schreyer , the fact that final agreement has already been reached in the European Parliament on Budget 2000 and that the requirement for additional funds should be covered by the Member State in question from the funds already allocated .
However , the redistribution of funds was made subject to approval and this approval has not yet been given .
I consider the argumentation of Mrs Schreyer to be somewhat cynical when you consider that , only a few days later , she announced that the additional financial requirement of EUR 300 million for the EU Balkan commitment , which is undoubtedly important , would be covered by EUR 300 million from the agriculture budget without the farmers noticing it , and this includes forest owners .
I would like to stress once again that we are dealing here with extremely long-term damage which may also have ecological implications .
Tidying up , storage and reforestation all involve intense physical work .
Commissioner , I know what I am talking about .
I am a farmer .
I have seen how the hurricane took the roof off our stable and I have seen the state our private woods are in .
We were able to put things right ourselves but , by and large , this is not the case for all areas , all persons , all communities .
You can see that .
But that this is done quickly and efficiently and , above all , is sustained long term is an ecological necessity .
During his visit to the Black Forest on 16 February , the Commissioner for Agriculture , Rural Development and Fisheries , Dr Fischler , indicated broad flexibility within the existing financial framework for measures for rural development .
He indicated , as you have today , Commissioner , that you are willing to give consideration to , to help ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , the natural disaster which overtook European countries was tragic .
I am in complete agreement with the Members who have spoken on the matter and , believe me , the Commission would love to be able to do something about it . Yet neither the Treaties nor the budgetary regulations provide for this possibility .
As I said before , no Community framework exists which would allow the Commission to adopt initiatives to provide direct aid to the forestry sector .
Moreover , the same applies within the framework of Regulation 1257 / 99 .
It is the Member State itself which has to adopt the necessary initiatives and provide for appropriate aid .
According to the principle of subsidiarity , the Commission cannot direct resources from the rural development programme towards channels supporting the timber industry following storm damage .
The Commission cannot apply competition regulations to authorise national aid or joint financing initiatives under the provisions of Regulation 1257 / 99 .
Moreover , negotiations are in progress with the Member States and I have made it quite clear that , within its institutional and legal capabilities , the Commission is doing everything in its power and more , and is being as flexible as it possibly can .
It is unfortunate that the institutional authorities have decided that forestry policy is to be governed by subsidiarity , and that it does not fall within the competences of the Commission but is wholly the responsibility of the Member States .
This is something which the Commission cannot change for the moment for that would mean amending the Treaty , although reform of the Treaties is currently being discussed .
I therefore call upon all Members who are convinced that subsidiarity should not apply to forestry issues but should be the remit of the Community to make representations to their national governments to this effect .
Commissioner , you have been extremely active this morning .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Joint motion for a resolution replacing the resolutions on the economic effects of the recent storms on the forestry sector in Europe
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Declarations of vote and other declarations
Mr President , I voted in favour of this resolution and I am glad that those behind the sabotage which , from 9 o ' clock this morning , prevented us from carrying out our work properly and voting are no longer present to turn this Parliament into an undignified circus .
Imagine if other citizens were to go about their work in the same way as those delegates who think that they have a four-day week here , even though the five-day week for the plenary meeting was agreed in Strasbourg .
This Parliament has actually agreed , and I also say this to the delegates over there who want a democratic vote , that Friday will be a session day in Strasbourg .
It is indeed a strange concept of democracy , and this also applies to the others who instigated this circus , if the opponents of Strasbourg are now using genuinely dirty tricks to sabotage Fridays .
I was a Member of this Parliament 35 years ago and in all my time I have never seen such abuse of the Rules .
One really should expect delegates to respect a democratic decision reached by majority , such as that concerning our session calendar , even if it does not suit them .
But they are bad losers and they really do not care that they have prevented important resolutions being taken for the citizens of the EU and , in particular , those who are starving in Ethiopia .
This latter point is especially grave and reprehensible .
I hope that those who instigated this procedural circus will be punished by the voters .
In the interest of forest owners , including in my own State where , to be fair , the last storm disaster was not as devastating as here , for example , in Alsace , I hope that measures will be taken by the EU , as proposed here , in order , above all , to prevent small and medium-sized enterprises going under ....
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , I would very quickly like to go back to the events which took place during the explanation of votes or during the point of order this morning .
I am very new to this Parliament and I would just like to express my deep disappointment at the incident .
Of course , I respect the Rules of Procedure and democracy , but the strategic , political action of a mere forty or so Members has prevented us from voting on Ethiopia .
On behalf of this Parliament , I would like to apologise to the people of Ethiopia , to the men , women and children who are suffering in a tragic situation and in relation to whom Parliament was prevented from adopting a position this morning .
I am extremely concerned .
We were able to vote on the last two items , which were also urgent , but , in all honesty , I would have preferred to have voted for the people of Ethiopia and to have lent them the support of this Parliament .
Once again , I apologise to the people of Ethiopia .
Mr President , I would like to support what Mr Daul has just said .
For me also the timber trade is something of great importance , but then our aid to Ethiopia is equally important .
For this reason I would like , and I attach great importance to this since you did not previously allow me to speak again when Mrs Buitenweg falsely quoted me , once more to clearly ask : where are those who this morning arranged this whole theatre ?
Why are they not here now at the end of the session , proving that the work of Parliament is genuinely important to them ?
That is the real question .
Mr President , like everyone else , I am deeply concerned about the situation we have landed up in .
I find it disagreeable to have taken part in the votes we have had when there are so few of us .
In actual fact , I abstained from voting in all our votes this afternoon because I did not think that I wanted to be involved and participate in making decisions which are as illegitimate as I believe they must be when there are so few of us .
I support the protest action which has been taken here today .
I am a new Member and therefore a little shocked when I hear that the unsatisfactory state of affairs which prevails on Fridays has been going on for years , unchanged .
If that is the case , vigorous protests are certainly needed so that we can bring about a change , for matters cannot continue like this .
We shall be a laughing stock throughout Europe .
I notice that , today , we are concluding this sitting with approximately fewer than 40 Members here to make decisions .
It is disgraceful .
Mr President , firstly , I voted in favour of the last motion and the amendments thereto .
That was the formal declaration of vote .
I would like to rid certain people here of the misconception that those who took the initiative for quorum counts are no longer present .
It is true that some have left .
But I am one of the people who took the initiative and I am still here , just as I am here every Friday .
I have noticed that some people say that there are people who are after a four-day week , but I am certainly not one of them .
I am , however , of the opinion , that we need to work a proper five-day week , which is not happening at the moment , if the number of MEPs in attendance today is anything to go by .
And this is why the problem has arisen .
If Fridays were like Tuesdays or Wednesdays , then it would not have been necessary to have this debate and the counts here today .
This will now have to be carried through to the moment at which Fridays either run in the normal way or , due to a lack of interest , they are abolished , which is once again a likely scenario .
- ( PT ) Mr President , I would firstly like to explain why I voted the way I did : I voted in favour of the joint motion for a resolution because I agree with the serious concerns and actions it puts forward , although this does not represent a change in my Group ' s position .
Our position is that we have concerns about the Union ' s courts having responsibility for forestry policy .
Nor can I fail to mention the fact , which has already been referred to here , that the saboteurs of this morning ' s sitting did not take part in the vote , and I am delighted that the PPE has suggested a nominal vote , which will clarify the matter .
There is a French saying about the arroseur arrosé - the biter being bit . Here we have the saboteur saboté - the saboteur hoist with his own petard .
It is deplorable that we have been involved in this circus .
Those concerned could have made a point of order , since it is an important issue that the Bureau and the Conference of Presidents have to address .
But they went too far . They showed no consideration for Ethiopia and sabotaged the votes .
They then suggested a nominal vote so a count could be taken .
As we can see , however , when we take a decision here on an issue related to storms , disasters or Europe ' s interests , that is , serious matters , they are no longer present .
Almost none of the 32 gladiators were present for the final vote , which is utterly deplorable and which clearly reveals the true intentions of those who destabilised this morning ' s sitting .
Mr President , I would like to say to Mr Daul and Mrs Lulling that , in debates on the Rules of Procedure , you must always bear in mind that there are also tactical and strategic aims coming into play .
It is no different for you than for those colleagues who tried what they did .
For the first time this morning I joined in the request for the quorum to be established .
I am a supporter of Strasbourg and a supporter of Fridays .
However , I am of the opinion that those who wish to ensure that the work of Parliament continues to be carried out should also be present .
I therefore thought to myself that a warning shot was in order ; what then happened I thought went too far and I did not want to fall into line because I thought that it was about Strasbourg and Fridays .
For that reason , I did not go along with it any further .
But the fact that those delegates did what they did you have to grant them .
You then have to respond accordingly .
The Rules of Procedure , and I would like to pay my respect to the President here , were sensibly interpreted this morning with great composure and great calm .
Matters proceeded as was established .
The votes which were carried out are proper votes .
They are no less valid because only a few delegates participated .
I consider that , by exhorting our colleagues , and also the Groups , to be present , we should try to rescue these Friday debates and these Friday votes and to bring about a positive outcome .
Mr President , I would first of all like to thank the President of this eventful sitting , the Members present and Mrs Reding .
Commissioner , with regard to the forestry issue , I would like to say that , although your openness has sometimes made your words difficult to accept , you have , at least , been frank , in contrast with those declarations made at the time of the incidents , which may have been rather rash .
I sincerely feel that your approach is far more beneficial to the credibility of the European Union than the tone of the declarations made when the issue first arose , which led us to believe that Europe was much more involved than it actually intended to be .
The subject of the forestry sector is now open to debate , and we must take up the issue of natural disasters as well , for we cannot endeavour to draw closer to our citizens and then explain to them that we are unable to help them when they are in trouble , while , at the same time , we are sending task forces abroad .
This is a matter of genuine symbolic and political significance .
So thank you .
I would like to express my support for the comments of Mr Daul , who worked together with Evelyne Gebhardt to draft this resolution on the timber industry , and to express my regret and shock at the fact that we have exploited the plight of the people of Ethiopia to further our petty games .
Petty games which are not acknowledged , moreover , for although , effectively , the right does exist to request that the quorum be tested and also to bring up the issue of Friday working , it is blatantly obvious that this morning ' s events were an attack by the anti-Strasbourg faction .
And , even more seriously , it appears that this incident may well be repeated every Friday .
We do , however , have one small consolation in that it will not be long before their refusal to participate affects those who were conspicuous by their absence today and who managed to derail this morning ' s sitting .
We simply need to return to the issue of the agenda again as soon as possible .
It is a well-known fact , and I am publicly admitting it before all those here today , that the Chamber is never full because Parliament ' s work is specialised .
Nevertheless , we must stop trying to hide ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , I would like to remind the House that , several months ago , Parliament rejected an amendment calling for Friday sittings during plenary sessions in Strasbourg to be abolished . At the very least , one would expect Members to abide by their vote .
This amendment was rejected by a large majority .
Therefore , we c