Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on 4 December 1997 .
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of 4 December 1997 have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , last Friday the European Council in Luxembourg approved unanimously a resolution renouncing and condemning the terrorist organization ETA , and the following day the Basque people took to the streets in mass demonstrations , demanding exactly what we are offering to the eastern European countries knocking at our door : peace , liberty and democracy .
Mr President , I would like you to make a public statement on behalf of this House , to express our support for the aspirations of the Basque people , and our sympathy for the family of José Luis Caso , who was murdered for having been democratically elected to represent Basques like himself .
Mr President , I support what Mr Galeote has just said .
I should like to add that we think murdering José Luis Caso , a simple town councillor in the small Basque town of Rentería , for the way he lived his life and represented his fellow citizens , was an attack against Spain 's democracy , the democratic institutions of the Basque Country , and the great European democracy which we are all building .
We are pleased that the European Council in Luxembourg has made such a clear statement , and we are aware , Mr President , that you have already conveyed Parliament 's condolences , and will give all the support you can to the victim 's family .
I believe Parliament is to receive a visit tomorrow from the family of the town councillor Miguel Ángel Blanco , who was murdered in Ermua , and Vice-President Cot is going to lead a meeting to provide information and support for all the victims of terrorism in Spain and Europe .
It is in that spirit that my group wishes to express its full support , and its commitment to working energetically to ensure that such acts cannot be committed in the future .
Mr President , I want to support what my colleagues have said .
On behalf of the Spanish socialists , I should like to say that the murder of Councillor Caso is an attack against democratic principles , and against the Spanish people 's attempt to construct a stable and lasting democracy . It is yet another manifestation of the totalitarianism which sometimes lurks in some of our European societies .
I should like to thank you , Mr President , for having sent our condolences . I am very pleased with the declaration made at the European Council in Luxembourg , and I hope this Parliament and our other institutions continue to support the efforts of the Spanish people to live in peace and democracy .
Thank you , Mr Medina .
Ladies and gentlemen , I think the three speakers have expressed the feelings of the whole House .
I share the same view , as I made clear at the time of the European Council declaration .
I should also like to remind you that tomorrow , at 6 p.m. , as Mr Puerta has mentioned , we will be holding a meeting which will be open to all Members of this House , to express our support for all the victims of terrorism - in Spain and in Europe as a whole - and this House 's strong will and commitment to combat terrorism in all its forms wherever it occurs .
Mr President , on Wednesday , the day after tomorrow , we will all witness the extremely significant moment when the Sakharov prize is awarded .
It is of exceptional significance this year , its tenth year , since it is the fiftieth anniversary of human rights .
In 1995 our Kurdish colleague in the Turkish parliament , Leyla Zana , was honoured with the Sakharov prize for her unrelenting struggles , on account of which she was mercilessly persecuted and incarcerated by the Turkish government .
Mr President , we recall Mrs Zana 's speech to this House on the 12 January 1996 , which was read to us by her husband because she could not be present , and which ended with the plea , " I ask for the help of the European Parliament in putting an end to the tragedy which is afflicting my people . '
Today , two years later , Leyla Zana is still in a Turkish prison , despite the fact that she has gained a reputation worldwide as a symbol of the peaceful struggle for a solution to the problem and for the survival of her people .
Mr President , since the issue of the rapprochement of Turkey with the European Union is somewhat topical , I think that today the European Council , in keeping with its principles , should request and demand from the Turkish government the immediate release of our colleague , Mrs Zana , whom we in this House honoured with the Sakharov prize .
Thank you , Mr Papakyriazis .
In any case , I should like to remind Members of this House that the best way to show support for the way Parliament awards the Sakharov prize is to show a good attendance at the partsession to be held on Wednesday at 12 noon , when this year 's prize will be presented to Salima Ghezali , in recognition of work which is similar to Leyla Zana 's .
Mr President , on a point of order : as you may know , the United States has apparently imposed a ban on the import of European beef into the United States .
This has not yet been officially confirmed but I believe it to be the case .
That , coupled with the other rumours circulating about both beef and lamb , suggests to me that it would be important for the Commission to make a statement to this House , particularly after the Council meeting today .
I wonder whether you could put that request to it at some stage this week .
It has been discussed by the Conference of Presidents .
As these are rumours rather than facts it was decided that it would be better to make a statement in January when we have all the facts and a statement by the Commission .
Mr President , without wanting to get into the substance of the debate , which would mean my getting slightly bitter , please allow me to point out that I heard this afternoon from Mrs Bonino that she is assuming she will issue a statement tomorrow evening after the Commission has met .
I gathered from the agenda that this statement will take place tomorrow evening at 9.00 p.m. , here in this House , followed by a debate on the issue .
I was proceeding from this assumption until two minutes ago , and Mrs Bonino is proceeding from this assumption too .
For this to be the case , the Rules of Procedure state that there has to be a change to the agenda , which obviously has not happened at the moment .
Oh , I beg your pardon .
I made a mistake .
In fact , the agenda states that at 9 p.m. there will be a Commission statement on beef and veal products posing a potential health risk , followed by a debate .
Allow me to correct myself .
You are right , Mrs Roth-Behrendt ; it is on the agenda and will be debated tomorrow .
Mr President , on a point of order .
I was going to make the same point .
It is right that we should have that debate at 9 o 'clock on Tuesday night , as agreed .
Mr President , rather than get into a long debate about this , could we not simply agree that the item that is scheduled for tomorrow night at 9 p.m. could cover all the aspects concerned , including lamb as well as veal and beef ?
I assume that is what the Conference of Presidents intended when they put this on the agenda .
It will depend on the Commissioner and his statement , of course .
Mr President , a statement will indeed be made tomorrow at 9 p.m. by the Commission , on beef and veal posing a potential health risk .
But what appals me , Mr President , is that this declaration will be followed by a debate , but not by the Parliament taking a position .
There will be no resolution or vote .
And there will be no resolution or vote taken on the labelling of genetically modified organisms , a matter to be debated on Friday morning .
I believe that the items contained in the statement from the Commission will be very much in earnest .
Doubtless a prohibition of imports from the United States , doubtless a modification on the prohibition on use of specified risk material , which should in theory come into force on 1 January next .
In short , matters which are of extreme importance , and it is inconceivable that the European Parliament should not take a clear position in a timely fashion , in other words , right now , and not in one or two months , when the European Parliament will be able to do no more than deplore what has already happened .
Mr Berthu , you were present at the Conference of Presidents which decided not to make any resolutions , just as I was .
The conference indeed considered that a debate was necessary , but that there would not , in all likelihood , be enough substance to justify a resolution without the appropriate committees expressing an opinion on the matter .
This was the explanation proffered to the Conference of Presidents .
You were there as I was .
I was keen to make this information available to this House .
Mr President , first of all I should like to agree with what you said about the position on this date with America , but perhaps I could help you a little bit with regard to Mr Hallam making a cheap political point .
He should know that British beef has been banned from America for a number of years and that it is his government that is causing a problem for the beef industry by refusing to revalue the ' green pound ' .
Mr Sturdy , this is not the place to discuss the internal problems of any Member State .
Mrs Roth-Behrendt , we have a very full agenda .
Please let us not waste time now in mutual recriminations .
Mr President , I do not intend to get involved in the debate .
I would just like to say something about procedure and congratulate the Conference of Presidents on its wisdom .
Last month , in November , we adopted a far-reaching resolution with very few omissions in it .
To do so again this month would not be sensible in my view .
I would ask those colleagues who deem this necessary to consider the fact that in February we will be debating the next Commission report - the first of the half-yearly reports - and will have to come to a decision on that .
That is to say , in the space of just three months , we will have more BSE resolutions to adopt .
I think that will be fun enough , so we can afford ourselves the luxury tomorrow of having a discussion that will provide us with the necessary information .
This way we can save ourselves having to detail a resolution considering the Commission 's report in February .
Mr President , I just want to say to Mr Hallam that had the government of his country observed ...
No , Mr Gallagher , there will be no further debate on that matter .
Mr President , I indicated my desire to speak at the start .
Forgive me if I do not comment on the question of British beef .
I do not want to join Mrs Roth-Behrendt in congratulating the Conference of Presidents ; on the contrary !
Tomorrow the Committee on External Economic Relations will meet , chaired by Commissioner Sir Leon Brittan .
Given the subject under discussion , it should be a matter of urgency this week .
We are now obliged to make this an informal meeting without the involvement of interpreters .
I merely wanted to protest that , while each working party and intergroup can meet here under sensible conditions , a committee discussing the sort of important matters that need to be dealt with this week , cannot !
I would ask that this way of organizing things cease .
Mr Posselt , this decision was made by the Conference of Presidents .
The decision to hold committee meetings in Brussels has been explained to the committee chairmen and to each and every one of the committees .
If you think it ought to be changed , you should approach the Conference of Presidents , but now is neither the time nor the place to make such alterations .
Mr President , I would like to ask a question on the basis of article 22 , section 5 .
Can the Bureau as soon as possible provide the necessary resources for employees in the post room , who are not able to do their work satisfactorily , and can the chauffeurs who have to sit in that terribly cold corner of the entrance hall in Brussels be given better accommodation ?
We are now well set up to do our work properly ; I think our valued colleagues should be in the same position .
Mr President , you often come in for a lot of flak on these occasions and I think it is only right that on some occasions you should receive some compliments as well .
I would ask you to pass on our thanks to all the services involved in moving us into our new offices in Brussels for the way this was carried out .
There were some small difficulties but , on the whole , this massive undertaking was carried out with exceptional efficiency .
Please pass this on to all concerned .
Thank you , Mr Provan .
I can say to Mrs van Bladel that the Secretary-General is looking for a better place for the chauffeurs in the new building .
Thank you for your remarks : we had a team that worked very well and we must congratulate the Secretary-General on providing the team for that very successful operation .
Mr President , it was to raise a point about the minutes that I asked for the floor , just when you introduced the first point on the agenda .
I would like to make a comment about page five of the minutes of the meeting of 4 December , and more particularly on the response to my point raised under Rule 48 of the Rules of Procedure .
In my speech , I reminded the House that on 19 November , I had submitted a written declaration formally registering my concern regarding the regularity and transparency of procedures governing our operating and investment expenditure .
I wished all members to be in a position to give their opinion on all the questions and all the rumours which surround these matters .
You replied , Mr President , that you had referred the matter to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure .
And indeed , in a letter dated 3 December , you wrote that you were actually referring the matter to the Rules Committee that very day .
Mr President , the Rules Committee met on 8 and 9 December .
It had still not received this letter .
As of today , 15 December , no submission has yet been received from you on the subject .
I would like to ask you why things have taken so long .
I would like to know why your entourage , why your services , why your staff are so unwilling to push this procedural matter forward , on a question of whose importance for the image of our Parliament you are well aware .
Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , I signed the referral to place the matter in the hands of the Rules Committee as soon as I was able to do so , given that I was travelling in Great Britain .
The document has been sent today , after going through the registration procedures - you know that there are formalities with regard to internal mail .
So I have signed it .
You know that there are formalities which we are trying to reduce , but which are still somewhat slowmoving .
Bear with me , the official document has gone to the Rules Committee , which will receive it today .
( The Minutes were approved )
Order of business
With the agreement of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , Mrs Redondo Jiménez requests that her report on the control of Pseudomonas solanacearum ( Smith ) Smith should be taken without debate .
Mr Colino Salamanca , the chairman of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , has the floor .
Mr President , the amendments to that report were approved unanimously in committee .
There is no problem .
The request can therefore be granted .
I put Mrs Redondo Jiménez 's request to the House .
( Parliament gave its assent )
The vote on this report will therefore be taken on Tuesday , at 12 noon .
I have received a request signed by Mr Ford and 28 other people , asking that a Commission statement on UEFA 's decision not to allow the winners of the Coca Cola cup to take part in the European Cup competitions should be added to the agenda .
Because this part-session 's agenda is so full , if it is decided to include such a statement , the only place it could be added is at the end of the Friday session .
Mr Ford has the floor to present this request for amendment .
Mr President , that will be perfectly acceptable at the end of business on Friday morning if the House is so agreeable .
Does anybody wish to speak in support of the request ?
Anybody against ?
No ?
Then we shall proceed to the vote .
( Parliament approved the proposal )
The order of business has been adopted thus amended .
Green Paper on a partnership for a new organization of work
The next item is the report ( A4-0313 / 97 ) by Mr Andersson , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the Commission Green Paper " Partnership for a new organization of work ' .
Mr President , I would like to begin by thanking the Commission for an excellent Green Paper .
I would also like to take the opportunity to thank my fellow Committee members for excellent collaboration within the Committee in drawing up this report .
As far as changes in the organization of work are concerned , we can state that we are lagging behind the USA and Japan .
That is a fact and not an estimation .
I believe , you see , that if we are to change the organization of work in Europe , we should choose our own model , based among other things on the social model , and not plagiarize models from the USA and Japan .
I would also like to say a few words about the word flexibility .
This is a word which is steeped in taboos .
For me flexibility is about a connection with security .
The fact is that you can never create a flexible organization of work unless you also have a well-developed labour law , an active labour market policy and a right to in-house training for employees , etcetera .
It is not a case of one model if we want to create new organizations of work in Europe , but many .
Things are different for different sectors and different for different companies .
What they have in common and what is important is that the parties in the labour market are involved at both industry and company level .
However , turning to the Group of the European People 's Party and Amendment 4 , we should not interfere in the way the parties in the labour market organize themselves .
It is important for small and medium-sized enterprises to be included .
However , it is not we , but the employers themselves who should decide how small and medium-sized enterprises should be represented in employer organizations .
Changes in the organization of work affect a multitude of policy areas , including taxation .
The Committee now recommends , as before , a reduction in taxation which involves reduced tax on work and increased tax on energy , the environment and capital .
We therefore also oppose the amendment from the UPE Group which concerns a general reduction in taxation .
We want tax changes , not a general suppression of taxes .
The other policy area which is affected by the issue is labour law .
On a previous occasion an agreement on parttime work was approved in this House .
However , that is not enough . It is just as important for us to have changes and security where atypical forms of work are concerned .
I would therefore like to ask the Commission when it intends to return to regulation and security in the question of atypical forms of work .
We also have proposals on minimum standards with regard to information , consultation and participation .
What is the Commission 's position on binding minimum standards in these important areas ?
The third policy area which I shall touch on is working hours .
This is largely a question for the parties in the labour market , but society should give the basic standards and create incentives to shorten working hours .
We previously put forward proposals about this in the Rocard report .
We now return to the subject . When is the Commission going to produce its own proposals on shorter working hours ?
When are we going to get the intervention which has been promised so many times with regard to the situation in Europe on the question of shortening working hours ?
In the fourth place , training is important where changing the organization of work is concerned .
However , in this respect the situation is gloomy .
We know that only one in three employees has access to training .
In small and medium-sized enterprises the situation is even worse .
There it is only one in ten employees .
We have to support the small and medium-sized enterprises , but we cannot , as the Green Group proposes , go into supporting certain forms of ownership .
I am a warm supporter of worker-owned companies , but we cannot go into supporting certain forms of ownership .
However , we should support small and medium-sized enterprises .
A change in the organization of work is a long-term measure .
It is also important to involved the employees .
On the question of health risks , a lot can be done to improve health and safety .
However , there is also a danger .
There are also examples of organizational changes which have made things worse , and it is reasonable for employers to have more responsibility for the costs of the working environment .
We are therefore opposed to the proposal from the UPE Group which weakens the position which the Committee has taken .
I would also like to address the area of equal opportunities .
What the Commission says is positive .
What the Committee on Women 's Rights has said is also positive , and I also support the amendment from the Group of the European People 's Party concerning the equal opportunity aspects and responsibility for the family both for men and women .
Finally I would like to thank the Commission for a good Green Paper , and I would like to thank my colleagues on the Committee for a constructive collaboration , both within the Committee and hopefully also now that we are considering the matter in this part-session .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate Jan Andersson on his excellent report and the Commission because the Green Paper itself picked up on all of the most important themes in the future organization of work .
I would like to make just three brief points .
The first is that , as the rapporteur himself says , we now need to convert this comprehensive analysis into practical action in the framework of the next social action programme .
For example , we need to seek urgently , either a framework agreement on necessary instruments on working time management , or action on forms of atypical work contracts other than part-time contracts .
The second point is that these actions are going to require the use of both the negotiating track and the legislative track under the new Social Chapter .
We need therefore to have a clear interinstitutional agreement setting out the mechanisms and timetables which will operate to make sure that we do act expeditiously .
You yourself , President , have raised this issue in the Trialogue .
I hope that when it is reached on the agenda of the Trialogue , the Commission will take it very seriously and that we will manage to achieve some progress under the British presidency .
My third and final point is that we need a new understanding with the Member States and Council that there are very important social matters outstanding which can only and must be addressed at European level : for example the mobility of labour , another important aspect in this Green Paper .
We must end the logjam of the last two or three years in the social sphere and get things moving once again .
Otherwise I have a genuine fear that the internal market that all capitals see as being of crucial importance will be subject to increasing and massive disruption .
We must get the balance right .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , those who are following either from close by or from a distance the diversification of employment contracts , employment statutes , mobility of labour and flexibility of working hours , will observe that the existing employment system needs to be adjusted .
The employment regulations in force must be adapted because of fundamental changes in both the economic sphere , and in the social sphere .
Those who do not take this into account , will be overtaken by these changes .
Europe 's responsibility in this entire area is not easily defined , however .
Who takes part in the negotiations ?
Who takes part in the partnership ?
Does it involve informal exchanges of ideas , or negotiations aimed at agreement ?
What does organization of work mean ?
We are talking about health and safety at work and working hours in particular .
We are talking about salary conditions , employment conditions in general , insurance against industrial accidents and occupational illness , education , vocational training , labour market policy , target group policy ; these are all elements which form part of this , and which are discussed in the Green Paper , but it is not always clear what Europe 's role in this is .
We believe that Europe must be able to apply a certain legislative authority which can modulate the big inequalities which also exist today between the different Member States ; and to try and achieve a certain harmony .
In that sense I would like to agree with the proposals made by the rapporteur and Mr Hughes just now for the next social action programme .
In all this , we must not overlook some basic principles , and in this respect we also agree with the rapporteur , that both the opportunities for economic growth and its promotion must be taken into account , but on the other hand that the opportunities for employees to retain their jobs , and also to preserve social security must be borne in mind .
It is this balance which we call the European social model , and we would like to preserve , improve and adapt this European social model where necessary in this new organization of work .
It should be clear that it should not involve something whereby the gain of one thing is at the expense of something else .
On behalf of my group I would therefore like to thank the rapporteur for his report , and for agreeing with most of our amendments .
I have just heard that the rapporteur also agrees with an amendment which we are submitting once again , in connection in particular with the effect of the organization of work on the family . We believe there is no point in increasing growth , strengthening competitiveness , employment and employment security , if this is to bring about a deterioration in family life .
I would like to draw the attention of the rapporteur , Mr Andersson , once more to the role of SMEs and the negotiation on the level of the social partners , in which the specific representation of SMEs must also become possible .
In that sense we are also prepared to support the report tomorrow .
Mr President , I would like to join my colleagues in congratulating Mr Andersson on his report despite the misgiving that I have with regard to some parts of it .
The biggest changes that are taking place in the workplace and with regard to work are the changes in technology .
We need to consider how best we can adapt and retrain our employees to ensure that they can get the maximum benefit and the maximum advantage to gain new types of work .
To that extent there are some very welcome initiatives coming from the Andersson report and from the Commission 's Green Paper .
However , there are also some anomalies within the report that we should be highlighting , for example , this proposal for a tax on capital .
If you are not going to invest capital in new machinery , in training , in new plant , in new equipment and so on , how do you expect to employ more people ?
If you are not going to bring in flexibility with regard to the types of work that people want to reconcile the family and working life then you will be denying people , particularly women , the opportunity to work .
Therefore , I would ask the Commission , when it gets this report back from the Parliament , to study very carefully the effect in every single country .
Mr President , colleagues , I would also like to thank Mr Andersson for his excellent report .
I think we have a report before us which is keeping pace with the times .
In relation to the globalization of the economy , the information society and demographic developments , we are facing enormous reforms of our system as regards working methods .
To permit these reforms , policy measures will have to be supportive , and in this context I would like to point to our social security systems , in particular pension schemes .
The way they are organized at the moment means that there is still a problem in many countries with regard to the portability of the value of a pension , or to put it another way , in many countries people interrupt their pensions . In Germany , for example , there are long qualifying periods .
This is very bad for reform in this sector .
In addition I would like to highlight training systems .
The rapporteur says quite rightly that we will have to learn and train throughout our lives .
He does say , however , with regard to the Christian-Democrat amendments , that we should not interfere in small and medium-sized enterprises .
Those looking at the figures relating to this point will notice that small and medium-sized firms have great difficulty in investing in the expenses associated with life-long learning , and I think it is extremely important to include small and medium-sized firms in the reforms of the organization of work ; on that point , my group will therefore support the amendment of the Christian-Democratic Group .
Finally , Mr President , I would like to mention atypical work .
We will have to move towards a system in which people can choose the hours they work , whether to work part-time or not , whether to work as an employee or freelance , and our social security system should be adapted to suit this . I hope that the Commission will take this into account when developing the proposals further .
Mr President , first I would like to congratulate Jan Andersson , the rapporteur , on his success in being able to include in the report the criticisms the Standing Committee on Employment and Social Welfare posed in respect of the Commission 's Green Paper .
The conclusion the Commission 's Green Paper draws , that the reorganization of work casts doubt on the whole basis of labour legislation and labour market relationships , is , in my opinion , pretty peculiar , to say the least .
Labour legislation , at least as far as we are concerned in Finland , does not impose restrictions on development and development policy , which the Green Paper refers to .
There are plenty of examples of this .
It is perfectly possible to come up with new and flexible solutions for work organization within the framework of present legislation .
Flexibility with security , as Mr Andersson said , is incredibly important .
It is extremely unwise to get into a situation where new developments come in at the expense of legislation and normal negotiation procedure .
The reorganization of work cannot come about by tampering with this legislation ; the result would be mayhem .
In the ever-changing work scenario we need legislation to ensure the security of individuals .
Without security and guarantees , workers will find it hard to adapt to new developments in work .
That is why it is crucial that the principle of employee protection must be given far more weight than it is now in any further discussion or movement on the reorganization of work .
I , along with the Committee on Women 's Rights , am deeply concerned about how the position of women will be affected in the changing work scenario .
There is a great risk that a two-tier system is being created : there are those who are in permanent employment , and those who do atypical work .
I fear that women are mainly of the latter type .
Mr President , I would like to begin by congratulating Mr Andersson on what I think has become a good and important report in many different respects .
According to the Commission 's Green Paper , new forms of organization of work are needed in order to be able to increase the competitiveness of the Union 's companies .
This then requires us to have more flexible workers .
At the same time it is said that this flexibility of labour should be combined with security for workers .
I do not think we can emphasize this enough , and Mr Andersson has also tried to convey this in the report .
Productivity and flexibility should not therefore be overriding goals . Instead they must go hand in hand with social security , a guarantee of employees ' rights and the aim of creating more jobs .
In that context I do think that Mr Andersson could have been a bit clearer with regard to the shortening of working hours , since it is only said that people should continue to examine whether shortening working hours might be a way .
I think we have already done that quite sufficiently .
The only thing remaining is the demand for a comprehensive shortening of working hours .
As far as our Amendment No 6 is concerned , the Green Paper also says that influence and participation are important matters for a new organization of work .
I therefore think it is important that we support employee-owned companies and make things easier for them .
Of course it is a political decision and a policy measure , but we are not going in and creating companies . Instead we are making things easier for companies and supporting them .
I think we should do that if we want a development with participation and transparency .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too would like to join in expressing my gratitude for the good report , which is important , but also very complex .
I would also like to thank the Commission because , in this report , it has once again grasped and accentuated the consensus view of this House , by attaching the same importance to flexibility and social security as to boosting competition and employment .
It is important for us because we want to defend and extend this European social model , which is built on solidarity and consensus .
I also find it interesting that the Commission has presented us here with a variety of models and proposals .
What I miss , though , is an action plan .
And I am not on my own in this , for this action plan has been requested by all speakers in this House .
There is , however , a huge gap between insight and the action needed .
I would like to stress a few points here .
Firstly - as has been stated - there is the question of further and continued education .
We want to assist the SMEs in assuring and improving quality because we know they are not always in the position to create the necessary conditions either technically or in terms of human resources .
I would also like to mention - which has partly been forgotten - that further education is needed for our management too .
My second point concerns equal opportunities for women .
The Commission 's Green Paper overlooks one or two things here .
We have been used to better things from you in the past , and I would ask you to study the statement from the Committee on Women 's Rights , which is attached to this report and which we all support .
My third point concerns the modernization of job organization .
This involves greater worker participation , more cooperation and codetermination and not less .
Finally it should be noted that the Green Paper has taken up many of the suggestions from the European Parliament in the last few years .
We are now ready and willing to turn them into reality together with the Commission and the Council .
Mr President , I am sorry but I cannot say that I agree with this document as it stands , or with the contents of the Green Paper .
Both documents start from shared and acceptable assumptions such as workers ' safety , social protection , equal opportunities for women and the disabled , space for immigrants , worker profitsharing and introduction of new technologies , but then they go on to say that a reduction in hours may ensure greater competitiveness , better working conditions and a rise in employment without affecting production : everything , and the opposite of everything .
The report does not take account in the slightest of the cries of alarm from businessmen , for whom a 35-hour week would mean greater costs , lower productivity , a freeze on investments , a threat to the survival of weaker companies and , ultimately , the danger of job losses .
Don 't you think so ?
We need only look at the experience of Germany where , after the introduction of the 35-hour week , they are now quickly taking a step backwards .
Mr President , on behalf of the European People 's Party may I again welcome the Commission 's Green Paper and congratulate Mr Andersson on his factual and well-balanced report .
The object is to improve the competitiveness of the European economy and , with it , the employment situation .
There are new aspects to be found in the present Green Paper and the report : with regard to the site discussion , for instance , it says that we should not just conduct a cost debate on this issue .
Europe cannot compete in the world in terms of wages , but ultimately only on productivity .
This presupposes an increase in motivation , and associated with that new forms of remuneration , changes to job organization , improvement in qualifications and life-long study .

I was very pleased that Mr Andersson refers in clause 19 to promoting worker profit-sharing .
I would like to go a step further and make a connection with greater mobility in pay policy .
Finally , I want to go into a much discussed issue .
Of course , management decides on the introduction of new forms of organization .
However , I agree with the report from the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment when it calls for worker participation in decision-making . There are three reasons for this .
Firstly , group work that goes against the will of the workers cannot function well .
Secondly , new technologies and organizational forms should not be introduced all at once , but only after the workers have been properly informed and consulted .
Thirdly , if workers ' experiences from their present working environment are drawn on , then this will improve company productivity .
That is why , for me , the title of the Green Paper is also the programme : a new organization in the spirit of partnership .
Our companies need better forms of job organization , in the interest of increased employment too , and these need to be created in partnership .
In this sense we endorse Mr Andersson 's report .
Mr President , I would also like to thank the rapporteur for his outstanding report .
There are some major questions on the European agenda in the coming years .
Expansion is the most important , but achieving full employment is one of the major ones .
We will do this in our own , European way , as the rapporteur writes , and this means amongst other things that viability , equality and equal opportunities are centre stage .
Viability means that we must shift taxation from labour to taxation on pollution and resources .
Without such a shift , we will merely be leaving an unholy legacy for our descendants to clear up .
Equality means amongst other things that there must be equality for men and women , including in the next generation , that is , our children .
And , here , men as managers and staff and fathers must exercise more understanding and commitment in practice than is the case today .
Not only for women 's sake , but also for the sake of the children , who feel happy if their fathers are really there for them .
And finally , equal opportunities , and here I am thinking in particular of the disabled , to whom we must give real opportunities for getting involved in work .
If we can combine these three concepts , we will have the basis for creating our own path in Europe .
Mr President , the Commission Green Paper does not offer anything new .
As in the case of all Union policies , the policy concerning the organization of labour gives way to capital interests and demands .
There is great unease since the pace of labour market reform in Europe is lagging behind that of the United States and Japan , and this can be interpreted as a demand for the widespread acceptance in essence of part-time work and the quashing of workers ' basic rights and achievements .
Unfortunately the report of Mr Andersson , apart from certain important ideas contained in it , is tending in the same general direction .
Mr President , workers are not worried about the pace of the reforms but about their direction .
They are demanding and fighting for a general reduction in working hours without a reduction in pay . The first essential step is the 35-hour , 7-hour a day , five-day working week , with pay , work and social security protection for those who are forced to work with part-time or atypical work contracts .
Only if the organization of labour moves in such a direction , will it be in tune with workers ' demands and aspirations .
Mr President , this report is a really good piece of work .
Organizing the future labour market is a large task , but this report does a good job of covering not only the opportunities but also the risks involved in the new organization of work .
A more flexible labour market may benefit both employers and employees .
To employees , it means more varied and exciting work and slightly more fringe benefits .
To employers , it means more flexible staff who are willing to ' do that bit extra ' for the business .
As Europeans , we get competitive businesses which can hold their own against the USA and Japan ... there is not a dry eye !
And how !
We must make sure that the weakest employees , such as women , do not become the losers on the future labour market .
Because there is reason to fear that , while the strong and most flexible will manage to exploit the new challenges and opportunities , those in weaker positions , such as the poorly-educated , will find it even harder to keep up .
I think the rapporteur hits the nail on the head when he warns that there will be two classes in future : an underclass of untrained , vulnerable and mainly female workers , who will typically be homeworkers ; and , on the other hand , a highly educated overclass enjoying all the benefits of the new technology .
Nor does the Commission 's Green Paper focus on the effects of equal opportunities now that employees have to be more flexible when it comes to working hours .
Most households have set themselves up in such a way that women are flexible in relation to the family , by working part-time for example , while men are flexible in relation to their jobs by working overtime , etcetera .
This model must be used if women are also to have the chance to benefit from the new opportunities existing on the labour market .
Mr President , the labour market is changing rapidly today because of globalization and new technology .
Our efforts should therefore be directed away from collectivism and things done on a large scale in favour of individual agreements and easily adaptable organizations .
Mr Andersson 's well-written report concludes that Europe is lagging behind competitors like the USA and Japan .
I believe that rigid sets of rules create hierarchies and centralism and that the rate of modernization lags behind .
I believe the change we see today must be taken heed of and accepted .
Our debates here must be based on the labour market of tomorrow .
In my opinion attempts at EU level or at national level to intervene in the organization of companies or in another way to limit their freedom of action will be counterproductive , that is , they will not help to create new jobs and increase employment .
Modernizing the organization of work in companies is a question of competitiveness and survival , and it obviously requires participation and willingness to change .
To support this I believe our conclusion should be that we need fewer , not more rules in Europe 's labour markets .
I am afraid that the approach of the Green Paper and of the Andersson report do not facilitate modernization and enterprise .
Mr President , I would like to welcome the report .
I agree with you , Mr Andersson , on most things , but I would like to help widen the perspective a little .
When we talk about a new organization of work , we must not link it only to existing activities . We also have to think of new forms of work .
Traditional activities , such as the production of goods and today 's public sector , are declining .
Naturally , we must concentrate more on services , on knowledge and information and on creating experiences , that is , on areas which are both socially and environmentally positive for people and for the world around us .
In that respect I am very pleased that Mr Andersson raised the question of tax changes , that we should reduce tax on work .
It is absurd to have , as we do in Europe , the highest taxation on the resource which we most wish to use .
Instead we could increase taxes on the environment .
However , I believe it would be beneficial , and on this point we may have different opinions , if we could reduce taxes a little more than we increase them .
Otherwise we will probably never compete with the USA and Japan .
Mr President , let me begin by congratulating Mr Andersson on an excellent report on the Green Paper on a new organization of work .
The principal aim of the Green Paper was to promote a debate on how we can improve employment and competitiveness through a better organization of work , and a high level of competence and quality , and at the same time guarantee social security .
The response to the Commission 's Green Paper has been very positive .
The Commission also welcomes the support which this House is giving the Green Paper and we shall take account of the proposals and opinions which Parliament presents in its report .
The Commission is going to follow up the Green Paper over the next year .
Our intention is to create a European network in which Member States can exchange experiences in this area .
Only today there is a meeting of the employment and social ministers .
Last month a summit on employment was held in Luxembourg .
We expect the Council of Ministers today to approve formally the guidelines for employment policy which the Commission presented at the summit .
The guidelines we have presented are based on four main pillars : employability , enterprise , adaptability and equality between women and men .
These guidelines are also reflected in the Green Paper , not least with regard to adaptability .
At this point I would like to remind you that last month the European Council invited the parties in the labour market to negotiate agreements on modernizing the organization of work .
Such negotiations should take place at all suitable levels , i.e. local , regional and national levels , and also at company level and across industries .
This also applies , of course , to the question of working hours which was raised by the rapporteur .
I assume that we agree that the emphasis here should lie on the parties in the labour market , or , in other words , on partnership .
That is the recurring theme if you want to modernize working life .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Trafficking in women for the purpose of sexual exploitation
The next item is the report ( A4-0372 / 97 ) by Mrs Waddington , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights , on the communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on trafficking in women for the purpose of sexual exploitation ( COM ( 96 ) 0567 - C4-0638 / 96 ) .
Mr President , trafficking in women for the purpose of sexual exploitation is an increasing global trade which involves women from poorer countries being forced into sexual slavery in the EU and elsewhere .
Two examples were reported last month .
Firstly , the case of a hundred Brazilian women , aged between 18 and 25 , who were persuaded to come to London to work as nannies , maids and dancers .
Once in the UK , they were forced to work as prostitutes , working six to seven days a week , twelve hours a day .
Their passports and all their earnings were confiscated by the traffickers .
Secondly , research published last month revealed that tens of thousands of women from Russia , Ukraine , Latvia and Belarus are being duped with lucrative offers to work as au pairs and waitresses in the European Union , only to find themselves trapped in prostitution .
The former Soviet bloc has become the main source of women and children trafficked for the purpose of sexual exploitation .
This report by the Committee on Women 's Rights recommends a number of measures to protect women and combat trafficking .
It proposes information campaigns in the countries of origin which warn women of the dangers of falling into the hands of the mafia-type organizations responsible for trafficking .
It calls upon Member States to provide more protection and support for the victims , since victims and their families are at extreme risk of violence and intimidation .
It underlines the importance of taking effective sanctions against those organizations and individuals involved in trafficking .
It suggests that a range of Community programmes , including STOP and DAPHNE , could be developed and used more effectively to combat trafficking in women , support the victims and enable them to rebuild their lives .
It proposes that non-governmental organizations , which are close to the victims , should be given maximum access to Community programmes so that they can help the potential victims and survivors of sexual exploitation and enforced prostitution .
It urges that gender equality and the need to combat trafficking in the countries of origin are featured in the EU development programmes and EU negotiations on enlargement , since this trade is primarily fuelled by women 's poverty and their lack of power and opportunity in these countries .
This Parliament should congratulate Commissioner Gradin on the work she has done in this field , persuading Member States to begin to work together to combat this trade in women .
By supporting this report , we will be providing further encouragement for action against the exploitation of vulnerable women whose human rights are being violated , and we will enable more measures to be taken to support the victims of sexual slavery in rebuilding their lives .
I hope that this report will be adopted unanimously by this Parliament , as it was in the Committee on Women 's Rights , because then the work of Commissioner Gradin can gather momentum and force , and we will truly be able to say that this European Union is taking every possible step to avoid the victimization of women and violation of their human rights .
Madam President , I would like to congratulate Susan Waddington and Maria Colombo Svevo most sincerely for their excellent report , but I would also like to thank Commissioner Gradin for her passionate dedication to the fight against trafficking in women .
Since the previous report , the United Nations and more especially the European Union have made a great deal of effort to tackle the problem of trafficking in women .
But despite all European agreements , the Member States have not managed to enter into the fight against trafficking in women effectively .
I believe there are two reasons for this .
First and foremost the enormous complexity of the problem , but secondly the fact that the wrong approach was used to tackle the problem .
Maria Colombo Svevo made a reference to the latter just now .
Countries would rather battle against trafficking in women , against illegal immigration , than against the most brutal violation of human rights .
Even though it is worthy of consideration , even though it is good that in some countries there are some forms of temporary protection against women , concern for victims is still very selective .
It only applies to women who have lodged a complaint , who have started legal proceedings which may develop into successful prosecutions against dealers .
We demand that all victims are protected , and that all victims are given a chance to start a new life .
Secondly , the complexity .
Trafficking in women for sexual exploitation concerns prostitution by force , and au pair , marriage and employment agencies .
It has links with drug dealing , and the black market circuit .
As long as countries do not tackle trafficking in women in similar ways , do not penalize it in similar ways , do not employ the similar penalties , prison sentences and impoundage of goods , as long as there is inefficient international policing and judicial cooperation , we will not be able to tackle trafficking in women effectively .
Finally , Madam President , I would like to say that you have done a lot of work concerning trafficking in women within the European Union .
The Parliament supports you very emphatically in this .
The problem is however , that the agreements with the Council of Ministers are not legally binding , not enforceable .
We hope that this statement which the Commission has given us , and Parliament 's report , will lead us to a European Convention on human trafficking following the review in 1999 ; not until then can human trafficking be tackled truly efficiently .
Mr President , I would like to join colleagues in expressing my admiration to Commissioner Gradin and to Mrs Waddington for this excellent report .
I should also like to be a little bit nationalistic and say that I am extremely happy that it was during the Irish presidency that the importance of the issue that we are discussing today finally impacted on the political agenda under President Norah Owen , who was the President-in-Office at the time .
The fact that 500 , 000 women are estimated to be being trafficked in the European Community is an appalling figure .
When Commissioner Gradin raised this issue and made it one of the priorities for her term of office , there was probably quite a lot of amusement and scepticism about the extent of the problem .
So it is a very good day for all of us that we are today debating Mrs Waddington 's excellent and very comprehensive report .
The European fight against trafficking is a major crime issue but it is also a fundamental matter of women 's rights .
To focus on trafficking only as crime means sidelining the support and services needed by the victims of trafficking .
Many of the asylum procedures in all our countries , particularly my own at the moment , seem to be taking a particularly long time .
We are in real danger of adding an extra layer of victimization for many of these women who are being brought into the trafficking net by being offered work opportunities in the EU as au pairs , domestic workers or as waitresses .
Many others are offered introductions with a view to marriage .
While some women may know they are to work as prostitutes , many do not .
They arrive in a new country often illegally , without papers and are then trapped .
Their earnings are taken by traffickers , they are unable to speak the language and they are oppressed by the fear and the secrecy that surrounds this issue .
Mr President , all measures to combat trafficking in women will be a waste of time and effort unless an intensive policy is pursued which will improve the position of women in their countries of origin .
This must be achieved by supporting more women 's projects in European and national development policies ; it must be achieved by strict implementation of the human rights clause in agreement with third countries ; and it must be achieved by putting more emphasis on the equal opportunities policy in negotiations with candidate countries in central and eastern Europe .
Otherwise it is not worth a penny .
Women 's rights are human rights .
The root of evil in the trafficking of women originates , after all , in the unequal balance in power and wealth between men and women .
Having said this , Mr President , the Group of the European Liberal Deomcrat and Reform Party thinks Mrs Waddington 's report a good one . To the Liberal Group , the emphasis is on the following issues : firstly , implementation of articles K.1 and K.3 through joint European action by police and judiciary , and by financial liberalization of the Stop and Daphne programmes , for both children and women .
Secondly , much more emphasis on the role of the non-governmental organizations in the information , prevention , protection and later reintegration of women in their countries .
And thirdly , in those third countries , support for the policy and judiciary for the training of personnel , and for the acquisition of equipment ; the existing European programmes can easily be utilised for this .
Coordination and cooperation on a European level is necessary , when protecting victims , when prosecuting and punishing perpetrators , when informing and educating people through , for example , EU embassies in third countries , in strengthening the role of NGOs and through support of women 's organizations in the countries involved .
Trafficking in women is degrading .
It is slavery , and it forms - this has been said before - an important part of organized crime .
The Dutch presidency organized an excellent conference on the prevention trafficking in women , and thoroughgoing agreements were made during this .
Please let us all , EU and Member States , show the political will to implement these measures efficiently and generously .
It will not be for lack of trying on the part of the European Parliament and Commissioner Gradin .
Mr President , in a typically Swedish way I am not usually very exuberant when it comes to saying thank you for a report .
In doing so now , and thanking both Mrs Waddington and Commissioner Gradin for their very solid piece of work , I am showing that it really comes from the whole of my heart .
Thank you very much .
I think it is quite right to do as Mrs Waddington has done and compare this trafficking in women with the slave trade of the past .
People were able to participate in the slave trade of the past as long as they did not think that the people being shipped from African countries to countries around the world had any humanity .
I therefore think that , although this is a solid document , there is something missing from the communication from the Commission and in the report by Mrs Waddington , namely , the " demand side ' .
In September , when I raised the possibility of criminalizing the clients of prostitutes , large sections of this House roared with laughter .
But I still think that we must appeal to all the responsible men who do not buy minors and who do not buy people forced into prostitution , or even willing prostitutes .
We must have their support .
I think , as I have said , that we should inform men and have them on our side in this fight against the new slavery .
Mr President , we should not only congratulate Madam Gradin , although such congratulation is called for , but also indeed , the many others who have in the end made sure that trafficking in women is on the agenda of the European Union ; and Commissioner Gradin 's statement has certainly made an important contribution to this , including a number of chairmanships from the recent past .
It is in this way that the wish not only of this Parliament , but also of society , to opt for an international approach to trafficking in women , has been complied with .
It is obvious that this is not easy , because the Treaty which is in force at the moment offers very few leads , and this new Treaty , too , the Treaty of Amsterdam , is insufficiently equipped to ensure that an integrated European approach becomes possible .
This integrated approach is indeed necessary ; not only cooperation between police and law services , but in particular the protection of victims is needed in order to be able to prosecute perpetrators .
The role of the NGO 's , as has already been said here , is crucial in this , since they are much better able to win the trust of the women who have ended up in totally alien societies .
The DAPHNE and STOP programmes are in fact a response to the need for an integrated approach , and we should be pleased with this , although we cannot be pleased with the fact that the European Parliament has been so frugal in allocating funds for both programmes for the coming year .
But more should be done , and in the Member States it should be mentioned that as far as the protection of victims is concerned , more effective action should be taken , because a temporary residence permit is often not enough to win true trust .
We should latch onto this violation of human rights to treat the residential status of victims of trafficking more generously .
Mr President , I would like first to congratulate our rapporteur , and the Commissioner , for the quality of the work she has carried out on so delicate a subject .
The question required special attention , and substantial measures are required if this problem , which is nothing short of a plague , is to be put right .
I have nothing to add , either in form or substance .
I would rather emphasize the necessity of attacking the root of the evil , which affects the most disadvantaged women .
The root of the evil , as our rapporteur has reminded us , is the situation of disproportionate inequality between the economies of the rich and poor countries , and the inequality of economic resources devoted to men and women .
Poverty and unemployment are the reasons for the growth in this trafficking , which holds out to the women who are victimised by it the illusory hope of a better future .
This is the field where we need to concentrate our action a little more .
I would also like to mention the situation in the central and eastern european countries , where the whole of this problem has taken on considerable proportions .
Let us simply express the hope that the opening of the European Union to these countries will enhance our ability to control this problem , especially as women from the central and eastern european countries who are involved in this trafficking are young and educated , and therefore should have better chances of entering the employment market .
On the other hand , women from the developing countries are older , less well educated and have poorer prospects for the future .
The problem is most acute in the African and Latin American countries .
Women from these countries use subterfuge to obtain long-stay residence permits in the Union .
In conclusion , I would say that while I express no doubt as to the effectiveness of the measures proposed , I believe , quite simply , that we should step up our efforts at improving the economies of these poorer countries .
This is the only way to put an end to this unscrupulous exploitation of human wretchedness .
Mr President , we support Mrs Waddington 's report on trafficking in women for the purpose of sexual exploitation .
However , there are shortfalls in the analysis of the phenomenon , and in its observable causes .
First , given the current extension of homosexuality , trade in women is no different from trade in men or in transsexuals - it is all done for the same reason , so to speak - and , worse still , it is no different from the even more horrible , more monstrous trade in children , as revealed by the unspeakable actions of Dutroux and his accomplices in Belgium .
Such trade shames our Europe , a Europe which , increasingly less Christian , is increasingly less respectful of human dignity .
However , we should not forget that the institutionalized practice of Islam , if not of the harem , at least of polygamy , and the possession of many concubines , as propounded by the prophet Mohammed in the Koran , continues to be a decisive factor in the real and ongoing practice of slavery in many African and Asian countries .
We cannot but observe also - at a time when the thought police are everywhere hunting down rather than refuting books , by the Marxist professor Garaudy , for example - that there are thousands of tonnes of literature sold in newspaper kiosks and in bookshops , magazines , books and newspapers which exult , advocate and describe all forms of sexual perversion and sadism , and incite people to them .
How can this be denied , when we see that in France , for example , the number of child murders accompanied by the tortures of sexual sadism has increased twenty-fold since the 1970s , and where decadence and horrors have been allowed to flourish in unfettered freedom ?
How could you in this House - where you believe the influence of certain historical theses to pose a threat to freedom - deny that the freedom permitted to sadistic pornography does not exert its own influence ?
Is it not time to put things straight ?
We need a spirit of freedom and challenge in the search for the truth , in the fields of science , history and philosophy . But on the other hand , for those who advocate more sadism , two centuries after the death of the Marquis de Sade , we need the prohibition and repression of their hideous industry .
But how on earth can we lay any legitimate claim to defend children , when so often we cut their lives short , so soon after their conception , by the crime of abortion ?
Mr President , I too would like to heartily congratulate Mrs Waddington and Commissioner Gradin , who have had the courage to put their finger at the crux of one of the thorniest problems of our time , the trade in the souls and bodies of mainly women and children . This is a problem which , with the help of technology , is developing into a modern day scourge .
The five hundred thousand women trafficked in the European Union and the millions in Asia bear tragic witness to the fact that the pursuit of easy gains has been tolerated as of the highest merit , while the ideology of the market place and the law of supply and demand have transformed human beings into merchandise .
Here I would like to stress something which is not mentioned in the official reports . Trafficking in women and children for sexual exploitation could not take place if the demand for such services did not exist , if the respectable client consumers did not exist , if , finally , the patriarchal values and structures which apportion rights , resources and power unequally between the two sexes , did not unfortunately still determine our socio-economic system .
We must not forget this when we talk about the reasons for the phenomenon : poverty , marginalization , immigration and asylum problems etcetera , but chiefly we must not forget this when we look for the means to combat it effectively .
We need to take direct , proactive , deterrent and suppressive action .
We need political will and the economic aid provided by the funds that have already been made available for the financing of actions aimed at international cooperation , at supporting the services of Europol . We need measures for the protection and social reintegration of the victims .
But above all we need to strengthen the policy of equal opportunities .
We still need to remind Member States to implement the joint action which was approved on 24 February 1997 and to carry out the commitments that they made at the Hague Conference on 24 April 1997 , with specific actions to involve both the competent authorities and women 's organizations in effectively tackling the phenomenon .
Mr President , women are being lured to the EU by the promise of easy money .
They are being recruited for so-called " pleasure centres ' that are anything but pleasure .
They are enticed into dubious employment and sham marriages .
Women from Asia , Africa , South America and the central and eastern european states .
Better and better organized gangs of pimps make women submissive by threatening or dispensing violence , exploiting them , forcing them into prostitution , holding them prisoner .
That is the everyday existence of more than 500 , 000 women annually .
Mrs Gradin , the Commission is proposing a pan-European approach to the fight against the trade in women for the sole purpose of sexual exploitation , and we fully support this in the European Parliament .
However , it needs to be made more concrete and include the NRO .
In her committed and excellently researched report , Sue Waddington demanded that the issue be regarded from the victims ' angle .
I go along with that .
First of all , we need an awareness-raising campaign to provide us with background information on , and thereby thwart , the aims of so-called recruitment agencies , the structure of their systems and their wheelings and dealings .
The victims need help in finding the courage to come forward and name the offenders .
They need a safe refuge and , at least , a limited right of abode in a women 's hostel before returning home , having been properly prepared for asserting themselves there in the face of poverty and discrimination .
It might be cynical of me to say this , but it is true : trafficking in human beings is one of the growth markets in Europe .
Not limited by borders , it can be carried on without serious risk .
This international crime must be sapped of its strength by closing the localities known to traffic in people , confiscating the profits made from criminal acts , imposing maximum custodial sentences , and depriving the perpetrators of their civil rights .
The Member States must take united action and stop this slave trade through the terms of treaties concluded with non-member countries , on behalf of hundreds of thousands of suffering women .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur for this excellent report .
The trafficking of human beings is also a part of organized crime , and is widespread and mainly found in the Eastern bloc countries .
There is also plenty of fresh evidence of this in Finland .
What is particularly worrying is the trafficking of younger people , even children , who are targets because it is their only means of survival .
This is nothing other than a lack of basic protection for human beings and a total disregard for the protection of children .
I agree with the rapporteur that the problem must be tackled from the viewpoint of the victims .
This is a violation of the basic rights of women and children , which we just cannot permit or tolerate .
The European Union is to start talks on membership with the eastern european countries in the Spring .
The slave trade in women and children should feature in those talks , which should also spell out what is meant by the rights of women and children and sexual equality .
Neither can we ignore the responsibility our women have to ourselves and our children .
We cannot tolerate women being used as merchandise , because everyone should have the right to earn enough to survive through their own labour or enterprise .
Mr President , at the end of this debate , the Group of the Party of European Socialists is able to join in applauding Commissioner Gradin and Mrs Waddington .
We have heard how the victims of human trafficking are invariably women .
Non-government organizations estimate that some 500 , 000 women annually are either lured or carried to the countries of the European Union with false contracts of employment , where they are forced into marriage or prostitution .
Most of them come from central and eastern Europe , especially Russia , Poland and the Baltic States .
Here , economic need is particularly great , and women have no other way of feeding their families and so become the puppets of dubious sponsors who promise them an income and prosperity in western Europe .
The figures supplied by the Federal Office of Criminal Investigation in Germany , the BKA , which last year registered 10 , 000 female victims , are shocking .
The BKA ascertained that this represented an increase in one year of 43 % , and I am certain that the number of unreported cases is substantially higher .
With the report on the trafficking of persons , we in the Committee on Women 's Rights have embarked on a course to take us out of the taboo zone .
Commissioner Gradin 's statement on the trade in women and the Stop and Daphne programmes are a further important development .
In regard to the seriousness and urgency of the growth of this modern form of slavery , however , this is but a drop in the ocean , and the ministers for home affairs and justice need to act quickly at national level .
They need to develop effective strategies together with Europol , the Commission and the non-government organizations .
Specifically , on the basis of Mrs Waddington 's report , we call for effective action in the area of victim support , collaboration on the part of the Member States and information .
I also consider it vital that we grant the victims a limited right of abode to give them at least a legal status until criminal proceedings against the perpetrators have been concluded .
Otherwise , lack of victim support will be the best protection of the criminal .
This resolution allows us to put a stop to the contemporary slave trade .
Mr Commissioner , let me begin by congratulating Mrs Waddington on a good and balanced report .
Thank you also for all the friendly words towards me .
The trafficking in young women which is taking place in Europe today is a shame for our continent .
It is a tragedy for all the young women who come to grief .
Unfortunately , it is very lucrative for organized crime .
As Mrs Waddington stresses , we need to take action in many different areas if we are to succeed in fighting the trafficking .
That is also why , in my draft plan of action , I stress both the need to focus on human rights and on care for the victims and the need to act in a multi-disciplined way .
Since the big conference in Vienna in the summer of 1996 and the plan of action which was adopted by the Commission in November last year , the question has really been put on the political agenda .
Last spring the Dutch Presidency held a large Conference of Ministers in the Hague .
The Conference adopted guidelines which were aimed directly at the Member States .
In that way it was a concrete follow-up of the Commission 's plan of action .
The Ministers for Justice and Home Affairs have also acted swiftly and followed up both the plan of action on trafficking in women and the Stockholm Conference on the sexual exploitation of children .
Several of the measures are common to both areas .
Last autumn the Council of Ministers decided to change the mandate of the European Drug Unit so that the EDU now also deals with the problem of trafficking in people .
The Council of Ministers has also decided that trafficking in people shall be regarded as a crime and that the perpetrators will be punished .
However , that will not come into force until the Member States have changed their legislation in this direction .
As things appear today , it is very profitable to smuggle drugs , but it is also risky .
If you are caught , the sentence is often 10-12 years .
The smuggling of young women is also highly profitable , but the risks are small .
If you get caught the sentence is no more than one or two years .
My question to the House is this : is that sensible ?
The Council of Ministers also made a decision on the Stop programme , which stands for Sexual Trafficking of Persons .
This is a multiannual programme providing training , information and an exchange of experience for police , judges , prosecutors , customs and immigration officers , as well as others who come into contact with the victims of trafficking .
Over the years we have had intensive activity under the Stop programme .
Courses have been started on supporting victims , on developing preventative measures , on statistics and studies .
The policewomen 's network in Europe has drawn up a code of conduct for the police with regard to women who have been battered or raped .
The network of female judges recently arranged a conference in Rome , also with the support of the Stop programme .
Within the framework of the Stop programme , the Luxembourg Presidency arranged a Seminar of Experts in November .
That is the start of a joint project between the USA and the EU on the trafficking of women .
Next year we are going to carry out a joint project with preventative measures in Ukraine and Poland .
The USA is going to cooperate with the IOM , the International Organization for Migration , and we in the EU with the voluntary organization La Strada .
When we are ready the idea is that we should jointly evaluate methods and results .
It is interesting to note that interest is now growing outside the European Union .
The US President and his First Lady are deeply involved in the issue .
So is US Secretary of State Madeleine Albright who has instructed the American State Department to give the fight against trafficking the same priority as the drugs trade .
This autumn the first conference was also held in Russia , where representatives of authorities and voluntary organizations gathered in Moscow to discuss trafficking in young women .
Mr President , the Daphne programme started this year thanks to the initiative of the European Parliament .
It is aimed at voluntary organizations working with children , young people and women who have been victims of violence .
In the Commission 's plan of action , I emphasize the contributions made by voluntary organizations for women who have been victims of violence of various kinds .
My experience tells me that women who are victims of violence prefer to turn to a women 's organization in the first place rather than an authority .
It also appears that the DAPHNE initiative has been met by very great interest .
Many good applications have been received , but we have still not been able to give support to more than 40-50 projects .
ECU 3 million is good , but it does not go very far .
The great interest clearly shows that there is a need for contributions from voluntary organizations in this area .
Let me give some concrete examples of Daphne projects .
We have one which aims to increase awareness among the police about how to deal with women who have been raped .
We have another project which deals with victims of trafficking in Austria , mainly from Latin America and Eastern Europe .
The project involves organizations and authorities in Italy , Poland and the Dominican Republic among other places .
One aim of the project is to inform women about what rights and choices they have and to set up a network to support these women at the regional , European and international level .
A third project concerns the sexual exploitation of immigrant women .
Italy , Spain and Great Britain are cooperating on this .
All the Member States of the Union are involved in one or more projects .
We have succeeded in distributing funds so that around half of the project funding goes to women 's projects and half to children .
We hope , of course , that we shall have the opportunity to continue the DAPHNE programme next year too .
Let me take this opportunity also to say a few words about other multiannual programmes we have which touch on this area .
We have the Sherlock programme which concerns training and exchanging experiences in the area of immigration , not least where the seizure of forged documents is concerned .
The Grotius programme concerns information and exchange in the judicial area , and the Oisin programme concerns increased cooperation in policing .
In her report Mrs Waddington asks about a follow-up report on the part of the Commission .
We have also heard demands for a convention .
I can inform the House that the Commission already plans a follow-up which I hope to be able to give an account of here in a year 's time .
We must therefore do what we can to keep this issue on the agenda .
Through today 's debate the European Parliament has made an important contribution for which I thank you .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Gas emissions from internal combustion engines
The next item is the report ( A4-0413 / 97 ) by Mr K. Collins , on behalf of Parliament 's delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text , approved by the Conciliation Committee , for a European Parliament and Council Directive on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to measures against the emission of gaseous and particulate pollutants from internal combustion engines to be installed in non-road mobile machinery ( C4-0627 / 97-95 / 0209 ( COD ) )
Mr President , I must say that sometimes there are subjects we must discuss in this Chamber which are so riveting that Members come from miles around to take part in the debate .
As you can see , it is only very rarely that the Chamber is as crowded as it is at present .
I think the interpreters outnumber the Members at this present moment !
Even the public gallery is emptying .
They are all going away !
This is the conclusion of the conciliation on , not just non-road mobile machinery , but as you pointed out yourself , President , the elimination of gaseous pollutants from these vehicles .
This complements the auto-oil package which is currently going through its second reading and which takes a combined approach to engine design and fuel technology in order to cut emissions from cars and so on .
This is not about cars , this in fact is about non-road mobile machinery , and a lot of people really do not know what that is .
It is in fact tractors and combine harvesters and diggers and bulldozers and so on , and the point is that these contribute a very significant amount to this kind of pollution and without this directive these emissions would remain unregulated .
The existence of this directive will also enable European Union countries to take a lead in the manufacture and marketing of new engines which have been designed for this purpose in order to reduce gaseous emissions .
It will therefore give European industry a tremendous advantage on the world market - on the assumption , of course , that European industry grasps this opportunity .
But it is important and it is therefore welcome .
The directive was the subject of conciliation between ourselves and the Council .
The original Commission proposal was approved by this House without amendment .
That is not very common , and I have to say that it was not just because it was enormously technical .
It did genuinely meet with our approval .
But then it went to the Council , which made substantial changes in its common position .
It changed the type of procedure to be used by the Commission for implementing measures .
I will speak , President , if I may , to the gallery at this point , because in this House we spend a lot of time discussing something called comitology .
To anybody outside this Chamber , and I have to say to quite a good number of people inside this Chamber , it does not mean a great deal .
Comitology concerns the way in which technical decisions arising from directives are made , and we have a choice : either these decisions can be made publicly , so that members of the public can see what these decisions are and can understand them ; or we can make these decisions behind closed doors so that you , the public , do not hear what is being said and so that you , the public , do not understand what decisions are being made and the whole thing is kept under wraps .
So we went to conciliation on this , and during conciliation we managed to change the Council common position in this regard ; and I think that we have therefore advanced the democratic case that we wanted to advance .
We also secured a reference to the modus vivendi .
The modus vivendi is about bringing us and the Commission together so far as these decisions are concerned , and we do not think that the modus vivendi in its present form works very well .
We wanted to see it improved and I am very glad that the Commission has now made a statement which will be published in the Official Journal stating that it will keep the European Parliament fully informed about implementing measures arising from directives .
We also have an undertaking from the Commission that a new form of the modus vivendi will be proposed some time in the middle of 1998 .
In other words the multitudes of people who have gathered here tonight to listen to this riveting debate on gaseous pollutants emitted by non-road mobile machinery can be satisfied .
Everyone in this House , everybody who is occupying these benches over there , can be very happy that we have concluded this , that it is good news for the environment , that it is good news for transparency , and that it is good news for democracy .
Mr President , let me begin by expressing the Commission 's satisfaction over the result of the conciliation procedure where this very important question of legislation is concerned .
I would like to remind the House that this draft directive concerns a sector which has never before been regulated .
In the past , emissions from engines on mobile machinery intended for use outside the road network have been underestimated .
In fact their share of emissions from transport is substantially higher than was previously thought .
The use of less polluting engines in such machinery will therefore play an important role in reducing air pollution in our cities , and at a reasonable cost .
The European Parliament 's first reading was done without a report , while the amendments in the second reading all concerned the question of comitology and the implementation of the modus vivendi which we have just talked about .
I am conscious that the question of comitology has raised a problem for Parliament .
The Commission has undertaken to present a proposal to revise the 1987 decision on comitology .
The Commission has also , at the direct request of Parliament , undertaken to do so at the beginning of June 1998 .
This undertaking appears in a letter of 11 November 1997 from the President of the Commission , Mr Santer , to the President of the European Parliament , Mr Gil-Robles Gil-Delgado .
This means it has been possible to remove obstacles as far as the conciliation procedure is concerned on this question .
I can also inform you on behalf of the Commission that we are going to start informal contacts with the other institutions concerned at the beginning of next year in order to prepare the ground for a new proposal .
Let me finally convey the Commission 's appreciation of the fact that Parliament and the Council of Ministers have reached a constructive agreement with regard to the draft directive .
As soon as this directive has come into force it will mean an important step forward for the improvement of the environment , both in terms of air quality and public health .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Consumer protection and price indication
The next item is the report ( A4-0414 / 97 ) by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of Parliament 's delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee , for a European Parliament and Council Directive on consumer protection in the indication of the prices of products offered to consumers ( C40643 / 97-95 / 0148 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , this rapporteur is extremely satisfied with the result achieved in the conciliation procedure .
The negotiations with the Council went very well , and I think we owe particular thanks to the Luxembourg Minister Mrs Jacobs , who cut the knot at a rather crucial moment , and who brought about the readiness in others to agree at least on the last amendments of this Parliament .
I think we have been able to conclude this case within a very reasonable period .
Mr President , looking back briefly , the directive we are discussing today has a very long history .
For years , from as far back as 1979 , various governments have tried through different regulations to bring about something concerning indication of the prices of products .
All manner of things have been tried using extremely complicated regulations .
There was a system of obligations , a system of voluntary series .
It could be done at European level , or at national level .
But it created such a labyrinth of price indications for producers , that consumers did not know which way to turn , and suppliers were lost too , whilst the objective should be , both for consumer and seller , unambiguity in the indication of prices so that comparisons are easy to make .
In December 1994 , when the Commission requested a further transitional period for the confusing regulations then in existence , the members of the Committee on Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection quickly realised that things could not continue in this vein , and that something new should be introduced , namely , a new proposal for a simple and transparent system which consumers could use to make proper price comparisons on which to base their choices .
In 1995 , the Commission followed Parliament 's recommendations in a new proposal .
The proposal comprised , in addition to the compulsory indication of the sale price , the indication , where relevant , of price per standard unit - per kilo , or per litre .
I would like to add to this that , if , because of the purpose of the product , the price indication per standard unit turns out to be meaningless or offers no relevant information to the consumer , an exception to the general rule was made .
On a national level , exceptions were also made for certain products such as , for example , the 75cl bottle of wine , for which it is not necessary to display the equivalent litre price .
Some sectors can be excluded entirely from compulsory indication of price .
We agreed in the conciliation with the Council that Member States themselves can determine which specific sectors this applies to , but on condition that they use the criteria which have been set .
Catering establishments , hospitals , vending machines , etcetera , come to mind .
In fact , in the negotiations the Council adopted most of the amendments submitted by Parliament .
A number of technical or linguistic amendments were adopted instantly .
Obviously there were a few sticking points as well .
The general exception which , right at the end , the Council wanted to make was for small businesses .
We do not favour this .
We would like to see a transitional period for small businesses , and for that we had set aside a considerable period .
This point continued to cause friction and in the end we made a compromise in which , after three years , the Commission will draft a report on the state of affairs regarding small businesses , and we , after having received the report , will then be able to examine whether they - and this includes small shopkeepers - will have to meet those obligations , or whether we might decide to prolong the general exception for such tiny businesses as corner shops .
We , in the Parliament , have stuck tightly to the principle at stake , namely that there will be an extremely simple , but at the same time transparent , system with as little room for exceptions as possible .
We have therefore removed a great deal of dead wood which was in the text .
I now believe that the text which was eventually decided is clear .
Furthermore , we have included an extra provision for the euro . This is something the Council and the Commission had not provided for .
As yet there are still no clear provisions for this and the Commission has still not come up with a proposal .
I think it is good that this Parliament will be able to find something about it in the text .
Mr President , a satisfactory result , I believe ; a solid piece of consumer legislation .
Mr President , we often discuss how far Parliament succeeds in terms of the extension of codecision .
It would sometimes be more important to discuss what we do with co-decision when we have it .
I should like to salute the three Graces of this report : Mrs Fontaine , the Minister - Mrs Jacobs - and the rapporteur .
Their negotiations representing the three elements of the European Union have led to an exemplary performance of the co-decision role .
We now have a simple and clear way of moving from dual pricing to unit pricing .
We can prepare the way for the euro and when and how it is introduced in the various Member States .
We have met the anxieties both of those who felt that traditional measurements might be eliminated - and plainly they will not - in the various Member States and of those small shopkeepers who felt that they would be forced into a system for which they were not prepared .
At the moment we have a situation where they will have a five-year period in which to prepare themselves .
That is right and proper and I am very glad that we have reached this stage .
Mr President , a comparison between the joint draft and the original proposal yields at least three points of difference which are vital in order for the result of the compromise procedure to be called a quality product , and which prompt me to congratulate my colleague Mrs Oomen-Ruijten sincerely on her persistent efforts and on the result .
First , the sale price and the unit price have been better defined and it is clear that VAT and other taxes have been included in the prices .
Secondly , it provides an acceptable solution for the transitional period of the euro , which we will be right in the middle of when the directive becomes operational .
Even though we did not succeed in having the maximum of three prices which must be indicated statutorily accepted , nevertheless we did create space for Member States to limit the maximum number of prices which must be indicated statutorily themselves .
It is now up to the Member States on whose common sense we rely , to avoid extremely unproductive situations in which possibly 4 to 8 prices are displayed per product .
Thirdly , Mr President , there are all the small shopkeepers to whom we have to continue to give every assistance .
The Member States can issue an exemption to small businesses to whom implementation of the mandatory indication of unit price for other than loosely sold products will mean an excessive administrative burden .
I hope that the Member States will deal positively with this policy area ; it is an implicit recognition , after all , of a small imperfection in the directive , but we hope that it will be dealt with positively in the expectation that we will get an adapted directive in six years ' time , or who knows , that the problem will have solved itself literally automatically as a result of evolution in technological developments .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mrs Oomen-Ruijten for her excellent work and assistance in this job of conciliation .
This is a matter of consumer information at its most fundamental .
For example , the consumer should be able to make a true comparison between prices in shops .
I believe that we have achieved a good result , in that under article 10 of this directive Member States can go in for even better labelling than is required by this directive .
With that in mind , no country will feel the need to back out when this regulation eventually comes into force .
It is quite proper that certain exceptions and allowances have also been made .
It would surely be pretty odd if these price-labelling regulations were to apply to auctions , for example . I warmly approve the acceptance of the outcome of this conciliation .
Mr President , at the previous reading of the draft relating to the indication of the prices oproducts offered to consumers , the European Parliament adopted twenty-two amendments , and insisted on the need to provide for a longer period of adaptation in the introduction of these arrangements , for smaller retail outlets .
The Council accepted seven amendments , as part of the work of the Conciliation Committee .
At the relevant meeting , five other amendments were agreed .
Overall , the result is fairly satisfactory , as now , contrary to the initial proposal , separate display of unit price is no longer a requirement , if identical to the item 's selling price .
In the case , for example , of quality wines sold by France , in a 0.75 l bottles , the fact that wine is typically sold in this unit size made it clear that the compulsory display of the price per litre was unnecessary .
This constraint would only have added to the cost , which would have been of no positive advantage to consumers .
It was also essential that small retail traders be released , for a transitional period , from the obligation to display product unit price in addition to the actual product selling price .
I would like to remind you of the exorbitant cost which will already be borne by retailers generally , and more particularly by smaller retailers , as a result of the compulsory double display of prices in national currency and the euro .
The considerable extra cost which will be caused by the move to the single currency will already force some traders to defer necessary business investments to meet this obligation .
For some traders , the cost of dual price display will be disproportionately high in relation to their profit margins and may threaten their continuing viability .
This is no way to encourage the development of new jobs .
We must therefore be scrupulously attentive to ensuring that there are no additional constraints to burden our shop-keepers .
The present directive will force traders to display the real selling price of the product , as well as the unit price , for all products except those sold loose .
It is fortunate that the transitional period has been extended to 24 months , and the Commission will have to present a report and make a proposal covering the special case of small traders .
In conclusion , Mr President , our group will vote in favour of the legislation arising from this directive , but wishes to draw attention to the difficult situation which small traders are likely to face as a result of the two-fold obligation under the present directive at the end of the transitional period , and the requirement to implement dual price display in the countries affected by the single currency .
It is only when it is of real extra service to consumers that such constraints are justifiable .
Mr President , the introduction of the single European currency into the European Union is now only a matter of twelve months away .
The practical ramifications and consequences of EMU for the consumer must be closely analysed and monitored .
The euro notes and coins will not physically be in consumers ' pockets until the year 2002 .
However , the Commissioner for Consumer Affairs , Mrs Bonino , together with national governments must put in place comprehensive information campaigns relating specifically to the pricing of products in the euro and the national currency of the host Member State in the run up to EMU .
In essence , dual pricing campaigns across Europe in all key supermarkets and shopping outlets must now begin .
Prices on products should be displayed in the euro denomination and also in the host national currency .
This should have the desired and immediate effect of appraising the consumer of the price of the product in the euro denomination so that , when it is up and running as a currency , consumers will be able to adapt to the new monetary regime with understanding and confidence .
Mr President , first I would like to express the Commission 's appreciation of the fact that we have reached a compromise on the directive on consumer protection with regard to the indication of prices of goods .
I would like to congratulate Parliament and the Council for their efforts to find a compromise .
The directives on the indication of prices which were adopted in 1979 , 1988 and 1995 have entailed advances with regard to price information for consumers .
However , the system did not ensure adequate price information and was also very complicated to apply .
It is therefore important that consumers get proper and transparent information through this proposal .
By showing comparative prices and the sales prices , consumers will be able to compare different products .
That makes it possible to make a well-founded decision on the basis of a simple price comparison .
The compromise which has been reached does not mean a definitive solution for small retailers .
For some of them the requirement to indicate comparative prices entails a great burden .
Here Member States have the opportunity during a transitional period to disregard the requirement to indicate comparative prices .
For its part the Commission shall , after the expiry of the implementation period , deliver a report on the application of this directive to the European Parliament and the Council of Ministers .
The report shall in particular propose provisions with respect to small retailers .
On the basis of the report , the European Parliament and the Council shall consider and reach a decision within three years .
During this time , until the implementation period has expired , this directive will in all certainty give European consumers the chance to get complete price information from most retailers .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Postal Services
The next item is the joint debate on the following oral questions to the Commission :
B4-0911 / 97 - O-0144 / 97 , by Mr Ferber , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party on further development of postal services in the EU ; -B4-0914 / 97 - O-0155 / 97 , by Mr Wijsenbeek , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party , on the reimbursement of terminal dues between postal services ; -B4-1004 / 97 - O-0165 / 97 , by Mrs Schmidbauer and Mr Simpson , on behalf of the Group of the Party of the European Socialists , on the future of postal services ; -B4-1005 / 97 - O-0169 / 97 , by Mr Donnay , on behalf of the Group Union for Europe , on postal services ; -B4-1007 / 97 - O-0171 / 97 , by Mr Scarbonchi , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance on postal services and terminal dues ; -B4-1008 / 97 - O-0173 / 97 , by Mrs Moreau , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left on the future of postal services in the European Union .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is not so long ago that we discussed here in Strasbourg a second reading of the directive on the development of postal services .
At the time I tabled two amendments on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , which dealt with the problem of terminal dues .
Sadly , the House - unwisely , I have to say - did not take up our proposals .
It must be our aim - and I am surely in agreement with the Commissioner here - to allow competition into the European Union , that is to say to let the rules of competition apply here too .
This is not possible , however , if a worldwide agreement , namely the Universal Postal Agreement , is employed to deal with the issue of terminal dues .
It is the basis of this agreement that incoming and outgoing mail cancel each other out and thereby create a national balance .
We do not have this situation within the European Union any longer .
The single market also means - and we have found this with other deregulations - that the costs of using the services must be recovered , be it with the single electricity market and transmission rights or in the area of telecommunications and the interconnector problem .
Only where postal services are concerned are competition and the single market to carry on being ignored by a nonsensical provision .
That is why the Group of the European People 's Party is asking the Commission to tell us whether it will be addressing this problem , for example , in the notice to apply the rules of competition to the postal services ?
Will it also be addressing these concerns in the next postal directive , which will affect internet access , when we will be in the thick of the issue ?
Is it actually aware what it means to have to provide services that exceed each costing , while at the same time being locked in trade with competitors who do not have these liabilities ?
Europe 's postal services just cannot function in this way .
Mr Commissioner , if you do not succeed in solving this problem , you will not only put countless jobs at risk , but you will also compromise the postal provision we have agreed on in this House .
Mr President , despite the fact that in October , Parliament agreed a common position on postal services with the Council , the issue of post seems to refuse to go away and is yet again at the forefront of Parliament 's deliberations .
If my first reading of the Commission 's draft notice is anything to go by , then the issue of postal services may well dominate 1998 also .
Although today 's debate is about a specific issue , namely terminal dues , I would like to take the opportunity to warn the Commission that article 8 ( 3 ) of the notice goes against not only the views of this Parliament but the common position adopted through the directive , and should be dropped .
During discussions on the directive , the issue of terminal dues caused a great deal of concern .
Indeed it had been my wish , as Mr Ferber has said , to ensure as rapporteur that this problem was tackled within the directive .
However , disagreements emerged within the Council , and in order to get an agreed position on the directive as a whole , it was decided by Parliament to drop the amendments on this particular issue .
Of course this does not solve the problem being experienced by some Member States , particularly Germany , who are not recovering the cost of delivering mail from outside .
This , we would argue , is liable to jeopardize the proper functioning of the single market and brings into question the economic viability of some national postal authorities .
It also brings into question the stated objective of the Commission itself in its communication of June 1993 which states that postal operators should be paid according to the cost .
This terminal dues problem has to be faced .
In the absence of a multi-party agreement on the issue , then the responsibility of action has to fall on the Commission .
Therefore we are calling upon the Commission to introduce a proposal as soon as possible that would acknowledge that Member States may allow their universal service providers to determine terminal dues in accordance with their own cost .
I appreciate that this is a technical and difficult subject to address but a do-nothing solution would not be in the best interests of Europe 's postal services .
With the implementation of the directive , now is the time to act on this issue .
Mr President , I am not Jacques Donnay , as you can see , but I think there has been some problem with transport , and if you will allow me , I shall speak in his place .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , at the time of the recent adoption of the directive on postal services , we agreed on the principle according to which terminal dues should be based on the real costs borne by the postal services at the distribution end .
However , the various postal operators in Europe are constantly confronted with the practice of reposting , which can be compared with poaching or piracy , or even daylight robbery , at the expense of those postal services which do not seek to circumvent international agreements and regulations .
We cannot ignore the fact that some countries process an abnormally high volume of mail for cross-border destinations , compared to their domestic mail .
The proportion of international mail as compared to domestic mail is only 5 % for France , 6 % for Germany and 7 % in Italy , but rises to 12 % for Great Britain and 25 % for the Netherlands .
These figures clearly show that some postal services attract the national mail of other countries , and thus organize unacceptable and unlawful redirections of traffic , the cause of which is the depositing of mail outside national borders prior to its posting .
The only way to deal with the threat that reposting represents to the balanced arrangements of the very recent European directive on postal services is to lay down a requirement for the remuneration of the services provided , at their correct price . Hence as a matter of urgency terminal dues should be fixed on the basis of the costs borne by postal services at the distribution end .
In this case , reposting would be devoid of financial interest .
So I put my question to the Commission , Mr Commissioner .
Does the Commission believe that it is compatible with the rules on competition set out in the treaty that the postal service of a destination Member State should bill the postal service of the Member State which has sent the mail for the mail that it has despatched , at a price which covers the distribution costs , under the overall control of a national regulatory authority ?
Mr President , the resolution that I have tabled jointly with my colleague Michel Dary , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , provides a corrective to the wrongful practices of some member countries of the European Union .
Indeed , some postal services , advantaged by particularly competitive tariffs , practice unfair competition by giving incentives to mail reposting , and so poach from the national mail services business which they handle as international mail services , since the mail is deposited or sorted with them outside national boundaries .
The main beneficiary mail service is the Netherlands , whose KPN postal services made profits of around 1 billion dollars in 1996 , thanks to reposting acitivites .
This practice complies with neither the spirit nor the letter of the directive adopted on 1 December 1997 , strict respect of whose common rules will allow the harmonious development of postal services and of the quality of those services .
For these reasons , our resolution invites the Commission to conduct an inquiry into these unfair practices and to sanction those pursuing them .
We ask the Commission to subordinate the provision of aid to third countries , under the Phare and Tacis programmes , for the purpose of reorganizing their postal services , to the adoption by these countries of a system of terminal dues which is in accordance with the provisions of the directive .
Finally , failing agreement between operators on terminal dues , it would be appropriate for Member States to authorise their universal postal companies forthwith to invoice their postal processing and distribution services for incoming cross-border mail on the basis of the real costs incurred .
Mr Donnay and I have put forward four amendments to the resolution of Mr Simpson on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socailists , the Group of the European People 's Party and the Green Group in particular .
If these amendments are adopted by unanimous vote , we believe that we will be in a position of greater strength finally to solve this problem .
Mr President , first , thank you for the questions .
You provide me and the Commission with the opportunity to present our position again , which is undoubtedly necessary to avoid any misunderstanding .
I was particularly pleased by Mr Ferber 's question , which I want to highlight here because he congratulated me on my birthday .
The other questioners did not do that .
( Heckling from Mrs Moreau ) Yes , maybe next year , but thanks all the same !
The difficulties we are having with terminal dues are familiar everywhere - at least among those involved in deliberations here .
The tariffs are internationally the same and in the majority of industrial countries do not cover the costs of delivery .
That is the problem in a nutshell .
This results in considerable tension , also in regard to the quality of the services , for these international rates are not linked with quality of service .
They are wholly independent of this key aspect .
The actual costs incurred are not covered by the existing terminal dues , which are based on the CEPT system in force since 1989 . Not by a long chalk !
The current rate for a standard letter at the lowest weight is on average around 45 % of the domestic tariff , which would suggest that the actual costs of delivering a letter in this category are some 80 % of the domestic tariff .
It is indisputable - and of course is not being disputed by the Commission - that we are faced with a difficult problem .
The problem consists legally in the fact - I asked people to appreciate this during our last debate on the issue , which has led to Parliament not accepting several amendments - that the present terminal dues system , which is based on international agreements , is not in harmony with the Treaty 's rules of competition because the terminal dues tariffs are not cost-related .
This has become a vicious circle because if they were cost-related they would be in harmony with the rules of competition .
Yet if they were to become cost-related , then the international rules would have to be changed .
We therefore find ourselves in a conflict and this , I should like to point out , is also a consequence of Parliament 's resolutions in favour of a universal service and the reserved services .
According to the decisions made by Parliament and Council , the Member States enjoy clear authority in these areas , and not primarily the Commission .
The Member States and their independent regulatory bodies need to see to it that these things are sorted out .
However , we have not stood still on the issue .
One thing is clear : in a situation like this you cannot sit back and say that others should attend to it .
That is why we have asked the postal services concerned to submit to us an agreement on improved terminal dues , obviously within the Union , not as part of the international rules .
This socalled Reims agreement , which has nothing to do with the city of Reims , but is one of these nice acronyms for the activities of the Union , was the first of these agreements , and it was unsatisfactory .
We are currently reviewing the second one , which has been modified in line with the ideas we expressed there .
How this review will turn out we cannot say as yet , but it is possible we will find an appropriate relationship between quality of service provision and costs , on the one hand , and terminal dues , on the other .
This is what we are working on at present .
Naturally , we also want to achieve cost control and a reduction of the currently very high costs of some postal operators .
If we fail to achieve this , and I reiterate most forcefully - Mrs Moreau has pointed out that I was very clear on this question ; still , I need to be so all the time , to warn against making mistakes - if we cannot bring the high costs down , but instead simply add them to the terminal dues , the postal services will cease to be competitive because nobody will be able to afford them any more .
In other words : what is necessary , as well as an agreement that is in harmony with the rules of competition , is an improvement in postal services in terms of both cost and quality .
However , there are some members of this House who are interested in the post , but who are , sadly , always hard of hearing .
Yes , I have to say this , even if my friend Florus Wijsenbeek , who is too keen of hearing , is not present , but some people are very hard of hearing .
Mrs Moreau , if the postal services do not succeed in operating a sensible policy by cutting their costs and improving their quality , especially in the reserved services too , then the service will be of no use whatsoever !
It is an empty shell that cannot be filled because there is no client demand for it .
That is the point exactly .
Hence , I welcome the questions .
We are now trying to sort things out with Reims II . If this does not succeed , we must find a new approach .
We want to help in finding a solution - we , the Commission , and , I am sure , Parliament too - but then we will need to exert this useful pressure together on the postal operators .
Unfortunately , we have not managed as yet to subject them to the useful pressure of competition , at least not as far as I imagined .
Whatever , we must now try to do so by the present means .
That is what I wanted to say about the questions .
Now to Mrs Moreau .
Yes , I will come to you as well !
That does not matter today because the questions refer to the terminal dues problem and not to the draft notice .
The notice will probably be ratified tomorrow in the Commission .
The text has been agreed between the various services , and you can assume that there will be a majority in favour of it tomorrow .
I would just like to say a few words about this , not about the details of the substance , but about the role that this notice will play in general .
First , the notice would , of course , be completely pointless if it contained anything other than this directive we have agreed upon .
This is not the case .
This notice was adapted to the last parliamentary resolution so that there is no conflict between the directive and the draft notice .
Secondly , this notice is useful for those concerned since it actually sets out what the principles are by which the Commission will apply the rules of competition , especially to the reserved services , because there should not be any confusion about this .
What is more , there are court rulings on the issue .
Of course , the rules of competition also apply to the mail , and do so precisely at the point where it enjoys a monopoly or acts as the provider of a reserved service .
However , so that postal services themselves will know how the Commission will apply these rules , we are informing them in a draft notice of the rules we intend to apply .
So , we are actually doing more than we have to .
We could also make our decisions based on the rules of competition quite out of the blue .
Clearly , this would cause a furore every time and invite the justifiable question : just what are your general principles ?
How do you want to handle things generally ?
Or is there no consistency to the way you make your decisions ?
This is why , Mrs Moreau , I admire the interest which you are showing in the question , and the force of your commitment .
It would be better if you were to think first , before launching attacks which should not be directed against me , but against my colleague Mr van Miert .
I am the eternal scapegoat .
Having said that , I completely agree with Mr van Miert .
The document from Mr van Miert will be presented with my agreement .
It offers the postal services guarantees that the Commission is not doing something unacceptable or unexpected .
This is the reason why these are no grounds to justify your request .
In terms of form , you cannot constrain the Commission not to do anything which falls within its remit .
You may oblige the Commission to do something which is a necessary part of its remit , but you cannot oblige the Commission not to act within its remit .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there is an old German nursery rhyme which loosely translates as : ' I ride with the mail , I ride with the post .
I ride with the snail mail , there 's no cost . ' As for the speed at which legislation for the postal services has proceeded , I am very much reminded of the ' snail mail ' .
Things have really only progressed at a snail 's pace .
All this would be acceptable if the directive had been drawn up on the principle of ' all good things are worth waiting for ' .
Yet things have not turned out so well and considerable problems still remain .
On the one hand , the Council 's decision is so weakly formulated that each Member State can read from it what they will .
Then there is the Commission 's notice left ominously unresolved .
As far as I know , the notice planned makes the principles of the directive obsolete , and to that extent I consider it redundant .
The question of terminal dues for cross-border mail has not been resolved in the postal services directive .
So far it has always been claimed that the operators could be left to negotiate and solve the problem themselves without the need for legislation .
That is the way things stand , but nothing has been settled .
The Group of the Party of European Socialists is therefore calling for a legal ruling from the Commission .
It cannot be in the spirit of fair competition if letters can be sent from one country which on account of its good infrastructure and situation can offer cheap postal rates , while another country with a labour-intensive postal delivery service is encumbered with the greater expenditure - and you said yourself , Mr Bangemann , that only 80 % of the costs are covered - without appropriate compensation being made .
This tempts mail service users to send their letters into the country with cheap postage , while the actual country of origin is left with the costs .
Such remailing is an extremely unfair trade practice and it must be stopped .
It is not enough to invoke the Universal Postal Agreement .
There is a section on this in article 13 of the postal services directive , but here the Member States are only advised to ensure that in their agreements on the terminal dues involved in cross-border intra-Community post the following principles are observed .
Then the principles are described .
The single market cannot run purely on advice tendered in regard to a possible agreement .
Even if Reims II is to happen , this still is not enough .
We need clarity and legal certainty for all concerned , and it is the duty of the Commission to provide an efficient single market .
That is why we are looking for a directive proposal and do not want to have to wait so long for it .
What the Commission must not do when preparing the directive , however , is gear its speed to that of the snail mail .
Mr President , the problems surrounding terminal dues for international postal services and our recent decision about the EU Member States ' postal services and the Universal Postal Union as an institution are based on a view of postal distribution as a state monopoly , a view which is on the way to becoming increasingly out-of-date .
Private distributors , electronic mail and faxes are increasingly replacing the old , overworked post offices .
Like Mr Ferber I would like to please Commissioner Bangemann and praise his insight into the problems and underline the need for a continued fight for a more deregulated and competitively neutral postal market .
My fellow Group member Mr Ferber has asked a particularly important and interesting question about terminal dues , so I will not repeat that angle .
The complementary question which I would like to ask concerns the situation of private postal companies in connection with forthcoming European legislation , something which I think we have debated far too little in the European Parliament .
Against this background let me ask Commissioner Bangemann the following : do you think that the current system of terminal dues in any way distorts competition for private companies which want to conduct international postal services ?
In your opinion , what is the situation of the private postal companies and their ability to operate in the European market following our , that is , the EU 's , recent decision ?
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , reposting is surely an aspect of the practice of dumping .
It is accepted wisdom that you do not get rid of dumping by having the parties concerned sit round the table to conclude a gentlemen 's agreement , because this does not work .
What you need is a regulation to eradicate dumping .
To achieve fair competition you need binding rules , and these rules need to go further in the single market than the situation we have with the old type of international postal agreement , so to speak .
Hence there is the need for a directive .
There is the need for control , Mr Bangemann , and it comforts me to hear you say that your notice is only intended to make the directive tangible and capable of being implemented . Yet why is the directive not taken as the basis for clarifying how the rules of competition should be interpreted in this area ?
This is not clear to me in your reply .
Mr President , recently Council and Parliament took the unwise decision to postpone the liberalization of cross-border postal services until the year 2003 at least .
Now that the postal services have been relieved of the requirement to be market-oriented and to work efficiently , legislation should direct itself at protecting the consumer against abuse of power by the postal services .
Most postal services in the Union take a different view on that .
Under pressure from , in particular , the German and the French postal services , the original directive for cross-border post , the so-called Reims I agreement , was laid on the table , and a new agreement , Reims II , was negotiated .
Contrary to the first Reims agreement , tariffs for cross-border post will rise without there being a commensurate improvement in the provision of services .
Moreover , as the tariffs which are charged are based on the national tariffs , Reims II operates to the advantage of the postal services with the highest national tariffs .
This makes the agreement unacceptable to me .
My sympathy is not with the five postal services which do not wish to sign Reims II .
Nonetheless , in this House too , there is more sympathy for the position of the monopolistic postal services than for the consumer .
Thus the draft resolution of the PPE Group , the PSE Group , the Liberal Group and the Green Group proposes that , now that Reims II has not been signed by all participants , the postal services will be allowed to set the tariffs in line with their costs .
In the text I do not find any minimum requirements for the provision of service .
The fact that some postal services do not even know their own costs , let alone how to set the proper tariffs , is also overlooked .
I would like to ask the Commission not to accept Reims II .
Until the liberalization of cross-border post , tariffs should be set according to the first Reims agreement , since in this the increase in tariffs is related to an improvement of service provision .
In addition , firms in other Member States , including postal services , should be given the same treatment as tenderers of large consignments of post within one Member State .
Excuse me , Mr Commissioner , for being unable to address you in your own language .
I am unable to do so .
You will not be surprised that I do not share your militant views in favour of the constant reduction of costs , which in my view has dramatic consequences for employment and lifestyle , and does not really benefit consumers .
I would simply ask you , Mr Commissioner , kindly to bear in mind that , even if one does not share your opinion , one is nevertheless able to think .
I have received three motions for resolutions on this issue pursuant to Rule 40 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 12 noon .
Water , energy , transport and telecommunications markets
The next item is the report ( A4-0398 / 97 ) by Mr Langen , on behalf of Parliament 's delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text , approved by the Conciliation Committee , for a European Parliament and Council Directive amending Directive 93 / 38 / EEC coordinating the procurement procedures of entities operating in the water , energy , transport and telecommunications sectors ( C4-0619 / 97-95 / 0080 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , there are not many of you left .
All good things are worth waiting for , however .
We have been deliberating for two-and-a-half years now about adapting the European directives on public procurement to the last WTO agreement , and we have now reached a concerted agreement at the end of the conciliation process .
I would like to thank everyone involved , especially my colleague Mr Tappin , who assisted and advised in this process in a most constructive manner .
Hence , this evening I would like to mention only the esssentials .
We could have had everything a lot quicker , Mr Commissioner , if the Commission , or part of the Commission , had been somewhat more flexible , for Parliament was of the opinion from the start that adapting the directives to the world trade agreement should only proceed as far as is absolutely necessary .
We want a key-stage review as to why the first draft - which is probably quite unique in the history of Parliament - was rejected in full with only one vote against , since the Commission wanted to regulate things which are not contained in the world trade agreement .
This was the reason for the delay , for the long consultation period , and in the end the Commission had to submit a new proposal .
This might not have been completely new , but was revised with respect to the crucial elements , just as Parliament had suggested .
So , by and large , we can chalk up a success today .
We agreed on a course , and there is common agreement on the most important aspects , which remained controversial until the end .
I mention here in particular the provisions for the technical dialogue , an issue which has preoccupied us right from the start .
The Commission has ultimately admitted - and the Council in the conciliation process likewise - that we should agree on a sensible arrangement regarding the technical dialogue , that the technical dialogue , that is to say the consultation prior to awarding the contract , will always remain a possibility , if competition is not expressly ruled out .
This solution makes technologically sophisticated and forward-looking general tenders possible , which perhaps only individual firms , say in the transport or energy sector , could provide , and so we can be satisfied about things by and large .
The Commission has taken this demand into account in the final analysis .
Ultimately we only had one argument between Parliament , Commission and Council , and that was the question of how far the demands of the so-called sector directive for both private and public contractors apply .
Now the issue has been the subject of lengthy controversial debates at all levels of European decision-making , and in the end Parliament has given its approval with the result that we will be able to reach an agreement in conciliation on two additional statements , which Commissioner Bangemann will no doubt explain to us in a moment .
Of the five recommendations made by Parliament , two have been accepted : one , the amendment affecting small and medium-sized enterprises , a project of Mr Tappin 's , with regard to training and information material , and the other , the amendment providing the technological dialogue if competition is not ruled out .
In the case of Amendments Nos 3 , 4 and 5 , seeking to make a distinction between public and private awarding entities , a compromise wording was agreed for article 1 of this proposed directive and for two statements published in the Official Journal .
The latter state that the obligation to communicate the advantages of the tender selected as well as the name of the successful tenderer must not harm firms ' commercial interests .
The confidentiality of technical information should be guaranteed , in other words .
The second point is the question of how far statistical requirements can be reduced to a minimum .
The Commission has approved this , too .
In conclusion I would like to thank all those who have given their constructive and critical attention to the consultation process , and I think we can now safely say - I assume my colleague Mr Tappin will concur with this - that the conciliation team has found a sensible compromise with its proposal - even if it has taken some time to produce - which has been helped along by both sides .
We can live very well with that and it fully satisfies our requirements under the world trade agreement government purchases annex .
It will allow a new market with a volume of ECU 350 billion to be used by ourselves and others .
Mr President , I wish to congratulate my colleague , Mr Langen , for having led the conciliation team to such a successful conclusion .
I have always thought that public procurement is a bit of a bodice-ripper , and I can see by the attendance here that other people think very much the same .
The whole of the debate on public procurement has been fundamentally changed by the progress we have made since the Commission first put its proposals before Parliament .
At that time , the gap between Parliament 's position and that of the Council was fundamental .
I am proud that the agreements obtained by the Conciliation Committee reflect the principles that Parliament put forward in the first reading and I welcome the willingness of the Commission to listen .
Our desire was primarily to establish good public procurement policy for the benefit of the people we represent .
Although , as with all compromise , the final result may not be exactly what we , as individuals , or we , as a committee , may have wished for , it is fair to say no one will regret the result .
In this report we have addressed the issues at the very heart of procurement policy : firstly , the distinction between public and private sectors ; secondly , questions of technical dialogue , to which Mr Langen has referred ; thirdly , the provision of information ; and , finally and fourthly , the matter of confidentiality .

These issues will be coming up before us again in the near future .
Firstly , when the Utilities Directive 93 / 38 comes up for review next year but also when we receive the Commission 's response to the Green Paper when that comes before Parliament early in 1998 .
I hope that we in Parliament will continue to work together as effectively as we have done in the case of the Langen report and that we will be successful in getting as good a conclusion .
I hope too that the Commission and the Council will continue to take Parliament 's feelings on procurement very seriously , especially when we are not there to make the case ourselves .
In this case I refer especially to negotiations at the GPA and WTO levels .
One of the dominant themes underlying this report has been the question of reciprocity , of getting and keeping the playing field level .
Even though the Langen report dealt with procurement inside the European Union , it became quite obvious , even to those who were less inclined to listen , that the global environment is as important to business in the EU as the internal regulation .
You cannot separate the effect one has on the competitiveness of the other .
This is not the time to pursue this argument but I am sure I speak for many of my colleagues when I say that we look forward to the next round of debates , most importantly to establishing transparency and accountability - two key words from Parliament when it comes to procurement .
If we can do that , we shall have gone a long way towards a system of procurement regulations which is in line with the wishes expressed at every stage of this report and will enable the user to exercise the skills of business without being hampered by the overburdening of bureaucracy and restrictive legislation .
This has been our objective .
If we achieve all that we would be even more proud .
In the meantime , my thanks and congratulations , in particular to Mr Langen , and to other colleagues who have been so active in this report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in June 1996 this Parliament , by a very large majority rejected the draft directive liberalizing the code of public sector contracts , proposed by the Commission , in the water , energy , transport and telecommunications sectors , as this code was deemed to be too liberal and to open up the doors of Europe to American industry without receiving anything in return .
To all appearances , this draft was overbeneficial to companies on the other side of the Atlantic , and had it been adopted unamended , I remind this house that it would have been directly and immediately applicable , and outside parliamentary control in most of our Member States , as it fell into the regulatory field .
At the time , this draft was pushing the boat out just a little too far , and in particular , sought to demolish the existing public licensing arrangements in many local authorities , in many countries of the Union .
We remind you that this draft directive laid down that an industrial group or one of its subsidiaries asked to carry out studies for a facility would not subsequently be able to bid for its construction .
At the opportune moment , Mr Langen , and here we wish to congratulate him , took the draft directive apart point-bypoint , as it delivered up the European market to foreign companies , without any reciprocal arrangements .
Since then , much water has passed under the bridge , and we are now in a position to give an opinion on the report of the delegation to the Conciliation Committee .
( The President asked the speaker to wind up ) I have one more minute , Mr President . I thought I had two minutes .
I do not ? I will conclude then .
The amended wording of the two statements to be published in the Official Journal , has allayed our fears , Mr President , and our group will fully support Mr Langen 's excellent report .
I am extremely disappointed that you did not let me have another minute , because we had recovered two minutes from Mr Porto , who will not be here tomorrow , and I thought you might have used this opportunity to show a little consideration .
Mr President , I think I can make this brief .
You have all heard how Mr Langen has been rightly praised .
Sometimes he is wrongly praised , but in this instance it is absolutely true that he has helped to produce a very sensible compromise .
If the Commission has ultimately done the same , this clearly shows that we are willing to achieve a result in a procedure of this kind .
If things sometimes look different from the start , then that is because many other services within the Commission are trying to achieve an ideal position for the Commission for all sorts of reasons .
That this is sometimes unworkable is something else we know .
May I thank you again , Mr Langen , and wish Parliament equal success in future with conciliation !
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 8.15 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Madam President , I rise concerning comments made by my colleague Mr Hallam yesterday .
I think he missed the point and the question he meant to ask was : In the light of recent reports in the press , can Parliament write to the Commission and ask if there is any truth in the fact that American companies are lobbying it heavily to relax legislation with regard to genetically modified organisms and genetically engineered food ?
Could we find out from the Commission if this is the case ?
Mr Thomas , we are on approval of the Minutes .
We are not going to return to yesterday 's debate .
Let things be perfectly clear .
If anything said has not been correctly reported in the Minutes that will of course be changed .
I did not see my name in yesterday 's Minutes from yesterday , but I was here .
I would therefore like it added to the Minutes that I was present here yesterday , but that I was not included in yesterday 's Minutes .
Very well , Mr Lindqvist , we shall do just that .
( The Minutes were approved ) .
Madam President , it is slowly becoming embarrassing and particularly irksome for me to have to remind this House every four weeks that I have been waiting for more than a year now for a reply from the Chair as to how it could be possible for the Council presidency to say in Zimbabwe that it had no idea about any resolution adopted by Parliament in the topical and urgent debate .
I have been making constant enquiries since September as to how such a thing can happen .
What happens to our resolutions , and how could the Council presidency say it had no idea although the resolution was known ?
And now I would like to request again that I finally be given a reply so that I do not have to repeat my entreaty , like a prayer wheel , at the start of every sitting !
We take note of your statement and your wishes .
Are there any other comments ?
Madam President , I will speak to you in French , to make it easy for you , as you spoke on this question .

On 22 October I wrote a letter pursuant to Rule 28 , paragraph 2 , asking the Presidency of the Bureau why a car had been made available to the past President , Mr Hänsch , and why he continued to enjoy the same privileges as when he was President .
I have only asked for a reply regarding existing precedents and the cost of these things . Also , we are currently living in a concentration camp atmosphere , where people wish to control our least movements .
I would not want the Bureau to become a politburo which would be unaccountable to this House .
There we have it , Madam President .
I would like a reply !
Mr Fernandes , I understood the question you put to me in my own language .
I would also have been able to understand it if it had been put in your own language .
Having said that , the Bureau has indeed looked at the way in which we might , with a maximum of dignity , deal with our past Presidents , those of them , of course , who continue to be serving Members of this House .
You can well imagine that , after two and a half years as President , these colleagues are very much in demand , are invited to make many visits , and to respond to many requests . We have adopted an approach which is very measured , perfectly reasonable , which I would ask you to look at with considerable care .
You will see that there is nothing excessive .
That is why the Bureau has adopted these procedures , which affect a number of our colleagues , and which of course have no reason to continue once those colleagues have left Parliament .
But I can assure you there is nothing excessive .
I am not sure that you are aware of the precise details of these questions , because here too , many stories have done the rounds .
It is just like that well-known story about the media , the television and the photographers .
Things have been reported inaccurately , and I would invite you to look at what has actually been decided .
That is quite simply what I wanted to say .
I am personally committed to the decision that was taken .
Madam President , I would like to believe you , and I do believe you .
So I would like to know which of Mr Hänsch 's predecessors made the same request for the same privilege .
I do not understand .
Why is Mr Hänsch the problem ?
Mr Barón Crespo , Lord Plumb and Mr Dankert are also former Presidents of this Parliament , are they not ?
If these measures have not been properly applied , you may indeed place the matter before the Bureau .
I really do not understand .
There are measures and arrangements which have been adopted and affect all past Presidents .
I shall give the floor to Mr Hänsch , as this is a matter of personal concern .
I think that is the least I can do .
Madam President , thank you first of all for what you have said by way of an explanation .
Secondly , I would like to state for the benefit of the ladies and gentlemen who have put these questions with the House 's approval that there is a host of subsequent duties incumbent on a former President , a great number of requests and appeals , which have to do with how the presidency has been publicly received in the past .
For occasions such as these I had an official car placed at my disposal .
Every one of you who has ever seen me here in Strasbourg and in Brussels knows that I do not have an official car available , rather I queue along with those waiting for a normal car in the evening , as any other honourable Member would do .
That as an MEP I have a car at my disposal is not true , and anyone maintaining that is lying !
( Applause )
Madam President , I was not commenting on Mr Hänsch 's case .
I made a clear-cut enquiry , and you failed to understand it .
I asked you to tell me which of Mr Hänsch 's predecessors made the same suggestion to the Bureau , of having an official car placed at their disposal for several months or years , no more and no less !
I asked whether it was Mr Barón Crespo , or whether it was Lord Plumb , or whoever .
I did not enquire at all about Mr Hänsch .
I would like to know who , apart from Mr Hänsch , made the request of the Bureau .
I would like an answer on this .
Mrs Pack , I did understand that you were talking about Mr Hänsch , but I am not even aware if the request originated from Mr Hänsch himself .
The Bureau considered a proposal from the Secretary General , without us knowing whether ...
Ladies and gentlemen , please .
The Bureau of 5 November 1997 adopted the following points . Offices equivalent to those of the chairmen of committees or delegations , secretarial assistance for two and a half years , availability of an official vehicle with driver for the first three months , followed by priority access to drivers to allow past Presidents on termination of office to honour their commitments outside their normal place of work for the following nine months .
These were the limitations set on the Bureau 's decision .
I think it is important to be specific about this , as I am tempted into believing that many colleagues , and this is quite normal , had no exact knowledge of these matters .
I would draw your attention to the fact that this proposal was not identified as originating from any particular person .
It was proposed by the Secretary General of the European Parliament as applicable to all past presidents , and the President of the European Parliament was considerate enough to say he would prefer Mrs Fontaine to take the chair for that part of the Bureau meeting , as it would affect him as well , once he was no longer President This request was not put forward by any particular person .
It was put forward in its own right , and it was adopted subject to those restrictions .
We did not get into a debate on the subject , but in my view , my colleagues should be fully informed of the context in which this decision was taken .
Madam President , the decision taken by the Bureau will apply in the future .
This means that , in future , every President of this House will be able to make use of this facility for a period of three months after the end of his mandate .
That seems reasonable to me ; it also seems to me in the interest of this entire House .
And may I add , Madam President , that it is my firm belief that Mr Hänsch was one of the best Presidents this Parliament ever had , and that I am proud that , three months after his mandate has come to end , he will still be able to function in such a way .
Madam President , first of all , the Presidency Minutes are sent to every Member .
That is why every Member with eyes and ears has been able to read what the Presidency resolved in this matter .
There is , therefore , nothing surprising about what we are dealing with here .
Secondly , this is a general resolution affecting all Presidents of this House .
Thirdly , as regards unusual , Mrs Pack , what is being practised here is no different from what all presidents or speakers of the 15 national parliaments are entitled to .
Fourthly , this Parliament should not diminish itself .
It should be proud that Presidents of this Parliament can appear and deliver speeches in other Member States , that they represent the interests of this House and not the interests of a political group .
That is why , fifthly , I find it shameful that a debate is being conducted here about the President who has represented this House in a way that not many other Presidents have managed to do !
Thank you , Mr Samland , I think that you have very appropriately conveyed the feelings of the Bureau when it took this decision .
Madam President , I have another point of order .
I submitted two questions about the building work in Brussels and Strasbourg , one to the Commission and one to the Council of Ministers .
I have asked questions before , but I have never got a letter back saying that questions cannot be asked .
However , now I have received such a letter in which my questions are answered by saying that they are not permitted under Rule 41.1 .
I now have a question for you as President .
Since my questions were sent to the President of the Parliament , I would like to know who it is who decides whether questions may be asked in Parliament or not .
Is it yourself , some presiding committee or Parliament 's members who decide ?
I do not see my questions here on the question form , neither the question to the Commission , nor the one to the Council .
I consider questions about the building work in Brussels and Strasbourg to be questions which greatly concern us and our voters who ask questions .
It must be possible to ask this kind of question .
I demand an answer as to who decides whether my questions may be asked or not .
The reply is very clear . The President of the European Parliament has the power to decide on the admissibility of questions .
In reality , your questions are directed to the Council and to the Commission , and they should have been raised pursuant to Rule 28 , but it is perfectly possible for you to restate those questions under the appropriate Rule , and at that point , quite clearly , you will receive a reply .
Madam President , I too asked the President about the cost of the computer system in Brussels .
I trust that I will not receive a reply to the effect that I cannot receive a reply on the basis of Rule 41.1 which Mr Lindqvist has referred to .
When Members put a question to the President , they are entitled to an answer and Rules should not be used to obviate that answer .
We must have an answer as to why we have a computer system in Brussels which cannot take CD-roms and on which the main contractor has a three-year warranty , which prevents us using the computers for user-friendly purposes .
Answers to these questions must be given .
Our constituents demand it .
Mr Falconer , it appears that your question has been restated in accordance with Rule 28 , and you will be receiving a reply .
Madam President , I will not go back to the matter I raised here .
If the Quaestors give evidence in this House we shall know what really happened . We shall know the truth .
I would just like to mention that I submitted an urgent written question to the Commission on 20 October .
That question raised the matter of the disastrous agricultural policy to which the structural funds were applied in my country .
I know it has still not arrived , and the Secretary General of this Parliament told me it should have been here by 19 November .
I have always spoken against the conspiracy of silence between the Commission and member countries .
They cover up for each other .
That is why I have not had a reply .
I am entitled to that reply and so are the people of Portugal .
The number of the question is 3479 / 97 and it was submitted on 20 October .
I know Commissioner Deus Pinheiro - that is , the voice of the authorities - has tried to prevent the reply from being sent out .
If that is an acceptable procedure in a democracy , Madam President , then I would rather live in a totalitarian state .
I have already lived under a dictatorship , and it certainly did not use procedures like the ones that are often used here .
Mr Rosado Fernandes , I did not hear the end of your speech .
I shall confine myself to the first part , and say that we will check and ensure that you receive a reply to the question you have raised .
Madam President , it seems to me that Mr Rosado 's final statement was an insult to democracies .
I have had the misfortune to live under a dictatorship , and the procedures used in a dictator state are very different from those which this Parliament has adopted .
I would ask Mr Rosado Fernandes to rephrase his statement , in order to show support for democratic institutions and this Parliament .
Mr Medina Ortega , that was the reason I preferred not to have heard .
Draft budget for 1998
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :

( A4-0390 / 97 ) by Mr Tillich and Mr Tomlinson , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the draft general budget of the European Communities for the financial year 1998 , as modified by the Council ( Sections I to VI ) ( C4-0600 / 97 ) and on amending letter 1 / 98 to the 1998 preliminary draft budget , Section III - Commission ( C4-0645 / 97 ) - ( A4-0409 / 97 ) by Mr Giansily , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the draft ECSC operating budget for 1998 ( SEC ( 97 ) 0933 - C4-0270 / 97 )
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , following the second reading of the budget by the Council and the second reading last week in the Committee on Budgets , there is now a proposal on the table which has to be voted on this Thursday .
In view of the fact that so many members have left the House , I assume that we have a good proposal here since there hardly seems to be any need to debate it .
But how does it look in concrete terms ?
As a European Parliament we have signalled from the start that we are ready and willing to respect the Edinburgh decisions , especially with regard to the structural funds .
We decided from the start that we could not declare ourselves in agreement with the Economics and Finance Council 's position of aiming for zero growth as the Edinburgh decisions did not consider that realistic .
The European Parliament was open to a moderate growth , in line with European reality and reflecting the efforts of the Member States in their national budgets .
However , our condition here was that there should be an equal burden on all areas of budget expenditure , and of course we also staked a claim to implement and fulfil our political priorities .
I would like to reiterate those priorities we decided on in March .
They were combatting unemployment , tapping the potential of small and medium-sized businesses , preparing the groundwork for enlargement to the central and eastern European countries , and promoting youth , education and culture programmes .
On the question of initiating preparations for enlargement , we decided , where the Commission is concerned , on a reserve of 20 " A ' posts as a political sign that entry negotiations should start in 1998 .
This reserve -I would like to suggest to this House - cannot be sustained in principle any longer since the Council gave the Commission a clear job last weekend of setting about the spadework for the entry negotiations .
I think this satisfies our political intentions linked to this reserve .
One thing that was not open to discussion from the start was a repetition of what we found last year with the Council , namely cuts in structural funds payments .
We gave that the thumbs-down from the word go .
To that extent we remained true to our remit .
I would particularly like to mention the success we had with the 1998 budget in the area of agriculture .
It is not just that the relationship between " budgeteers ' and " agrarians ' in this House has basically improved and become constructive . No , we have now developed a budget procedure with which it is essential we continue .
We are now in a position , courtesy of the latest data , to adapt the Commission 's preliminary draft for agricultural spending to the real conditions found in the year and so not only create a sensible budgetary policy , but also allow the Member States to make savings .
The allocations for those involved , to wit the farmers , still remain unaffected by this ; only the overly high estimates in the agricultural budget we normally have every year have been reduced to a minimum with the 1998 budget .
Incidentally , we have had other successes in the area of agriculture .
For the first time we have achieved the right to be consulted along with the Council in this area , with amendments from the Committee on Agriculture being taken into account at the Council 's second reading .
This is a success of our negotiations .
We achieved a new nomenclature in a certain area of agricultural spending .
We also have a reserve of ECU 200 million , where we are not only able to have a say , but are required to have a say .
The procedure provides for this .
It means we also have the right to be consulted in the area of obligatory expenditure .
And we also said , right from the start , that if the Commission tabled an amending letter , then there should be no corrections through across-the-board cuts !
The Commission followed the advice , and both Council and Parliament supported this approach .
In June and July of this year - something that has almost been forgotten -we submitted a recommendation to the employment summit in Luxembourg .
This concerned creating jobs in small and medium-sized businesses and giving them the incentive to create additional vacancies .
We know the outcome .
Now it is a matter of starting to implement the political decisions of Luxembourg as quickly as possible and of getting the Commission to come up with a suitable proposal for a legal basis as early as possible in the New Year , because we can only help small and medium-sized businesses if a legal basis is created for such expenditure .
I would like to remind you that this is the first time the European Parliament has succeeded in launching its own initiative before the Council , and that the European Parliament in contrast to the Council - and I do not mean the current presidency , but the Council on the Yugoslavia question , say , or Meda - has not just formulated one proposal , but has also said that we will find the money , and not just at the expense of other policy areas .
We have achieved our priorities in the area of culture and education .
We have - I am pleased to report - secured for Socrates , in concerted action with the Council , a deal involving additional monies being made available to students and young people from 1998 onwards , including ECU 35 million in 1998 and ECU 35 million in 1999 .
This is also a unique achievement : arriving at a figure during conciliation which is higher than the budget estimate put forward by the Commission .
This has never happened before in the course of the conciliation procedure .
In addition - and I refer to my statement just now about Meda and Yugoslavia - we have restored the balance in foreign policy , specifically in favour of the priorities of the developing countries and Latin America .
And , last but not least , we are tabling a proposal which leaves a margin of ECU 800 million , money which has not been spent , although this might have been possible .
Together with the cuts in payments , that is an operating result each MEP can be proud about at home .
This 1998 budget is more realistic than ever before and puts an end to the myth that money in Europe is only ever wasted .
I know there are colleagues , albeit only a few , in this House who do not share this view .
Yet their argument alone , that we have not achieved anything else this year other than putting the interinstitutional agreement into practice for the first time , is a remarkable achievement from an institutional point of view .
Mr President-in-Office , I told you before the first reading that you had not got the budget in the bag yet .
And I reminded you that it was precisely during the last Luxembourg Presidency that the budget procedure did not have a successful outcome .
This time round , I have to confess , you were a fair partner .
This budget is not least a personal success on your part , on the part of the Council .
You have set a high standard for the future , and I hope future presidencies will continue to pass on this baton that you hand down to your successor .
Despite all the general satisfaction , there are still a few items on the request list which I would have liked to see ticked off .
We have not made any significant progress with the legal bases .
Though all the signs are there in principle .
In my opinion , the approach to this year 's budget has provided a firm basis for us to progress in the next round of talks on the question of legal bases .
Nor have we made the breakthrough - and I am personally sorry about this - in fisheries .
We were close to making a final agreement with the Netherlands .
But here the Commission , which also has something to say on the issue , was not really involved .
So we are not 100 % satisfied where fisheries are concerned .
Yet I believe that the budget for 1998 , which will be put to the vote on Thursday , is a good proposal .
I hope that the British and Austrians next year will take up this proposal in this spirit .
For my part , as rapporteur for this House , I would now like to hand over the baton for the 1999 budget to my successor , Barbara Dührkop Dührkop .
I wish to thank everyone most sincerely - the President , the Commission and my colleagues in Parliament who were involved in preparing this budget for 1998 .
Madam President , my task is relatively simple by comparison with that of Mr Tillich , because this year , for the first time , all the amendments adopted by Parliament at first reading , with a minor exception , have been adopted by the Council .
That is unique and it shows that we have been showing the same level of financial prudence as that which the Council has sought to apply to other areas of the budget .
I mention that because it is an object lesson .
The recognition of our financial prudence is something that could be learned by some of our colleagues who have been complaining volubly about waste and yet do not participate in any of our discussions about controlling it .
In terms of the other institutions , including our own , there have been no amendments by the Council to our budget .
The twenty per cent ceiling of category 5 appropriations has been respected , as we always said it would be , despite the cost of the new buildings , which everybody in this House knows were not necessarily our choice but were forced upon us by decisions taken by the Heads of State and of Government meeting in Edinburgh and , subsequently , Amsterdam .
We have done all that and , at the same time , in category 5 , maintained a margin of ECU 187 million .
That is a very satisfactory outcome .
There is , however , a relatively minor problem concerning the revenue amendments referred to in paragraphs 24 and 25 of our report .
I said to the Council during the conciliation that I really did not think any of the members of the Council would understand the detail of what we were doing , and that proved to be the case .
What we were doing was quite simply entering into the budget remarks in accordance with article 20.2 of the Financial Regulation .
These are remarks on the revenue side of the budget , designed for the maximum clarity and transparency .
They are already incorporated by the Court of Auditors in the remarks on its budget , and we sought to get an interinstitutional standard of equal regard for article 20.2 .
For some theological reason which I , and I suspect the majority of members of the Council , do not fully understand , there was a reluctance to accept our amendments .
We have nevertheless reincorporated them .
We hope that the Council will see the wisdom of this , accept it and will even go further than that by deciding that during the forthcoming year , instead of leaving a lot of our discussions to the very last minute , it will enter into a sensible dialogue with Parliament on the revenue side of the budget .
This year we have had major constraint of expenditure - sometimes damaging constraint of expenditure - without any sensible dialogue about the wastes that occur by not getting the full rights of own resources and other revenues entered into the budget .
Each extra ECU coming into the budget is worth as much as an ECU saved on the expenditure side .
Yet when we look at the wastes on the own-resources side , from the collection of traditional own resources , the fraud in preferential trade agreements , the failure to ensure proper collection of excise duty and VAT , and the whole question of transit fraud on which this Parliament had a committee of inquiry , we can see massive losses of potential income to the European budget which could be had without increasing the own-resources rates .
So we hope that the Council will start a process of sensible dialogue with us on revenue and that , instead of having this conciliation at the last minute , we can perhaps in the earlier part of next year have a sensible dialogue with the British presidency together with the Luxembourg presidency and the Austrians , so that we can take all these questions fully into consideration .
The other paragraph in the report I would just like to draw to Parliament 's attention is paragraph 26 .
Some Members of this House were concerned that following the decision of the Court of Justice we had not got the appropriations for the twelfth part-session on the line ; they were fully in reserve .
Paragraph 26 clearly invites the administration to bring forward the appropriate transfer for the twelfth part-session in Strasbourg , and it points out that there are suitable and easy methods of financing that .
With those few words , I , like Mr Tillich , thank all the staff , the administration of Parliament , the Committee on Budgets and also the Commission and the Council for their cooperation on the budget .
I hope that this cooperation continues with their acceptance of our minor revenue-side amendments and then a sensible discussion on the revenue side later next year .
Madam President , with the ECSC budget we are dealing with a traditional report which is now of no great interest and regarded as something of a hangover from a far-off and long distant past , and which in the last few weeks has caused an astonishing rumpus , because of the position of the Committee on Budgets .
Before I deal with that , I would like , as an exception , to refer to a text which dates back a bit but which I think has something to recommend it .
It goes something like this . A common interest creates solidarity .
It makes new solutions possible , which were not possible in national forms .
The financial expression of this solidarity is the levy on all the coal and steel production of our six countries , made under the treaty and handed over to the High Authority .
This levy protects the labour force against the risks to which it was previously exposed and which stood in the way of the necessary progress .
This levy makes it possible to finance a conversion fund , so that workers who change jobs receive compensation which will contribute in large measure to removing their anxiety about the future .
The same person also said that the enlarged market , where the producer may be subject to competition from a wider range of companies , and in where the consumer knows he can rely on a greater number of suppliers , changes the attitudes of people through changes in the economic situation .
These few sentences were spoken here , in Strasbourg itself , on 20 May 1954 .
You will not be surprised when I tell you they were spoken by Jean Monnet , at a time when the construction of Europe was a thing of the future , and had not yet been buried under the deadweight of technostructure .
The Commission 's report on the 1998 ECSC budget proposes burying this levy , unnoticed and unmourned , five years before the 2002 deadline , the pretext being that the ECSC has not made any loans since 23 July last .
A fine thing !
That decision is inappropriate .
It does not respect the spirit of the founding fathers , as the levy had not been intended to be made in consideration of anything whatsoever , but to be a system of financial compensation to promote employment .
That is why we are asking for the levy to be kept , and for the relevant funds be devoted to employment in the coal and steel sectors , to research and innovation , for the benefit for young entrepreneurs and dynamic researchers , who do not believe their sector is in terminal decline .
These funds should be handled by the EIB , which should allocate preferential interest rate loans to small and medium-sized companies creating new jobs .
In 1998 , the sector is set to lose 28 , 000 jobs .
When Members of the European Parliament are confronted in their own countries with the tragedy of families hard-hit by unemployment , they cannot be expected to cheerfully accept the disappearance , not only of 28 , 000 jobs , but also of a source of finance which would make it possible to create at least a few alternative jobs .
It is possible , Mr Liikanen , that DG XIX has become an island managing prosperity which is now rare indeed in Europe , the ECSC treasury , which I remind you , amounts to ECU 1.2 billion .
The report on the use of these funds will provide an opportunity for interesting discussion , which will doubtless be an extension of your report for 1998 , and we hope you will today be looking at the proposals of the Committee on Budgets , in the full awareness that , in addition to the financial considerations , we are faced with a full-scale problem of political philosophy , which is the reason why the majority of the Committee on Budgets opposes your proposal to eliminate the levy .
I am aware , of course , that you have the last word , but I believe you would be wrong to underestimate this issue .
Naturally , my group supports the report I have had the honour of presenting on behalf of the Committee on Budgets .
By agreement with the session services , I take advantage of this opportunity to move straight on to our group 's position on the report by our colleagues , Mr Tillich and Mr Tomlinson .
While we largely endorse the conclusions of the trialogue , in particular as regards structural funds , reduction of which was not acceptable to the Committee on Budgets in 1998 , the penultimate year for the financial perspectives under the Edinburgh agreement , we cannot , on the other hand , accept a reduction of ECU 550 million in obligatory expenditure , nor , in particular , the targeted reduction of ECU 250 million : ECU 100 million for the agri-monetary regime , ECU 100 million for the beef sector support measures , and ECU 50 million for swine fever .
Indeed , I believe that the European Parliament , by agreeing to enter into a process of incipient codecision , as our colleague Mr Tillich demonstrated just a moment ago , is going down the wrong road .
There is obligatory expenditure , where the Council has the last word , and there is non-obligatory expenditure where Parliament has the last word .
To enter into commitments for expenditure over which we do not have the final say , in a codecision procedure which ends up costing us ECU 500 million , is unacceptable as far as our group is concerned , and that is the reason why we will abstain in the vote on agricultural expenditure .
For the rest , and in particular as regards the reductions affecting European Union internal policy and external actions , we are fully aware that concessions had to be made , so to speak , and sacrificial victims offered up on the altar of monetary union , in spite of the effort already made by our Parliament in 1996 for 1997 .
Even so , I repeat that we are fairly satisfied with the agreement on the structural funds , as we have an agreement on the Peace programme for Northern Ireland - my Irish colleague , who will be speaking about this later , is far more competent that I am on the issue - and we are also delighted - I repeat - that measures have been taken in favour of employment , even if the initiative we proposed for the ECSC has not been agreed , and that there is still ECU 150 million for the three financial years , ECU 450 million in total , which will provide us with the finance for the decisions that were taken in Luxembourg .
I would like to conclude , Madam President , by thanking the Luxembourg Presidency of the Council , as I believe that this year , we had far better dialogue than in the previous years with other presidencies , and all these discussions were extremely fruitful , with everything put straight on the table .
I would also like to offer my sincere thanks to our colleague , Mr Tillich , for the kindness he has shown to all members of the Committee on Budgets , as well as to the chairman , Mr Samland et Mr Tomlinson , for their work in the Committee on Budgets .

Madam President , all the speeches I have made this year on the 1998 Budget have started with my saying that I enjoy excellent cooperation with the Committee on Budgets .
I am glad to say that still applies .
I would like to thank Mr Tillich and Mr Samland , in their respective positions , for this .
I would also like to include the Presidency of the Council , the Netherlands at the beginning of this year , and subsequently Luxembourg .
The agriculture budget this year is unique , because if we are to believe the latest estimates of the Commission , we are setting a budget which is certain to be too low .
The Committee on Agriculture nevertheless adopted it and accepted it because it is also aware of all the cuts which have to be implemented throughout Europe in connection with the introduction of the euro .
We therefore agreed to it , but on one clear condition .
That condition is more input from this Parliament into the agriculture budget , and for this we would like an extra supplementary Budget and figures from the Commission , if necessary in March or April next year ; a positive attitude from the Council and Parliament will be needed .
We welcome the solidarity which has been demonstrated in this Parliament in wanting to reduce the agriculture budget by the same amount as headings 3 and 4 .
Two things were at the forefront of the discussions this year .
First , no reduction on arable farming supplements .
We considered this essential .
The rules should not be changed halfway through the game , and we are grateful to Parliament for following us in that .
The second point is on the amendments from the Agriculture Committee which have been taken up to a large extent by Parliament and the Council of Ministers .
One thing became clear .
The agriculture budget - and many people may have thought this - is not safe in the sole care of the Council of Ministers .
That is why it is essential for there to be a trialogue in years to come , and the procedure followed this year should not be a nine days ' wonder , but one we will continue in the years ahead .
It is necessary that we maintain agricultural spending at a satisfactory level .
Madam President , the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment has frequently had to deal with the question of how the phasing-in of the ECSC policies is to be combined with the phasing-out of the ECSC .
It is important for us that parallelism really exists , that whole areas of social policy are not destroyed with the abolition of the ECSC , that the positive responsibilities anchored in the ECSC Treaty do not simply disappear and - I might add -that the ECSC reserves do not disappear in the process because , for example , the Commission is of the opinion that a lot of money needs to be spent closing down the Polish mines or similar large enterprises , for which the Commission might have appropriate plans tucked away somewhere .
I would like to stress again in context that the ECSC reserves ought to be investigated more closely , because the ECSC pursued a very far-sighted and intelligent banking policy in the past and used the system of authorizations and payments to build up a whole series of reserves , which is hard to comprehend .
Mr Giansily has suggested that something might yet be done for employment in this area via the levy .
I find this meaningful insofar as it strengthens the EIB programme .
It makes no sense simply wishing to curb structural change , instead the money must actually be used for innovative projects .
Clearly it is not very much .
Moreover , we are not all in agreement in my group whether this is a sensible strategic emphasis or rather a less sensible ad hoc venture , but the strategic emphasis could take the direction of doing something to alleviate the specific distress , particularly in the coal regions - the steel regions are less affected .
This seems sensible and no doubt also conforms to the Social Committee 's line in fighting to see that the available monies are mobilized for those affected and for the wage and salary earners .
It is in this spirit that I might support Mr Giansily 's initiative .
We still need to debate this , however .
Madam President , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , I would like to thank the Committee on Budgets on this occasion for the great work that they have achieved in securing ECU 70 million over two years for the Socrates programme .
This , as Mr Tillich pointed out , is an unprecedented situation , where the amount eventually agreed by the Council is above the amount requested by the Commission .
I know that this is a result of heavy pressure and brinkmanship by our Parliament representatives during the conciliation process which I understand lasted for about six hours .
The amounts granted at the end recognize the role of education in enhancing job creation .
Thousands of students and teachers will be jubilant at the additional funding .
Of course the figure , as far as the Culture Committee is concerned , will always be too low , but this is a huge step in the right direction .
I would , however , like to point out an anomaly in the system that we have developed as a Parliament in terms of the conciliation process : the Culture Committee was all geared up to start conciliation on the budgetary aspects of Socrates .
The deal that was made by the Budgets Committee is something that all members of my committee would recognize as being extremely difficult to achieve in a straight conciliation process by the Culture Committee .
But the process made a nonsense of conciliation by the Culture Committee later .
In future , therefore , if individual committees are entering into conciliation of budgetary aspects , agreements will have to be made with the Budgets Committee before conciliation is tied up so that the amount agreed will be respected by the Budgets Committee in the subsequent annual budget .
We found that the system has worked against us in Raphael in the past , but in this case has worked to our advantage .
We are , however , delighted by the results of Socrates in particular , and recognize the hard work done on our behalf by the Budgets Committee .
Madam President , first of all , there is a mistake in the paperwork given to us .
The same amendments appear both as having been passed by the Committee on Budgets and not having been passed by the Committee on Budgets .
I hope that can be rectified .
I would like to thank very much my colleagues on the Budgets Committee for their cooperation throughout this year .
As far as the budget for energy and research is concerned , we need to look at what it can allow us to do , particularly in terms of the agreement reached at Kyoto which , although disappointing , nevertheless requires action from us .
There are three things you can do to reduce CO2 emissions from fossil fuels .
You can use nuclear energy , and the Euratom Treaty allows large amounts of money for the safe use of nuclear energy .
You can be more efficient with energy : the programme which concerns us there is the Save II programme where the Council has been disappointingly unambitious in the amount of money it has allotted .
I am pleased that Parliament is increasing the money a little and is insisting that some of the money is spent locally by networks covering the regions , islands and cities .
The third thing you can do is use renewable energy and I am disappointed that so far there is no legal base for Altener II .
When there is , I appreciate the fact that the Budgets Committee says they may be able to put more money into that programme .
As far as research is concerned , all of us were extremely disappointed , including yourself I know , Madam President , at the results of the conciliation process where the ECU 700 million we had expected to be added to the Fourth Framework Programme ended up as a mere ECU 115 million .
Nevertheless , I would like to thank the Budgets Committee for their help and cooperation , which enabled us to put some pressure on the Council .
So far as the question of fusion and the Jet staff are concerned , alI I can say is this should be a lesson to us in future : in big projects you can end up with big trouble if you are not very careful about the details .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , three months ago , to the very day , I had the opportunity and the honour of setting out before you the main lines of the first reading of the draft budget by the Council .
On this basis , Parliament proceeded to the first reading of the budget in its October part-session .
The Council , for its part , as you know , adopted the draft budget at its second reading , on 27 November .
Between the two readings , Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , procedural events of crucial importance have occurred .
Here , I have in mind the trialogue of 17 November , and in particular the ad hoc concertation of 27 November on agricultural expenditure provided for in the Commission 's letter of amendment .
In a general manner , I would like here to mention the discussions which have regularly taken place during the budget adoption procedures , for example , the meeting of the Parliamentary delegation with the ministers of finance , with the Member States budget ministers , and Commissioner Liikanen , before the Council 's final adoption of the budget at its second reading .
As regards the decisions taken by the Council at its budget meeting , on 27 November , these bear the mark of the discussions that I have just alluded to , and which gave rise to important agreements . On the one hand , these provided for compliance with the principles of rigour and budgetary discipline fixed from the very start by the Council , and on the other hand , they took into account of the results of the European Council on employment .
Essentially , these decisions are as follows .
In the field of agricultural expenditure , the forecast amount is as agreed at the concertation meeting of 27 November , taking into account the revised forecast requirements communicated by the Commission , as well as a supplementary abatement of some ECU 550 million , which is the counterpart to a reduction of the same amount in non-obligatory expenditures under headings 3 and 4 .
In this respect , Madam President , I wish to say that the presidency and the Council have at the very least as much reason as your Parliament itself to be satisfied with the way these discussions took place .
Indeed , your Parliament , from the outset , told us that it was ready to shoulder its burden of responsibility with regard to expenditure under headings 3 and 4 , insofar as the Council was ready to shoulder its responsibilities with regard to expenditure under heading 1 , that is , agricultural expenditure .
On this point , I think that everybody has finally kept to their commitments .
With regard to heading 2 , the Council agreed to keep to the amounts set by Parliament at its first reading .
The Council considers that in so doing , Madam President , it has very seriously contributed to better collaboration with the other branch of the budget authority .
While in the Council 's view the identified expenditure of funds advanced made possible a degree of budgetary rigour in this field , it has given up the cuts in payment appropriations decided at first reading , and has followed , respected , and accepted the position of the European Parliament , whereas we , the Parliament and the Council , know perfectly well that the Edinburgh objectives related only to commitments , and not to payments .
This decision was basically made in the light of our concern for a better understanding with the other branch of the budget authority , that is , with yourselves , Madam President .
It is true that this must be compensated for by real rigour in other sectors of non-obligatory expenditure .
That is what your Committee on Budgets is proposing .
Furthermore , the Council has accepted Parliament 's proposals regarding Peace in the light of the Commissioner 's suggestions .
Headings 3 and 4 , taken together , are expressions of the same budgetary rigour as applies to expenditure under heading 1 .
Having said that , the Council - and , I believe , your Parliament as well - is convinced that these austerity measures are in no way prejudicial to the implementation of the Union 's internal and external policies .
With regard to the other important points I want to raise , Madam President , I would first like to emphasize the increase of some ECU 70 million in the funding for the Socrates programme for the years 1998 and 1999 .
This programme is rightly regarded as of first importance in this House , because it aims at better training for our students .
Following on from the European Council of 21 November , the Council , as agreed , set aside ECU 150 million in commitments for the employment initiative promoted by the European Parliament .
The Council has kept its word and thanks Parliament for this initiative , which will give the decisions taken by the European Council on employment much more convincing legitimacy .
In the research field , the Council has implemented parliamentary and Council codecisions on the adaptation of the fourth framework programme .
Furthermore , in accordance with our agreement of 27 November , the Council transferred ECU 25 million from Tacis to the Chernobyl expenditure line .
The Tacis commentary specifies that it is possible to provide for identical reinforced funding for Chernobyl insofar as , in accordance with the legitimate concerns of the Parliament , other donor countries are also ready to abide by their commitments .
That , Madam President , is what I wanted to say on the essential features of this second reading of the draft budget for 1998 .

Basing myself on the preparatory work , and after hearing the two rapporteurs , Stanislaw Tillich and John Tomlinson , I have high hopes that the Committee on Budgets will submit a budget for the forthcoming financial year to the vote of your plenary session which will , in its major lines and overall policies , reflect a consensus between the two branches of the budgetary authority at the highest level , so far unequalled in the budgetary history of the European Communities .
This 1998 budget , Madam President , is a balanced budget which in practice should give satisfaction and be acceptable to both branches of the budget authority .
From this I infer that the 1998 budget is a good budget .
It is the result of an effort of mutual comprehension and substantial reciprocal concessions .
It is above all the result of close cooperation , essentially based on the principle of mutual trust between the two branches of the budget authority .
In conclusion , Madam President , I would like to say one word more , to express special and very sincere thanks to your Parliament , your Committee on Budgets , the chairman of your Committee on Budgets , Mr Detlev Samland , the two rapporteurs , Mr Stanislaw Tillich and Mr John Tomlinson , and all the others for their competence , their commitment , their loyalty , and also their dependability .

I say this because , in the final analysis , Madam President , I have the feeling that if there is an agreement , then the praise for reaching that agreement must essentially go to this Parliament .
Finally , I would like to direct some words of gratitude and appreciation to Commissioner Erkki Liikanen , to Mr Mingasson and to all the others who have shouldered their burden of responsibility in the service of the Commission , and who have made a definite and a decisive contribution to today 's overall agreement .
We offer them our warmest thanks .
Thank you , Mr President-in-office of the Council .
In turn , on behalf of Parliament , I would like to thank you warmly for your words .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , as you have said , this has been quite a remarkable budget procedure .
The general budget for 1998 is a rigorous one which respects the obligations of the Union and reinforces the focus on employment creation and expenditure .
The 1998 budget is a rigorous one .
Its growth rates of 2.4 % in commitments and 1.4 % in payments are below the growth in national public expenditure .
Its margin of some ECU 7 billion below the own resources ceiling facilitates the consolidation efforts of Member States .
Furthermore , it is a sizeable reserve for future responsibilities of the Union , first and foremost to prepare for enlargement .
The decision on negotiations was taken last week in Luxembourg .
The 1998 budget reserves significant margins in headings 3 , 4 and 5 and , for the first time since the system of financial perspectives has been created , these margins in commitment appropriations are real savings .
They should put to rest the notion in some capitals that the Community ' spends it all ' .
I heartily agree with the rapporteur , Mr Tillich
But the 1998 budget will be more than just a budget of savings .
As the result of an impressive cooperation between the institutions , in particular between the European Parliament and the Council presidency , this budget also concentrates expenditure on programmes which can have a real impact on employment in the Community .
The Commission will adopt its proposal for a single legal base early in January .
Due to the endorsements from the special European Council of 28 November 1997 it should be adopted quickly .
I understand that there is also a proposal regarding the budget of the European Coal and Steel Community to contribute to these efforts .
Such a contribution can be conceived .
Taking into account the sectoral objectives of the budget it could most effectively be linked to the Community initiatives Resider and Rechar .
The unanimous agreement of the Council would still be needed .
It is a different matter whether such a contribution would require the levy to be maintained .
It would appear that it could be comfortably financed from other resources without calling into question the long-term proposals which the Commission put forward on 8 October 1997 .
The Commission will have an orientation debate on the operational budget for the ECSC this afternoon .
It will decide after the opinion of Parliament has been adopted .
Coming back to the general budget , it is also remarkable for the procedural developments which made this result possible .
Interinstitutional cooperation has been of unprecedented quality moving from what was sometimes perceived as a dialogue of the deaf , as Terry Wynn very often said , to substantive and serious discussions of priorities , procedures and expenditure in all parts of the budget .
With regard to compulsory expenditure , full agreement was found between both branches of the budgetary authority .
The agreement to have a rectifying letter late in the budgetary procedure has been a successful innovation .
It should become a permanent arrangement .
On non-compulsory expenditure , the Council and Parliament have reached agreement on the commitment appropriations for important Community activities such as the Socrates programme and the Chernobyl Shelter Fund .
And they have agreed on the overall volume of payments appropriations .
It should not be forgotten that the spirit of cooperation has facilitated rapid agreement on the new procedure for the funding of CFSP actions .
Is it possible to characterize the state of the budget procedure today as interinstitutional cooperation on a partnership basis ?
If the answer is yes , then the interinstitutional agreement of 1993 has borne one of its most difficult fruits , not by means of a change of the treaty but by pragmatic acceptance of what is best for the Community .


I conclude by congratulating the rapporteurs , Mr Tillich and Mr Tomlinson , as well as the chairman of the Committee on Budgets , Mr Samland , for their extraordinary work on the 1998 general budget .
Last , but not least , I should include in these congratulations the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Fischbach , who has skilfully built on the foundations left by the Dutch presidency and has demonstrated what a Council presidency can achieve in cooperative dialogue between institutions .
Madam President , I will continue with this back-scratching exercise that is going on .
It is usual to begin by thanking the rapporteurs - in this case , Mr Tillich , Mr Tomlinson and Mr Giansily .
I have no hesitation in doing just that .
There are other thanks which need to be given because of the nature of this budget .
As has been said by previous speakers , we find ourselves in a position of consensus rather than the normal position of animosity between the institutions .
So , thanks to the Commission ; thanks to Mr Liikanen and his team for facilitating the process ; thanks to the Luxembourg presidency which , I hope , as others have said , has set a precedent for the future in working with Parliament ; thanks to the secretariat of the Committee on Budgets for the extremely hard work they have done for Members ; and thanks to that ' devil ' of Parliament - which many people seem to think he is - Mr Samland , for the skill that he showed during the conciliation process and along with that , to the members of the Budgets Committee who were with him in getting that agreement with the Council .
The budget has not been easy .
It sounds great at this stage , but let us not forget that this has not been an easy process for Parliament .
It could be argued that we have actually given the Council more than we really should have done .
I hope that the Council - and not just the Luxembourg presidency , because I am sure you do understand it - appreciates how far Parliament has moved on this budget , not just in the sacrifices it has made , but also in the margins that exist .
We have been prudent and we have tried to play our part .
But that must not be forgotten .
We all seem to be quite smug about this and seem to be wanting to sit back and say what a good job we have done , but we must not be too complacent .
There are warning signs if we do become complacent .
The fact that in 1997 and 1998 we cut payment appropriations can only be a one-off exercise for the headings concerned .
It cannot become the norm .
If we try to make it the norm , all we do is create a burden for the future in solving short-term problems .
We need to see Parliament and the Council working closer together .
The process that took place this year with the ad hoc procedure for agriculture must be continued into next year for fisheries and the CFSP .
That can only benefit everybody .
The Luxembourg Presidency , the United Kingdom Presidency and the future Austrian Presidency need to get together as a troika with Parliament early in the New Year as is planned , to make sure that we can continue in this spirit of cooperation because there are a lot of gaps between Parliament and the Council that still need to be bridged , especially on things like legal bases , on classification , the fisheries sector , and revenue .
All those things we still need to thrash out .
I said during the first reading that the integrity of the Council rested on its ability to deliver the employment chapter .
It has done it , and I say to the President-in-Office in a colloquial term , ' you have played a blinder ' in doing that .
Of course the next test is that , when the supplementary and amending budget comes along - if and when it is needed - those payments have to be found , not just for Category 1 , but for headings 3 and 4 .
Then both we and the Council will look to the Commission to bring forward that proposal .
If we can do that then the spirit of cooperation will indeed be evident for all to see .
I should like to give one other word of thanks before I finish , to Mr Waidelich , for the work that he did on the Jet project .
His working document , which was the basis of our report , is to be commended .
He should have the commendation of this Chamber .
In relation to that , there will be an amendment moved by Mr Tillich , the rapporteur , agreed by Mr Waidelich , which our group will be supporting .
Madam President , I must admit I find it unusual at this stage in the budgetary procedure not to be fighting for something .
We are in the process already of congratulation , and rightly so , because this has been an historic budgetary process for 1998 .
Like Terry Wynn , I wish to thank those who have been involved - that is normal process - but in particular Stan Tillich and John Tomlinson , as the two rapporteurs on the major reports for this year .
This year is characterized by three particular features which come clearly to mind .
The first , to which the Commissioner has referred , is the way in which we have moved from a process of confrontation in the budgetary procedure to one more like codecision , as if , by magic , we are finding a way of blurring the distinction between obligatory and non-obligatory expenditure without having to go through a treaty revision to do so .
I welcome this because it shows the way to the future in our budgetary debates .
Secondly , there is budgetary rigour .
Our speakers have referred , and will no doubt refer , to this during our debate this morning .
It is indeed remarkable that we have a Parliament today which has kept over ECU 700 million under those areas of its own responsibility in headings 3 and 4 without proposals for expenditure .
I am sure it is not a lack of imagination but it is an expression of real responsibility .
The last is Parliament 's role .
We have shown that , given more responsibility , we are capable of being more mature .
Mr President , you referred to that .
I welcome that as a statement but , of course , you , as a long-standing Member of this House , know how we function , and we greatly appreciate what you have done on our behalf in the budgetary procedure .
Let me now turn to what I would describe as the hallmarks of Parliament 's position .
To me it has always been a question of value for money , because we are trying to see how scarce resources can be utilized .
Parliament has tried to focus attention by the use of the reserve .
This year we have 23 lines in the annex to the resolution .
I draw attention to the fact that there is not a large volume of credits in the reserve - it is only 0.3 % of the budget - and that this is more a matter of management and resolution of particular problems .
I would cite four which come to mind .
The first is the Jet problem , to which Terry Wynn referred .
I welcome the work which has been done by Mr Waidelich on this .
I hope for a rapid resolution of the UK staff problem there .
That is for specific resolution of a problem .
Secondly , we come to improved management in issues like Bosnia or Meda , where we see that monies are not being efficiently utilized .
Thirdly , in terms of improved management , but where we wish to put a new structure in place - the European information system - that seems to us to be a really important aspect .
Fourthly and not least , is where we have one or two new initiatives .
Even in this year of budgetary rigour under the new transatlantic agenda , we in Parliament want to ensure that those monies will be effectively utilized and therefore parts of the credits are in reserve .
Lastly , we come to what I would call future horizons .
First , we need to ensure that where we have new initiatives they are well costed .
We will need to have our own means of calculating the financing for own-initiative reports .
We do not have that yet ; we will need to do that .
Secondly , I welcome the idea that the British presidency should bring us all together early in 1998 to see what the guidelines should be for the 1999 budget .
More cooperation seems to be very logical .
Lastly , we have huge challenges ahead now , with enlargement on its way , in the shaping of new financial perspectives and the structural funds in the future .
All this underlines the need to continue the excellent cooperation we have developed this year for the years ahead .


Madam President , I too wish to congratulate the rapporteurs Mr Tillich and Mr Tomlinson for preparing their report on the draft budget for the Union and I would like to congratulate Mr Giansily for the 1998 ECSC draft operating budget .
And I would also like to thank the " devil ' Mr Samland , as I have heard him called , for the way he is handling the work of the Committee on Budgets .
In our work , Madam President , the rigour with which the report has been drawn up can be appreciated , also in view of the need of the countries committed to the effort to converge .
The idea of reducing the payment allocations below the level of the first reading was therefore rightly accepted .
The originality of this budget should be pointed out for , despite this , resources for employment were found and I believe that the excellent work carried out by the rapporteurs , particularly Mr Tillich , should be acknowledged .
With regard to the problem of employment , which is the most important and pressing problem , I think we should understand that it is closely connected with the competitive capacity of the system .
It is obvious to many that this competitiveness is connected with the businessmen 's flexibility and ability to adapt to the ever faster changing worldwide situations .
The solution therefore consists in allocating resources to training , research , the reconversion of industrial activities and , in particular , to small and medium-sized businesses creating stable and permanent jobs .

For this reason , I think the courageous proposal made by Mr Giansily to find resources in a specific sector , that is , the coal and steel sector , is in line with what the European Council of Luxembourg is saying .
I heard what Commissioner Liikanen had to say , namely that other resources may be found , but this Parliament and Mr Giansily have done well to raise the problem .
Not everything is consistent and not everything inspires hope , because we still have serious difficulties in maintaining the allocations to the cohesion policy , we have inadequate resources dedicated to the Mediterranean and we have to grant reductions to the agricultural sector ; then we should not forget the existing inadequacies as regards the legal basis of many proposals .
Finally , I think we should quickly remember the enlargement .
This is a political subject we will have to face in the near future , because the approach and the choices so far made are not satisfactory .
Madam President , knowing how difficult it is to prepare a budget I would like to congratulate my colleagues , Mr Tillich , Mr Tomlinson and Mr Giansily .
This year I think they have been successful .
The approach has been pragmatic and exemplary .
At the risk of sounding like a member of a self-admiration society , I think this bodes well for the future .
I would like also to address the President of the Council .
On previous occasions I have always been somewhat bitter and critical but this presidency has shown that it understands the trend for the future which lies in cooperation and in doing away with outdated concepts .
It has been said before but let me repeat that no-one should say that this is a spending Parliament .
It is thanks to this presidency that there is this recognition .
I hope that the British and the Austrians will understand that message .
Secondly , I believe this Parliament has grown up because it understands that only with a vision of the future can you make progress .
The employment initiative has been one example .
And let me just say something about agriculture .
Agriculture has been always a special area and the point which Mr Mulder made needs repeating .
It needs to be linked to the overall budget for the benefit of the farmers but also for the benefit of the overall community .
I hope that , before we actually get to a new intergovernmental conference on changing the treaty , more unity is achieved between agricultural spending and other parts of the budget so that in the next three or four years we can finally say that the artificial gulf between the two has been bridged .
Democracy is something which we all want for the future and it can only be achieved if it can be shown that there is also an element of solidarity .
For that reason this Parliament has made cuts both in its budget and in agriculture which was not easy .
I repeat once more the point made by Mr Mulder : farmers can be grateful to Parliament that it is not the Council because with Parliament they are in good hands .
One final thing about Mr Giansily .
I do hope that the Commission will follow his courageous stand .
I speak for the majority of my group , although there will be one person speaking against .
I think it is very logical and coherent that we should not stop the levy five years before the end of the treaty especially since it is used for useful purposes .
It is not spent in vain ; it is spent for specific innovation ; it is spent for small and medium-sized businesses ; it is spent for the coal and steel industry and against that background it is important that we support Mr Giansily .
Mr President , on the agenda for discussion is next year 's European Parliament budget , which will do little to ease the unemployment problem in Europe .
Furthermore , the achievements of the Employment Summit are very modest in this area .
We do not have the resources , the financial wherewithal , to tackle unemployment as one unit , and that is why what the individual Member States do is crucial .
Our group considers a reduction in working hours , and hence structural reform , vital .
In this connection we have watched with interest the examples of France and Italy , where they have shortened working hours without reducing pay .
The solutions contained in the European Parliament 's budget , or those which came out of the summit last week , are unsatisfactory , dealing , as they do , with part-time work and other unadventurous schemes , which will only serve to create an unemployed , poverty-stricken underclass .
This budget is a foretaste of what will be seen as a general thinning of funding .
There are certain resources the Community has at its disposal , and they cannot be rationed anymore , and so it is important that they be used to help the Nordic regions more than they have been hitherto .
We think that the equal flow of resources to all parts of the Community and Union is vital .
We are in favour of the development of the south , but the northern dimension is also important .
For that reason the European Parliament must include the question of the northern dimension in its next budget proposal .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , with this year 's budget we have tied up a package that , without exaggeration , can be regarded as a model , which owes its existence both to the first-rate combination of people involved , in the form of the rapporteur Mr Tillich and the Luxembourg Presidency , and to the willingness of all institutions to reach beyond their shadows , as it were , especially in the area of agriculture and the employment initiative .
The most important aspect , however , is that this budget will have an effect beyond its particular year , since it involves institutional changes which will continue into subsequent years .
Hence , in time , Parliament will have more influence over compulsory expenditure and enjoy greater transparency and fairness with the subsidies .
Yet shadows are not just outreached , but also cast , and extremely long shadows at that , cast over a chapter that is turning out to be a most sad one in the area of foreign affairs .
I am talking now about former Yugoslavia .
Winter is upon us , reconstruction is sluggish in many areas , and the Commission has nothing better to do than fail to spend a sum of over ECU 100 million this year in Bosnia .
The word of Mr van den Broek no longer counts for anything , it seems .
Even before the first reading he promised me personally that improvements and greater momentum would be jointly sought in a working party .
We are still all waiting in vain here in this House for the invitation .
So , with a heavy heart , the reserve remains in the budget , and until such a time as we recognize that the situation is improving .
We will listen to what Mr Westendorp has to say in the Committee on Budgetary Control on 21 January and get an idea of things again .
Then we will decide .
Mr Giansily -he is not here unfortunately , I do not see him - however much I might agree with him on Bosnia , my view alters when I look at the proposal for the ECSC budget .
We all know that unemployment is structural .
That is why any employment initiative worthy of the name should not serve the sectors that are subject to structural change but , on the contrary , be deployed where , structurally , new job opportunities can be created long term .
Incidentally , both Resider and Rechar are available for this area , neither of which were fully utilized either last year or this , a fact which makes the urgent provision of additional funds questionable anyway .
To this extent the initiative is arch-conservative , in the truest sense of the word , not reform-oriented .
I would find it most regrettable if it was to be put into practice at the end of the day .
Mr President , our Committee on Budgets , with the laudable exception of my colleague , Mr Dell 'Alba , is proposing - without saying so , naturally - that we reduce our spending , but we have not gone far enough .
At the first reading , a majority of this house raised the draft Council budget by 0.7 to 2.7 % , without in any way taking into account the efforts required of the Member States in the field of control of public expenditure .
It took the wisdom of the Council , which proposed making considerable efforts , with a reduction of ECU 600 million in agricultural expenditure , in response to a reduction of ECU 550 million under headings 3 and 4 , accompanied by an effort of symbolic importance in reducing structural action expenditure by ECU 300 million , to ensure that the drive to budget rigour should not be made in the direction of agricultural expenditure only .
Unfortunately , this latter proposal was dropped .
The two branches of the budget authority have finally come to a compromise arrangement , which is a reduction of ECU 550 million in agricultural expenditure , and an equal reduction in the funding for internal policies and external actions .
Whereas the Council , unlike the European Parliament , has accounts to render , particularly to the agricultural sector , and has resigned itself to cuts out of concern for budget rigour , and to the acceptance of a new , heavy slice off agricultural funding , our Parliament has only sacrificed funding which is remarkable only by its very absence .
Nevertheless , the Council has reduced the expenditure under its control .
On the other hand , it has demanded and obtained a reduction in payments under headings 3 and 4 , which are under the budgetary authority of this House .
Having said that , the 1998 budget will not be scaled back to zero growth , contrary to what has been said .
The draft budget allows for an increase in national contributions , less indeed than the increase in expenditure , but leaving growth still positive . Hence there is an increase in contributions from Member States .
With regard to the ECSC draft budget for 1998 , the rapporteur is , curiously , proposing today that we re-establish a levy we had agreed to eliminate .
I heard the quotes from Jean Monnet , but I would have preferred quotes from that great European , General de Gaulle .
We cannot vote for this proposal .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , however attached we may be to harmony between nations , we do not underrate the common European good .
But I am speaking here as a defender of the interests of my own country , France .
Contrary to what is affirmed here and there , Europe costs my country a great deal , a very great deal .
France will pay 91 billion francs in 1998 . This is the fifth largest slice of the nation 's budget , after the national education system , national defence , social affairs , and infrastructure .
From this sum , my fellow citizens know that they receive a benefit in return of around 70 billion francs , 85 % of which is under the EAGGF Guarantee .
However , as these funds are set to decrease - due to the enlargement of the union to include the central and eastern European countries , the beneficiary being the structural funds - French agriculture will bear the brunt of the penalty .
But beyond all that , our criticism of the European budget is directed at the following points .
This is a budget which serves the reigning political utopia , the Europe of the regions , a step towards the planetary organization which sets the nations at nought .
The proof is that only the funds under heading 2 , that is , the structural funds , have not been affected by the flat budget , which we have had to accept at present , under the Maastricht criteria .
However , we know the extent to which these funds , some of whose concrete objectives are of course acceptable , are poorly used , or even not used at all .
Secondly , this is a budget which misappropriates taxpayers ' money .
Hundreds of millions of ECUs , and billions of francs are allocated to the Commission to allow it to develop its systems of clientele associations , NGOs , think tanks , clubs , organizations of employers and trade unions , and its totalitarian propaganda operations .
My colleague , Jean-Yves Le Gallou , last year gave an impressive but incomplete list of the Euro-Global Propaganda Stafel which you are yourselves incapable of presenting to us in full .
I am not even going to mention the scandalous expenditure on the new Brussels building .
This is a European Union which , the world over , finances humanitarian aid to all and sundry , and draws no political benefit from it .
For example , as the leading donor organization to Palestine , we were not even invited to the Dayton conference . All we are good for is giving them money , despised as we are by two proud peoples , who are sure of themselves and dominating , as General de Gaulle used to say .
Nobody can make sense of the complications of our cross-budget lines , the misleading headings and the dissimulating appropriations .
As for large-scale organized fraud , the annual report from the Court of Accounts stands quite simply as an admission of its own impotence .
Now , as always , 12 % of the budget goes into the hands of the Mafiosi ; as Borsellino , the judge who was assassinated said : ' Europe is a stroke of luck for the Mafia ' .
Because of course , the Mafia hates nothing quite so much as national borders .
The budget is unacceptable in terms of its end aims and objects , its funds are too often misappropriated , and it is ineffectual to boot , as a means of dealing with the real challenges of our day .
It makes no contribution whatsoever to improving employment .
The ECU 150 million - 1 billion francs - accepted by the Council as spending on the European pact for employment , is not going to solve the unemployment crisis . This border-free Europe , with its unbridled competition , and unlimited immigration , is the first cause of unemployment , which hits the farming populations dispossessed of their land , and the uprooted young people who wander around in a hallucinatory world of their own , haggard-faced under their baseball caps .

Mr President , you can only answer Mr Antony by saying that , instead of treating us to ideological prattle here in this House , he should have perhaps joined in the 170 hours ' work of the Budgets Committee , then he might have been able to apply his ideology there and then he would have noticed how far he met with approval .
Furthermore , Mr Antony , you would do well to recall the speech from Mr Juncker , who put the same question to you as to the whole house : What is the price of an hour 's peace if you draw up the net balance for France ?
What did we expect from this budget ?
We expected a partial response to the question of unemployment , this response has been given .
We made our contribution to this : ECU 450 million and ECU 60 million for the ECSC budget , that is , ECU 510 million .
This does not remove unemployment , but it is a stab in the right direction , for unemployment can only be fought if small and medium-sized businesses develop from scratch , if they are supported and if their problem of being undercapitalized is addressed by government response , guarantees and risk capital funding .
Every new business : three new jobs in the European Union .
To support this is prudent , and we have provided the inducement .
Secondly , we expected a realistic picture of agricultural policy .
This has also been achieved because for the first time we have received a rectifying letter from the Commission after the first reading of the European Parliament budget .
This too is a significant advance and an invitation to the Austrian Presidency to proceed in just the same way during its time in office .
Thirdly , we wished to save , but save rationally , and we wished to be efficient .
We have shown this , for instance , by providing the Socrates programme , one of the most efficient programmes for the citizens of the European Union , with ECU 70 million .
I would like to thank the Council especially for going beyond the Commission proposal to provide ECU 50 million for two years with its own decision .
This is the first time in the history of negotiations under article 189b that the Council has been closer to the wishes of Parliament than the Commission .
Fourthly , we wanted to aim for a restrictive budget where personnel is concerned .
We achieved this as well .
We ensured , despite the enlargement resolution , that savings would be made on the administration costs side .
Above all , I would like to thank the Commission for this , for being able to work with us on this in tandem .
Fifthly , we have left margins that are greater than all the margins in headings 3 and 4 over the last ten years put together .
The Council should be aware : this is the result of budget discussions here in this House , where there was a willingness to adhere to the decision or objective from the start of the year .
On this point , I wish to tie in a sentence that I have taken from a letter from your predecessor , Mr President-in-Office , namely the Finance Minister , Mr Salm .
Mr Salm says in his letter , and I quote : " therefore I hope that on budgetary matters in the future the cooperation between Council and Parliament will be characterized by this spirit of equal like-mindedness ' . I hope we really will be able to realize in future budget procedures the structural changes we have proposed .
These are institutional elements .
We have conducted seven efficient trialogues with each other .
This efficiency has never been seen in previous years , and this applies to both presidencies , the Dutch Presidency and the Luxembourg Presidency .
In conclusion , I should like to make it perfectly clear : we have budgetary growth rates of 2.1 % in commitments and 1.4 % in payments , and if the ministers declare in Council that Europe should be making savings then people should be aware that the average growth in the budgets of the Community Member States for the financial year 1998 is 3.2 % .
And those crying the loudest , namely the Germans , have 2.3 % , the French 3.6 % , the Spaniards 4.1 % , the Belgians 3.5 % , the Danes 5.5 % .
I could go on . The only ones with payments below that are Finland and Sweden .
Everyone else is above it .
So they should look at their own figures before they criticize the expenditure for Europe , because it should not be forgotten that the growth rate of 1.4 % simultaneously includes growth in heading 2 on the scale of 6.7 % for the structural funds .
If things were otherwise , we would all have a completely different result .
This decision was not made by the European Parliament , but by all those who brazenly point out what percentages we should actually be adhering to .
Mr President , I thank the Council for its close cooperation .
However , in the interest of the whole House , I just want to say one more thing : we already said goodbye to Mr Lenz , who is with us on behalf of the Council , when we worked together with the Council .
I want to thank Mr Lenz most sincerely for his close cooperation .
If I am the devil of Parliament , then certainly he provided the pitchfork for these discussions .
Mr President , the budget we are now debating has two main features .
The first of course is the one all the others have mentioned , the fact that it has been debated in a spirit of general consensus , and all those who have managed to bring it this far deserve to be congratulated .
However , there is another aspect , Mr President , which is somewhat strange and I will explain why : it is embodied in a logic according to which it calls for the support of efforts of the Member States to achieve certain objectives not by means of an increase but by means of a reduction in expenditure or , to be more exact , by means of a reduction in the contributions made by the Member States to the budget .
This time of course it is justified by the need to fulfil the convergence criteria for EMU .
The next time it will be justified by the need to ensure the permanence of convergence within the framework of a stability pact and so forth .
And when , after some years , this policy has allowed for some significant margins - which , it is hoped , will be below the ceiling of 1.27 % - then we believe that we will be able to proceed , without any great difficulty , to enlargement .
It is my impression , Mr President , that we are in for some surprises , since I fear that , if we carry on with this policy over a long period , enlargement will take place much later than is politically desirable , and we , as the European Parliament , must bear this in mind .
In other words , what appears to be changing is the philosophy of the common budget , and this is where the unease that I expressed previously resides .
I am not talking about the issues of the control of fraud or of the speed of fund absorption , the responsibility for which lies with the governments of the Member States , which will be called upon to accept their responsibilities not only towards the European Union but , for the most part , towards the people of their own nation , since , in principle , it is to them that they are responsible .
I am talking more about the fact that we are proceeding towards a greater degree of integration , starting with monetary union , in which case one would logically expect the community budget to play a larger role , either in the implementation of the principle of subsidiarity , or within the framework of an increased operational redistribution .
However we can see that the opposite is happening .
And unfortunately the European Parliament is also getting into this way of thinking . This tendency is being aided and abetted by the inherent weakness of the common budget , which is guaranteed by the manner in which it is financed .
So , as long as the common budget is deprived of funds , in the real sense of the word , the problem will persist and , with time , it will get worse .
On more specific issues , Mr President , I think that we were right to set out again all the amendments to the first reading and especially those which referred to better fund management , such as the preservation of the reserves at Meda , and other such amendments .
Mr President , I would like to say a couple of things concerning the matter of legal bases .
Mr Samland said that certain very fruitful trialogues had taken place .
The trialogues on the issue of the legal bases were a complete failure , Mr President , and I would like to hope that the positions of the European Parliament were beginning to be accepted as logical and admissible .
I hope that in the next trialogue - and I address myself both to the Council and to the Commission - we will be able to obtain a logical solution so as to remove the inconsistencies from the budget on the issue of legal bases .
Mr President , I am not at all in agreement with the budget philosophy .
However this will not prevent me from congratulating the President , Mr Samland , and the rapporteurs , Mr Tillich , Mr Tomlinson , and Mr Giansily , on their effort and on the spirit of cooperation which they showed to many members of the Commission when this budget was being prepared .
I believe that the picture painted by the budget is a little paradoxical , since we have been obliged to accept to be blackmailed by the Council in respect of the structural funds .
My question is : is the Edinburgh agreement on the structural funds in force or not ?
Because , if this agreement , which was a summit agreement , is in force , then why did the Council tell us that to prevent the structural funds being affected we must accept a reduction in agricultural expenditure of around ECU 550 million ' ?
I would also like to ask the Commission : when , at the beginning of each year , it presents its expenditure on agriculture , is it telling the truth or not ?
Because , if it is telling the truth , then why did the Commission accept the reduction of ECU 550 million which , unfortunately , was also voted through by Parliament ?
Finally , with regard to the cancer of unemployment , instead of going ahead with drastic therapy , this budget has prescribed aspirins ; ECU 150 million for 20 million unemployed . In other words ECU 7 for each unemployed person .
Do you know what ECU 7 is ?
It is what an unemployed person would spend on a pizza and a beer , and that is what we have given him , for being unemployed !
Almost nothing on social welfare , on health , on education , on culture , the things which constitute a United Europe , not just ECU and figures , when we forget that behind the ECU and the figures there are people .
Mr President , I first wish to thank the Mr Tillich and Mr Tomlinson of the Budget Committee for their splendid work and their lucid report .
And thanks also goes to Mr Samland for his excellent work as chairman of the committee , and to Mr Liikanen for his cooperation as member of the Commission .
The 1998 budget has been undertaken with great presence of mind .
Growth is slight , and outgoings and income are clearly below the limits of members ' costs .
This has been achieved through tight budgeting and , in the latter stages , extra cuts , with costs reduced by ECU 1.1 billion .
The reduction for agriculture is ECU 550 million ; in other words , agriculture is to get ECU 368 million less than this year .
This is a hefty reduction .
It is vital that these cuts do not endanger agriculture or bring about a reduction in income for the farmer , as has been the intention previously .
The Committee on Budgets bore that in mind in its resolution when it promised to approve a supplementary budget if the budgeted funds proved insufficient .
With these remarks I am happy to give my approval to the budget .
Mr President , could I first of all add my congratulations to the rapporteurs for this excellent budget and offer my congratulations on the work of the Committee on Budgets .
Mr Samland summed it all up when he told us how many hours were involved .
I welcome the fact that the peace and reconciliation package for my region of Northern Ireland has been approved , that the disagreement in principle over where the actual money comes from has been resolved , and that the Budgets Committee were able to deliver what they promised when they came to Northern Ireland .
That is a very important message to my region at this moment of time .
It is always very easy to criticize and more difficult to be constructive .
We all recognize this but this is a constructive budget and I trust it will be the forerunner to even greater cooperation in the future .
I believe we have to try to support the educational process through Socrates and other programmes .
I would also like to make the same point concerning overseas visits because that is a very constructive part of the budget and something we should not run away from .
It is very important for this Parliament to be able to send the message and encourage people to come here to see the work we are doing .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , each budget is a visiting card for the political will behind it .
The desire for rigour and prudence behind this budget cannot be denied , even though the need to accommodate the financial prudence demanded by the national governments in order to meet the convergence criteria has been cited as the motivation for it .
Perhaps this rather banal reason is responsible for the fact that cuts are still tending to be made too much across the board and too little with a specific target in mind .
The priorities set by the budget are generally unsatisfactory , it seems to me .
Courageous attempts to tackle effectively the major problems Europe is struggling with are modest at best .
I would like to address the research and technological development sector because it continues to remain extremely under-resourced .
Comparing research and development on the one hand with the cultivation of olives , sugar and tobacco on the other may sound polemical perhaps , but it is symbolic of the priorities which , rather than promote the competitiveness of the European economy , target the interests of particular groups .
The total spending on R & D is rated at ECU 3.49 billion , of which only ECU 487 million are apportioned to information technology .
The total spending on olives , sugar and tobacco , in contrast , amounts to some ECU 4.5 billion altogether .
There is a succession of technological areas where European industry , particularly the small and medium-sized enterprises , increasingly lacks the competitive edge over its American rivals .
The danger is that shares of the global market will be lost and the problem of unemployment made worse .
Since both the Americans and the Japanese invest enormous sums in research , every additional ECU the Community spends in this area in future will have been usefully employed in the fight against unemployment .
Mr President , first of all I want to thank the rapporteur , Mr Tillich , for having successfully steered the 1998 budget to its conclusion .
I also want to thank him personally , in my capacity as future budgetary rapporteur , because the standards he has set with this budget can make my work easier next year .
I should like briefly to draw attention to some of the high and low points of this year 's budgetary procedure . I think it has been a very constructive process because it has initiated a new , more friendly relationship between the two branches of the budgetary authority , as a result of some very open and direct trilateral discussions .
As other speakers have already mentioned , this has enabled progress to be made with the ad hoc procedure for heading 1 , allowing the treatment to be more rational , and updating the budgetary forecasts as late as possible .
In this way , I believe Council and Parliament , through common agreement , have got round the difficulty of the treaty 's inflexibility , for the sake of greater realism and stringency in agricultural spending .
Furthermore , in November 's employment summit , the Council was finally receptive to an initiative which has the European Parliament 's keen support : the creation of new financial instruments and the promise of a legal basis for employment .
I think Parliament 's attitude should also be stressed .
Parliament has amply heeded Member States ' demands for budgetary stringency , maintaining higher margins in headings 3 and 4 than in every year since 1988 .
Similarly , in the first reading , Parliament made available the resources for the jobs initiative .
However , the will to collaborate has not been able to prevent last minute problems , because during the conciliation for the second reading , Parliament was confronted by Council requests for even greater efforts , demanding cuts in appropriations in those very headings 3 and 4 , in exchange for an equivalent reduction in heading 1 appropriations .
It should be stressed that this is not a technical problem , but a political problem , since this Council request compromises Parliament 's budgetary authority , by attempting to fix non-compulsory expenditure .
That is a worrying precedent for the future .
It is true that Parliament has managed to gain an extra ECU 70 million for two years for one of its priorities - the Socrates programme - but it must be emphasized that this boost for Socrates is due to Parliament 's " intransigence ' , since despite what the Council said in Amsterdam about giving priority to education , its proposed financial backing for the Socrates programme in 1998 and 1999 was way below what Parliament had requested .
However Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , since it is now nearly Christmas ( as Mr dell 'Alba has already mentioned ) and since Father Christmas or the Three Wise Men will be coming soon , I should like to send them my Christmas list , in my capacity as general rapporteur for the budget next year .
The first thing I should like for Christmas is to be able to witness a continuation of the constructive process of cooperation and dialogue started during this year 's procedure .
My second wish is that the meeting of the troika in the New Year can help to promote an open mind for designing realistic objectives for 1999 .
Thirdly , I should like the Council to be willing to take account of Parliament 's declared priorities , given that Parliament has always been willing to negotiate on Council decisions , which often have financial implications .
And to conclude I would just like to say , as we do in my country when giving a Christmas list to the Three Wise Men : let us hope they come across !
Mr President , I wish to support this budget and to say that we seem to have achieved the ideal in being able to reduce administrative costs and , at the same time , provide for the vital major areas of regional and agricultural policies .
In regional affairs , we have increased the budget in line with our commitment to double the structural funds , thereby fulfilling our generous commitment to the poorer regions of the Union .
In agriculture , we should point out that we are maintaining global spending , with enough money to provide for the price guarantees and our full commitments in relation to the compensations agreed under the last reform package , in spite of the fact that the number of farmers is being reduced by 5 % per year .
So we are giving the same amount of money to fewer farmers - the global figures do not show this - providing an average of ECU 6 , 000 for every farming family in the Community , even though many of them have other , off-farm income .
In budgetary terms , we should point out that , even though the farmers of the UK - this matter was raised yesterday evening - are having a difficult time at the moment , their problems arise out of their failure to join the monetary system rather than the failure of European policies .
While the average payment to farmers throughout the entire Community is ECU 6 , 000 , to the United Kingdom farmers it is ECU 15 , 000 , whereas for the Spanish and French it is only ECU 3 , 000 and ECU 13 , 000 respectively .
If you add the cost of BSE to that , UK farmers are each getting something like ECU 17 , 000 or 18 , 000 per annum .
It is above the average industrial wage and is extremely generous .
My point is that there are three pillars in the CAP : free trade , financial solidarity , and Community preference .
If we , or any group of farmers in any state of the Community , seek to undermine the pillar of free trade , then they are attacking a policy which maintains rural Europe and gives very generous aid to all farmers , particularly to UK farmers .
Mr President , I too would like to start by giving my thanks for the cooperation on the Budget committee and with my colleagues , not least when they give a positive reception to amendments proposed by the Liberal group .
I would like to start by looking at the Giansily report on the ECSC budget , and I would like to note straight away that I am totally against the report 's proposal to impose a tax of 0.11 % in 1998 .
It would be totally unreasonable to punish an industry with such a tax in this way when the parties involved have agreed to abolish the tax otherwise .
The proposal is pure redistribution in the best Socialist style , and I fail to understand what logic moved the rapporteur to put forward this proposal .
It is said after all that enough money has been accumulated for different measures .
As the report shows , not only will the ECSC be able to live off its own accumulated income , there will also be significant capital available when the treaty runs out .
So if further activities are to be got under way , the money is there , and so I fail to understand why businesses in this industry should be pubished by continuing to charge a tax .
I also think it is damaging to Parliament 's credibility and the positive attitude we find towards the budget otherwise , because it comes as a great surprise that this question was even raised .
Otherwise , there is agreement that we will now implement a three-year employment initiative which can produce some positive results .
Let me also say that I am pleased at the responsible attitude which Parliament is taking towards the budget .
I am pleased that we have managed to set up some tight budget targets and even go on and meet those targets .
It is absolutely vital that Parliament as an institution and we as directly elected politicians show that we want to use taxpayers ' money effectively , responsibily and transparently .
And I believe it is important that in the next three years we use our strength precisely to ensure that we in Parliament itself do away with greed and overconsumption and pursue a tight budget line .
Mr President , stringency , stringency , stringency : so many crimes have been committed in the name of stringency !
Ladies and gentlemen , it is my honour today to express a minority view in this House .
It is as unusual as the heavy snowfall early this morning in my city , Barcelona .
But to show you the extent of this minority view , I can tell you that at the decisive moment in the Committee on Budgets , it was 15 to 13 .
I fundamentally disagree with the proposal put forward by the Committee on Budgets . I think it is a backward step in institutional terms ; a backward step shielded behind a totally unfounded appeal for stringency .
In my opinion , this year 's procedure has helped to make the budgetary procedure meaningless . I am not sure if we can still talk about the two branches of the budgetary authority : it is more a question of one branch - and a twig !
It has been said that for the first time we have managed to play a part in the decision on compulsory expenditure , and strictly speaking that is true .
But what has really happened is that for the first time in four years the Council has fulfilled the obligations it committed itself to in the 1993 interinstitutional agreement , in exchange for making Parliament pay the price of an unprompted reduction in payment authorizations in non-compulsory expenditure .
Ladies and gentlemen , it seems to me that Thursday 's vote will confirm the budget which the Council wanted right from the outset .
Parliament 's role has been reduced to that of stooge , carrying out the dirty work which the Council itself did not want to do , in cutting sections of headings 3 and 4 .
The Council said in July that the thousand million paid to agriculture and other structural funds had to be reduced , but now it is showing that it does not care if cuts are made in external policy headings .
I shall end there , Mr President .
However , I should just like to say that the Council is not very well qualified to demand stringency , when it was responsible this year for spending more than three thousand million in unwarranted overcompensation in the cereals sector .
Mr President , that is a very bad omen for the interinstitutional agreement we must negotiate between now and the end of 1999 .
Mr President , I want to talk exclusively about our colleague Mr Giansily 's report .
In our opinion , the only unacceptable aspect is the idea of maintaining the European Coal and Steel Community levy for the 1998 budget . The draft operating budget presented by the Commission shows that there are now sufficient resources to maintain activities , both for conversion aid and social measures , and for research aid .
These three areas are covered until the year 2000 and beyond , so there is enough of a financial margin to be able to abolish the levy .
Well , ladies and gentlemen , the rapporteur proposes that at this precise moment , just when the Community coal and steel industry has managed to regain its competitiveness against production outside the Community , at this very moment , he proposes to maintain a finalist tax which will be used to create jobs outside the sector in which it is to be collected - assuming that a tax can create jobs , which is mere hypothesis .
It is impossible in the first place , because the legal opinion which was expressly sought for this purpose states that the funds collected through this levy cannot be transferred to the European Investment Bank .
That would contravene Community legislation .
Furthermore , abolishing this levy as our amendment proposes would increase the productivity of the ECSC sector , thereby safeguarding employment levels .
Mr Giansily must understand that this is not even a question of ideology , but a question of economic logic .
Maintaining the levy , as the rapporteur proposes , is not going to create jobs in other industrial sectors .
But it is certainly not going to help conserve jobs in coal and steel .
Ladies and gentlemen , the decision is yours .
Mr President , after hearing the congratulations given to the rapporteurs , as this morning a great Christmas spirit of cooperation and happiness is felt on account of the agreements reached , I would like to emphasize the role played by Parliament , and Parliament in particular , in this budget .
On the first reading , with a sense of rigour and above all responsibility and a full knowledge of the challenges that lie ahead ( the single currency but , above all , the dramatic problem of employment ) , Parliament has found solutions for this budget to actually give a meaning to employment , a specific role and resources available .
And this has enabled Council , at its extraordinary Luxembourg summit , to take on specific responsibilities with regard to employment which , had Parliament not taken this initiative , would have proved very difficult to assume .
Council obviously accepted Parliament 's proposal on a second reading . However , I think it would have been very difficult for Council not to have done , as we have shown a great sense of responsibility .
We have emphasized the priorities that have always been defined - the role of the small and medium-sized businesses , the role of training , the role of the parties in providing opportunities in employment policies - and that correspond exactly with the guidelines by which the individual Member States have undertaken to draw up their plans on employment .
Recalling this Christmas spirit , Council is responsible for making these choices happen .
The legal basis , to which many of you have referred , is an important fact .
The Commission has undertaken to submit its proposals , and I think Council can only show a sense of responsibility by approving the legal basis .
If Council fails to show this responsibility , then Parliament has taken a measure that remains incomplete , so to speak .
Mr President , if the 1997 budget was known as the budget of austerity , then the 1998 budget , while still austere , could be termed the budget of consensus .
And I am not talking about the consensus we reach so often in this Parliament .
I am talking about the consensus reached on this occasion by Parliament and the Council which , in the case of the Socrates programme , has actually surpassed the Commission 's proposals .
We can also congratulate ourselves on the way the jobs initiative has taken shape in the budget : ECU 150 million is not bad as a first step , since directly or indirectly it will help to create jobs , while simultaneously financing the internal policies related to job creation .
I am hopeful that tourism may be included among such policies , by means of an amendment .
Talking about amendments , Mr President , I am still worried about the fate of the 20 % placed in reserve for general information activities , and the reserve for the Prince programme , and even the Meda programme , which although justified initially , is worse off today than the Phare programme .
Similarly , I am hopeful that the appropriations for cooperation with the countries of Latin America voted for in the first reading will be reinstated .
Mr President , I started off by talking about consensus , and I do not want to finish without returning to the subject .
I am well aware of the magnificent work carried out by the rapporteurs , Mr Tillich and Mr Tomlinson , and the steadfastness shown by Mr Samland during conciliation . However , accepting budgetary cuts after the first reading ( especially when those cuts affect Community policies ) is going to require us to be especially responsible , and our information policy to be especially effective , to help the European public understand that the cuts are necessary because we need austerity to attain the Maastricht targets , and are not because we lack confidence in the exciting idea of Europe .
Mr President , I take this opportunity to congratulate Mr Giansily for the excellent work that he has done on his report .
The future of the ECSC operating budget is not without controversy or complications .
We have seen that in the opposition from some Members today .
But I feel the rapporteur has steered a clear and constant course through the whole proceedings .
He is to be commended .
The theme of this year 's budget has been job creation .
Parliament , the Council and the Commission have put together a package for job creation .
Yet we know that this year we will have lost 17 , 000 jobs in the steel sector .
I wish that I could imagine that these are the last 17 , 000 jobs we will lose in that sector .
I wish too that the jobs we are going to lose in the coal sector - 8 , 700 jobs - were the last that we will lose in the restructuring of the coal industry .
Be we know , sadly , that these 25 , 0-26 , 000 jobs will not be the last that will have been lost .
We know also that time is running out , but that is not a reason to stop the ECSC clock ahead of schedule .
The last few years remaining of the ECSC operating budget will be among the most important , perhaps not for the size of the operations carried out under its aegis , but because they are the last chances to do something .
The unemployed this year and those who lose their jobs in the last years of the ECSC have a right to support , no less than those we have supported in this budget in the past .
In the same way , the right to offer new opportunities to replace those ended in coal and steel still remains a need of the Community .
We should not be looking to end existing schemes earlier or reduce the amounts available for social redeployment or research .
We should be looking to maximize the chances that remain .
For this reason I totally support , on behalf of our group , Mr Giansily 's resolution calling for the reinstatement of the 11 % levy .
To conclude , the ECSC is at the heart of the European Union , but it is not through sentiment that we should be taking these measures now .
It is because we have a duty to create employment in those steel communities .
How can we not continue the support of this levy and the job creation schemes in the ECSC report when we are supporting a job creation package elsewhere in our budget ?
Mr President , in an amendment tabled by 34 Members and accepted by the Committee on Budgets , tourist businesses were specifically included in the scope of Community policy in support of small and medium-sized businesses for which the allocations from the 1998 budget were to be made .
A vote for those amendments in the House next Thursday will open the way to the implementation of the Philoxenia programme , at least in so far as small and medium-sized tourist enterprises are concerned .
I would like to remind you that this programme , which is a European Commission programme , following significant improvements approved by the Council , remains inoperative due to lack of funds .
An important and productive sector of the European economy , tourism has been treated unfavourably by the Council of Ministers .
May I remind you that the Member States did not include European Parliament proposal for a reference to tourism as an economic sector in the Treaty of Rotterdam .
I am optimistic that , by approving the few things accorded to tourism with the amendment we have tabled , Parliament will give hope to the 10 million people employed in the tourist industry and , of course , give a kind of signal .
How is it possible for a programme that is now three years old and which has been approved by all the Member States , not to be implemented due to lack of funds - and we are talking about ECU 5 or 6 million ?
What tourism will get from the appropriation for small and medium-sized enterprises is even less than ECU 5 or 6 million .
So Parliament must vote for the amendment this time to allow this programme to be put into effect .
By so doing we will be responding to thousands of millions of people working in this sector .
Mr President , a budget without fresh borrowing is something really special in Europe and the world .
Not only is fresh borrowing not required , but a reserve has been built up too .
I think this is something we should constantly remind the listeners in the gallery of when we talk about the European Community 's budget , that such careful planning is made that there is a little left over each year .
We hope the national governments will follow the example we have set .
We draw up financial plans too , of course , multiannual ones , currently from 1997 to 2002 , which have tremendous advantages for planning , increasing clarity and accuracy alike .
Take the ECSC for instance , where there is now a schedule of assets , from which you can tell at a glance which monies are required in future and which are not .
We have increased the research grants , we have increased the funds for education , and we are trying to support those that are efficient to create new jobs .
We know we cannot create new jobs through spending alone .
The state cannot do it .
We need to create incentives to make employers prepared to do more in this area .
I think that retaining the 11 % levy for the ECSC is not wise .
What we are actively doing is in fact legally suspect , and I think the steel levy in particular would definitely come up against problems in this respect under article 50 .
In addition , companies which work well are under enormous pressure from non-EU steel imports , which are made easier by this .
Our companies are losing their competitiveness , while substitutes for steel and coal are becoming more competitive .
That is why I think that retaining the levy would damage our healthy industries .
Mr President , first and foremost I want to congratulate the rapporteurs , Mr Tomlinson , Mr Giansily and especially Mr Tillich , the rapporteur for the European Union 's general budget , for having achieved a conciliation agreement with this budget , in what has been a difficult process . Both Mr Tillich and Mr Samland , the chairman of the Committee on Budgets , have managed to defend Parliament 's budgetary priorities by means of an agreement with the Council .
It is an austere budget under difficult conditions in which , nevertheless , commitments are increased by 2.1 % .
Therefore , it makes a positive contribution to the future development of the European budget .
However , this budget also supports solidarity .
In an austere year , in which budgetary commitments only grow by 2.1 % , policies directed towards solidarity grow by 6 % .
That is a positive sign , and good news for those of us who believe that Europe should be more than just a market or a free-trade zone , and want to build a truly federal political project for the people of Europe , in which solidarity with the less well-off is one of the main aspects of European policy .
The increase in structural policies has been achieved through the actions of this Parliament , which some people say is ineffective . This increase is an important step in the construction of this common space of solidarity .
I only hope that after the year 2000 , with the enlargement of the European Union , we will be able to maintain internal cohesion for the Fifteen at current levels , over and above the short-term electoral interests of certain Member States .
This budget also supports employment .
Some might say that support does not go far enough , but it is the beginning of a greater role for Community policies to combat unemployment .
I also hope that in future the structural funds are used more in those regions of Europe with high unemployment rates , and in concrete actions to create jobs , mainly in those sectors where the demand has still not been consolidated , but which constitute future sources of employment .
I shall conclude , Mr President , with the Giansily report .
I beg support for the Rübig and Barton amendments in favour of abolishing the levy , which is an added tax on sectors such as coal and steel which are beginning to be competitive - the steel sector by its own efforts . We cannot punish these sectors with additional burdens , because it is essential to encourage their competitiveness .
In that way , job creation in these sectors can become a reality .
Mr President , this budget is no cause for enthusiasm , but it is reasonable .
It appears to me that our institutions have collectively - and this is good news for everyone , and particularly those who have doubts about the Parliament - reached the age of reason .
For this , our respects are owed to the rapporteur in particular , as to all others involved .
Indeed , we have accepted moderation , achieved a balance , reaffirmed our prerogatives , and expressed our priorities .
We have accepted moderation , and we were right to do so .
However , we should not exaggerate .
As Mr Christodoulou reminded us just a moment ago , it is fine to accept austerity if you are a nation state . But it would , on the other hand , be much more serious if we forgot that the European Union budget has a geographical logic , and that its responsibilities are different , as the European Union is extending and constantly increasing those responsibilities .
We have managed a balanced budget .
There was an intention to focus most of the effort on the structural funds , and we rejected that .
The sacrifices have been balanced out between the obligatory and non-obligatory expenditure .
Each side has made its own contribution to compromise .
That is a good thing , even though it was no fun for anyone to have to do so .
We have affirmed our prerogatives .
Thanks to the rectificatory letter and to the somewhat complex procedure , which is so deliciously a Community one , we have taken a modest but resolute step forward in the field of obligatory expenditure .
I have heard some people raise concerns about this .
Mr Giansily , my friend Mr Giansily , in particular .
I am tempted to tell him it is later than he thinks .
We will not really defend the interests of agriculture by rejecting calm and balanced conciliation procedures between the two institutions , and by hanging onto an absurd system in which authorities at loggerheads try to establish compromises each to its own advantage , that is , make up two halfbudgets drafted along different lines .
We have expressed our priorities .
There are plenty of them , and the main one being the employment initiative .
It is not to insult the European Council to say that , without the concertation which took place between the presidency and Parliament , the European Council of Luxembourg on employment would have been rather empty , and limited to a few solemn declarations .
We brought the only truly concrete item to that summit .
I think we should be pleased about all that .
The institutional triangle has , if I may dare say so , worked as a magic square .
And if so , this is due to many people .
Many complimentary things have been said .
For my part , I have only one compliment to make , and that is a personal one , to Mr Jean-Jacques Kasel , an indefatigable , discreet , and effective hero in the Luxembourg presidency .
To him , exclusively , I pay this personal tribute , but of course my thoughts clearly go to everyone else .
My colleagues have been so prodigal in their compliments that I cannot possibly add to them .
A word on the ECSC .
We have heard the rapporteur , Mr Giansily , giving us the benefit of an interesting experience .
He went down the road to Damascus twice .
This friend of Mr Madelin has discovered the virtues of compulsory levies , and this disciple of General de Gaulle has discovered the virtues of Jean Monnet .
I am delighted about the second point , because I believe that there will only be progress in the European concept in my own country if we reconcile the traditions of both Jean Monnet and Général de Gaulle .
For the rest , I have concerns , because I believe that Mr Giansily has forgotten Jean Monnet 's essential virtue , which was his pragmatism .
He has proposed us a levy which is unjustified .
Why strike down one business enterprise , rather than another , with such a burden ?
He has proposed us a levy which is useless , as in all truth , one cannot see why there should be any need to make a levy at a time when the Commissioner explained to us that he had set aside the necessary funds in reserves to finance this operation .
Finally , he is proposing somewhat unrealistic expenditures .
I heard preferential interest rate loans mentioned .
That worries me .
I am no friend of loans at preferential interest rates .
I prefer securities on loans . I prefer venture capital .
I believe it is possible to spend the amount that Mr Giansily wants to see spent without making extra levies and providing for extra input into the Resider and Rechar initiatives .
In this respect , the Commission has made an opening , and I would like the Parliament to seize this opportunity .
In that way , ladies and gentlemen , we will turn that fundamentally fanciful notion of politicians - the ability to increase expenditure without increasing the tax burden - into reality .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 9 : 30 .
Progress in the areas of justice and home affairs
The next item is the oral questions by Mr Nassauer , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , to Council ( B4-0915 / 97 - O-0108 / 97 ) and to the Commission ( B4-0916 / 97 - O-0109 / 97 ) , on the annual debate on progress made in the implementation of the areas of justice and home affairs - Article K.6 , third paragraph of the EU Treaty .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are taking this oral question as the basis to discuss the progress made on cooperation in the areas of justice and home affairs during this past six months .
We can now report to our total satisfaction that the Luxembourg Presidency has made progress .
This applies not only to the formal cooperation with Parliament but to the subject matter also .
Mr President-in-Office , we are pleased to point out that you made it a general rule , virtually anticipating the rules of the Amsterdam Treaty , to listen to Parliament on action in the area of the third pillar .
That is a good procedure .
You are not obliged to do so by treaty or for any other reason .
I think we have achieved some positive results from working together .
We want to make a point of stressing and applauding that .
Our request would be that you impart your convictions to your successor , of whom we now have similar expectations .
No doubt there are still demands in this area .
It would be better , for instance , if we conducted this debate on the basis of a report from the Council .
Maybe this could be passed on as a suggestion also .
Each time we study the catalogue describing such work , we find a wealth of topics where you never know exactly by the end of the half-year which direction they have progressed in or why they might not have progressed at all .
This would be a fine opportunity for any Council presidency to describe its projects and their realization , while at the same time disclosing the obstacles that stood in the way of them .
Work in this area has become very complex .
It covers issues such as the fight against trafficking in human beings , the fight against organized crime , protection of the Community 's financial interests , the treatment of non-Community minors not in the company of adults , risk assessment and control of synthetic drugs , the fight against corruption , passport control at the external borders , and an issue extremely important in practice , namely agreement on the issuing of judicial and extra-judicial documents in civil and commercial matters .
Behind this very legal-sounding formulation hides a central problem of intergovernmental cooperation under the third pillar , that is cooperation in the fields of justice and home affairs .
The great task facing us here is the construction of a European judicial network , that is to say an area of European jurisdiction .
We have become accustomed to trade operating without borders where economic activity is concerned , under the single market , but the legal instruments protecting trade stop at the national frontiers .
That is bad for Europe 's citizens and bad for the consumers .
Moreover , it is hard to understand why a ruling of the Local Court in Kassel cannot be issued directly to a French citizen by this court , with the result that the judgement is able to be executed immediately .
We need this , and it is feasible within this framework .
This will be the task in the coming period , even if you bear in mind that work in this field is likely to change permanently with the ratification of the Amsterdam Treaty .
While initially the same procedural rules will apply , the Council will decide unanimously and Parliament will be consulted .
Yet , following ratification of the Amsterdam Treaty , there will be a common legal base in the areas of asylum , immigration and police collaboration , and the process of inter-state cooperation we are experimenting with now will not apply any longer .
There will be questions to deal with here as well , Mr President-in-Office .
I will just mention one .
Currently the national parliaments act in controlling their governments .
Once there is a common authority , the relevant areas like asylum and immigration will pass from national control without arriving under the full control of this Parliament , since we will only be consulted and not enjoy codecision .
This is going to give some constitutional experts a real headache .
That is why we are advising in no uncertain terms , Mr President-in-Office , that the earliest possible use be made of the opportunities for introducing majority voting and codecision to this Parliament .
There are many individual aspects that we would like to see encouraged .
We need to prepare for the incorporation of Schengen .
We need to legislate for a common right of asylum .
And we want to continue to develop Europol into an effective unit , regardless of particular differences , which is subordinate to the control of a European Commissioner , the legal control of the Court of Justice and the parliamentary control of this Parliament .
At the same time we would prevail upon you to assist us , Mr President-in-Office , in view of our excellent understanding with you hitherto !
( Applause )
Mr President , Ladies and Gentlemen , we have , in the shape of article K.6 of the treaty , a fine tradition , under which every year we draw up a balance sheet , as part of the third pillar , of our actions and achievements in the field of justice and home affairs .
I shall first say , Mr President , that I appreciated the intervention of Mr Nassauer , one of the specialists in this field in this Parliament , and who indicated a number of paths which we should take rather seriously over the forthcoming months or years , as these are paths which are perfectly realistic , and which should take us towards more tighter and more loyal cooperation between the Council and the European Parliament .
I would also , Mr President , like to say that I am here drawing up a balance sheet of 1997 .
This is not a balance sheet of the Luxembourg Presidency , as this balance sheet also includes the Dutch Presidency .
The Dutch Presidency was concerned with the drawing up of the draft Treaty of Amsterdam , and I believe that their work was well done .
It was then the job of the Luxembourg Presidency to implement and anticipate on a number of provisions of the Treaty of Amsterdam .
I welcome the fact that your Parliament has followed in our wake .
I had asked all my colleagues to act as if the logic of Amsterdam already applied , and everyone has done so .
I can say , Mr President , directing my remarks to Mr Nassauer , to Mr Schulz and to all the other speakers , that finally , the British Presidency , set to follow on from ours , and the Austrian Presidency , which will follow on after , are both going down the same tracks , and adopting the same modus vivendi that we had agreed on in the course of these last six months .
All were most keen to do so . Your Parliament lost no time in reacting positively to our offer , by giving us its timely opinion on a number of projects and common actions , which the presidency has put before you , the results finally being very encouraging .
The Luxembourg and Netherlands Presidencies focused on a number of special areas .
The first of these was the fight against organized crime .
Boosted by the Amsterdam timetable , thirty-three points were ascribed well defined and precise deadlines for completion .
We , too , naturally had to comply with this timetable .
I believe we have done so , and found political agreement on joint action setting up a European legal network .
We have done so by putting the finishing touches to the joint action under which international instruments will be evaluated other than on a national basis .
It is not enough to adopt a convention , we still need to know whether everyone is ready to apply it out in the field , as the law lays down .
We have done everything , and I repeat , everything to finalise the action which makes it possible to bring those involved in organized crime to justice .
We were not successful .
I must admit that I am extremely disappointed , because our Parliament is right to insist , and constantly and always insist , on the need for a common definition of organized crime .
How can we combat organized crime in the European Union , if we cannot , between Member States , agree on the same language and the same wording , the same definition of organized crime ?
We were all ready to do so , Mr President , but one Member State , one only , prevented us from going ahead and agreeing .
I shall also say , Mr President , that we have made considerable progress in the field of police cooperation , by which I mean Europol .
Five Member States , at this time , have already ratified the Europol convention .
There are ten remaining Member States who should do so in the months to come , and no later than February , for Europol to be operational in July .
We have introduced most of the regulations which will be the basis of the new institution of Europol , and we have good hopes of seeing the convention finalised and ratified by the Member States between now and the beginning of next year .
We consider , and I personally consider , the adoption of the Naples II convention as the jewel in the crown of the Luxembourg presidency , and I shall say why .
This convention involves cooperation between customs administrations , which should give the customs authorities the necessary and sufficient instruments to effectively combat illegal traffic in alcohol , cigarettes , drugs , psychotropic substances , weapons , munitions , and nuclear material .
This is an instrument which should provide a qualitative leap forward in the cross-border fight against organized crime .
But this is not enough .
We shall also be moving on to the adoption , to the political agreement of the Brussels II convention .
This is the first time that in the area of judicial cooperation in the civil field , we have gone beyond the field of patrimonial rights and extended our competencies to the matrimonial domain .
This is an extremely important development for our fellow citizens , as here we are dealing with divorce , separation , annulment of marriage , custody of children , and decisions which require recognition and performance in all Member States .
Here , too , we finally approved a convention which is of vital importance for the community of law which we aspire to .
I could cite still further examples .
I must draw your attention , in the drugs field , to a number of achievements , and more particularly , and this is a first , to the results of the first informal meeting between ministers of justice and ministers with responsibility for the drugs dossier , who have discussed the adoption of a more consistent and pragmatic approach in the field of combating drugs trafficking .
I cannot say that this meeting was a tremendous success , but it had the merit of enabling discussion , in a fully serene and objective atmosphere , of the problems which are the joint responsibility of the ministries of justice and the ministries of health , although viewpoints , when judging these matters may differ .
It is clear that ministers of justice tend to place a greater emphasis on the aspect of repression , whereas the ministers of health are clearly above all concerned with prevention .
Even so , we successfully reach a minimum consensus around the table .
I can tell you why I believe this discussion was extremely useful .
It should , incidentally , become a guideline for the ministries of justice and of health over the next few months and years .
The ministers agreed on the fact that a person with a drugs dependency problem was basically a sick person . These are men and women who require assistance , who ask for help , and not for punishment .
We agreed in saying that , in the final analysis , it is important to put as much emphasis on the preventative aspects in the fight against drugs , as on the repressive aspects .
Here , Mr President , is a very brief balance sheet for this year . Brief as it is , it shows that this was a year which stands out from previous years , as honourable members will understand .
This year was , in my opinion , an extremely useful one in the field of justice and home affairs .
We made considerable progress in a number of fields , such as the fight against organized crime , police cooperation , judicial cooperation in criminal matters , and judicial cooperation in civil matters .
We also enriched and intensified our dialogue with the eastern and central European countries and with Cyprus , and laid special emphasis on the evaluation of legal instruments , in accordance with the Copenhagen criteria . However , you will see , Mr President , that negotiations with the central and eastern European countries will certainly be extremely difficult in terms both of the third pillar , and of the evaluation of the instruments that I have just referred to .
Mr President , I believe that we have worked honestly .
Clearly , we have not done everything hoped for , but at all events , the achievements of a presidency are measured by the success of the subsequent presidencies .
Here too , and once again , I would like to thank you for giving me the floor .
I would above all wish to thank the Parliament and the honourable Members of the Committee on Civil Liberties , the Committee on Legal Affairs , the Committee on Institutional Affairs , and the Committee on Budgetary Control , as we have also accomplished a great deal in the field of the protection of the financial interests of the Community , and in the field of corruption . And I would like to thank all for their commitment and their availability , when serving a cause of common interest to the Council and to Parliament .
Here , I am talking about our determined fight against organized crime .
Security , Mr President , and immigration , are subjects of the greatest concern to our fellow citizens .
We therefore have to meet their expectations and their interests , as these interests are legitimate , and should also be a cause of concern to us , for the credibility of the work we undertake depends upon it .
Madam President , questions under the third pillar have moved increasingly into the centre of the European debate , and rightly so .
It is a matter of increased security and safety for citizens .
If we are to be able to bring about free movement of people , we also have to be able to cope with the problems which go with fugitives , with organized crime , with the drugs trade , with fraud , corruption and trafficking in women and children .
We must create a more efficient cooperation between our countries .
This year has been characterized by work on the Amsterdam Treaty and on the enlargement of the Union .
The European Union is facing a task of historic proportions .
The new democracies in central and eastern europe and in the Baltic which have thrown off Communism are applying to join the Union .
For them , as for the EU 's current Member States , the crux of the matter is to build a cooperation in order to ensure peace , stability and democracy .
The challenges in the area of the third pillar are large within the existing EU .
They are also very large in the applicant countries .
These questions are very much in focus .
We have different experiences in the EU and in the applicant countries , but the problems we face are fundamentally the same .
Organized crime affects us all .
Let me give an example : Trafficking in women and children is an important political question in the EU .
It is now also beginning to be recognized as an important question in the applicant countries too . It is their young women who are affected .
Another example is that drugs smugglers use applicant countries and transit countries in their business .
The applicant countries now recognize that this also leads to a domestic market for drugs .
We do not only have common interests , but also a shared responsibility .
For our part this involves living up to the pre-accession strategy .
For applicant countries it involves introducing the acquis communautaire in the field of justice and home affairs .
We have put a lot of time into drawing up the Commission 's opinion for all the applicant countries .
At an early stage we pointed out that questions of justice and home affairs would require a lot of time and effort in the preparations for enlargement .
This may appear obvious .
If organized crime is allowed to spread , it will make inroads into democracy .
If the democratic institutions fail to implement and monitor laws , people will lose confidence .
That will affect the countries ' economies .
People who invest want to be able to rely on the judicial system .
It is fundamental for membership negotiations that the applicant countries adopt the Union 's " acquis communautaire ' , which requires stable judicial institutions .
During the spring we spent a lot of time arguing for our points of view in the government negotiations before the Amsterdam meeting .
As far as the third pillar is concerned , the Amsterdam Treaty represents a large step forward , although we would , of course , have liked it to have been even larger .
During the year , apart from the work in these two key areas , we have also taken a number of special initiatives .
We presented a proposal on temporary protection , which we debated in this House in October .
Our starting point was that people with temporary residence permits should have the same kind of protection regardless of the Member State which they were in .
We have also put forward a draft convention on rules for admission .
The background was quite simply that we had a number of resolutions which we wished to combine in a single instrument with similar rules with regard to labour , sole-traders , students , post-graduate students , family members and immigrants who are permanently resident in the Union .
During the year I also presented a communication on the carrying out and recognition of civil judgments which to a certain degree corresponds to the problem about which Mr Nassauer is asking , i.e. that it currently takes too long and costs too much to have a judgment carried out in another Member State .
As Mr Fischbach said , synthetic drugs are spreading like wildfire among young people around Europe .
The drugs are designed to avoid legislative bans , and the authorities are sometimes forced to hand back confiscated drugs quite simply because we have not had time to put them on a list of banned substances .
It currently takes around two years to get a new drug onto the UN 's lists of banned substances .
That is of course not acceptable .
When I saw the extent of this problem , I gave my departments the task of carrying out a proper analysis of the situation .
We finished the analysis in January and then drew up a communication to Parliament in May .
As you know , we have proposed a system for the exchange of information which would make it possible for us to quickly warn each other when new substances come onto the market and to share experiences and analyses .
We must also develop methods to ban new chemical drugs more quickly .
The Council of Ministers gave its support to this in June .
As far as the fight against drugs is concerned , we have a cooperation which works well with both the European Parliament and the presidency .
The Commission has also become deeply involved in anti-drug activities outside Europe 's borders .
This applies to North Africa as well as South East Asia and Latin America .
I can mention that as recently as last week we took part in a meeting in the Dominican Republic on the implementation of the plan of action to combat drugs in the Caribbean which was adopted in Barbados in May 1996 .
Madam President , trafficking in women was the subject of a special debate in the plenary session here yesterday when the Waddington report was on the agenda .
As I said then , we are already in the process of seeing how we can follow up the plan of action .
As far as the sexual exploitation of children is concerned , we are in the process of drawing up a communication which takes an overall view and which will propose , among other things , a joint European register of missing children .
During the year we started the Daphne programme which is aimed at voluntary organizations which work with women and children who are victims of violence and sexual exploitation .
We have encountered a lot of interest , but have only been able to support a fraction of the projects which have been submitted to us .
We now hope that through the individual projects we shall gain experience and knowledge which can also be of benefit to others .
All the Member States of the EU are now involved in projects in one way or another .
We have also worked hard to implement four multiannual programmes , Sherlock , Grotius , Stop and Oisin .
Quite recently the Commission presented two more multiannual programmes , Falcone and Odysseus .
Odysseus is aimed at strengthening the practical cooperation between those who work on false documents , border controls and asylum and immigration questions .
Madam President , when the question is asked , on what area should the European Union concentrate , a majority of those questioned answer that it is fighting organized crime , drugs and violence .
That is what concerns people today .
They expect us to make real efforts to protect their personal freedom , safety and security .
The Commission is playing an active role in the work on the Union 's plan of action for the fight against organized crime .
The Commission did so before the summit in Dublin and continued to do so both before and after the summit in Amsterdam .
It is gratifying that the Council of Ministers has supported the fact that the Member States and the Union 's institutions are together putting power behind the promise to make the fight against organized crime effective .
However , reality speaks for itself .
In the EU we have 15 different legal systems , different definitions of fraud and major differences in rules for banks and finance .
Organized crime exploits this situation .
That should make greater demands on increased cooperation and greater effectiveness in the Union 's fight against crime .
To increase the opportunities for effective cooperation , I have put forward a proposal for a joint measure , the socalled Falcone programme , which is aimed at increased cooperation between those who work in the field with policing and legal questions in this area .
It is obvious that the fight against organized crime and corruption is an important element in the forthcoming membership negotiations with the countries of central and eastern europe .
The plan of action proposes that a special cooperation pact against organized crime should be entered into between the applicant countries and the Member States of the EU .
Together with the Presidency , the Commission is now in the process of studying what shape such a pact should take .
Several times I have complained , as the rapporteur does , that many conventions in the area of the third pillar have still not entered into force .
These include Europol , the Convention on extradition and the Convention on the protection of the Community 's financial interests .
I would be grateful if the Members of the House also helped us , as the President said , to at least get Europol in place for 1 July next year .
As I mentioned initially , the Amsterdam Treaty means that cooperation on justice and home affairs is being raised to a new level .
It contains a five-year working programme on how border controls , immigration and asylum issues and civil rights shall be integrated into the first pillar .
That also includes the matters currently covered by the Schengen Agreement .
Cooperation in the area which remains within the third pillar , that is , the police , customs and criminal law , will be developed through framework decisions , among other things .
We are going to continue to work with the instruments we have through the Maastricht Treaty .
At the same time we are of course preparing ourselves for the day when the Amsterdam Treaty enters into force .
I think we need a proper overview of the consequences of the new treaty with regard to questions of justice and home affairs .
I have therefore set in motion an analytical study which I intend to present to Parliament and the Council of Ministers in the form of a broad communication .
I hope that , in the same way as a White Paper , it will serve as an important basis for a thorough debate on how we shall realize a free , safe and just Europe .
With that I would like to thank the Committees here in Parliament , with which we in the Commission work intensively , for a good cooperation during the year .
I would also like to thank the Presidency for the successful achievements we have succeeded in bringing about , in spite of everything , during 1997 .
Thank you , Commissioner Gradin .
The debate is adjourned to 3 p.m.
Welcome
Before we move to the vote , I would like to make an official welcome .
Ladies and gentlemen , we are honoured to have with us today in the official visitors ' gallery the family of Miguel Angel Blanco , the young town councillor from Ermua in Spain 's Basque region who was kidnapped and murdered by ETA terrorists in July of this year .
( Prolonged applause ) As you will no doubt recall , the death of Miguel Angel Blanco sent enormous shock waves not only through Spain but through the rest of the European Union .
The European Parliament was not immune to this feeling , which applies to all other victims of terrorism , and sent a delegation to Ermua as an unequivocal show of solidarity .
The Mayor of Ermua and the leaders of the parties represented on the town council are accompanying the family .
I would like to welcome you all most sincerely , as should be clear from the applause you have received in this House .
Thank you very much for coming !
Votes
The obligation to display the price of an article per unit of measurement is , of course , a commendable one , and can only contribute to better consumer information .
In the light of the ever more extensive range of products offered for sale , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten 's report goes in the right direction , which is toward educating Europeans in the practice of comparative consumerism .
However , given the principle that too much information is harmful to information itself , we must remain vigilant with regard to any excesses potentially arising from such measures .
At the time when this report was examined by the Parliamentary Committee on the environment , I had occasion to draw my colleagues ' attention to the problems raised by prices on a per litre basis , with regard to wines and spirits .
What possible interest can there be for a consumer to know that champagne or whisky costs so much per litre , when the bottles in which they are offered for sale contain 75 cl or 70 cl ?
Price comparison can be read directly from the price label on the article itself .
I think it is quite unnecessary to overload a label with extra information which is of no greater value than the unit price of the article itself .
I would therefore ask for the unrestricted application of the provisions of article 10 , ' maintenance of the most favourable provisions . '
With this single reserve , I approve the report of Mrs Oomen-Ruijten .
A simpler and more flexible directive is essential both for the consumer and for the retailer .
I welcome the conciliation agreement with the Council concerning arrangements for the dual pricing of goods during the transitional period for the introduction of a single currency .
The decision will result in the price of goods being displayed in both the national currency and the euro , including the price per unit , per kilo or per litre as appropriate .
The exemption of small shopkeepers also displays common sense .
Small shops will be given six years to comply with the directive .
Obviously , as these small shops sell everything , it would have been an unacceptable burden to have asked them to put the unit price on products also .
These measures are practical and will help consumers better understand the operation of the single currency .
Raw tobacco ( A4-414 / 97 )
The Swedish Social Democrat Group has abstained from voting on the amendment of this regulation because we do not think that any agricultural aid should be given to tobacco growing at all .
The introduction of the single market and ensuing liberalisation have considerably increased the degree to which some fields of our economy are exposed to international competition .
Tobacco production is in its own right fully part of the European agricultural economy .
As part of this framework , it requires all our attention .
Likewise , it must be treated independently of the dossiers dealing with combating tobacco dependency , which will be dealt with tomorrow by our Assembly .
As a medical practitioner , with responsibility for an ear , nose , and throat hospital department , I daily deplore the ravages occasioned by immoderate consumption of tobacco .
Even so , the European farmers cropping tobacco should not be those on whom the financial burden of decisions fall , especially as compared to their American or Asian colleagues .
This has not been the case until now , as this business has continued to be protected .
This is why I approve the one-year extension of the regime in force , pending an overall reform of the common organization of the tobacco market .
I am also in favour of applying an emergency procedure in the allocation of quotas for the 1998 harvest .
The single premium regime , as it exists today , is welcomed by the majority of producers , who are a not inconsiderable haven of employment opportunities in these difficult times .
Consequently , we should ensure the guarantee thresholds first , before subsequently envisaging a new basis of operation more consistent with world market prospects , and efforts to reduce the unwanted consequences of tobacco dependency .
I will therefore vote in favour of the proposal as now put forward by the Commission to the European Parliament .
I have voted against this proposal to extend the regulation concerning the common organization of the market for raw tobacco .
The reason is mainly that I consider aid for tobacco growers to be absurd , since at the same time the EU has a programme to prevent the harmful effects of smoking .
We know that thousands upon thousands of people die every year because of tobacco smoking and that the healthcare costs to take care of the people who are ill because of smoking are astronomical .
The EU 's support for tobacco growing should therefore end entirely .
Aid should instead be provided so that those who grow tobacco can convert to other farming .
The alarm bells which we in Parliament have heard , including the latest annual report from the Court of Auditors , show quite clearly that the EU 's policy in this area works very badly .
Among other things , the internal control systems do not work .
Fraud is also commonplace .
I do not therefore think it is sensible to continue with this policy .
The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament have today voted against the Community arrangements for untreated tobacco being extended to cover the automun of 1998 .
We do not believe that the tobacco which is cured within the EU should be subsidised for the following reasons : first , it is immoral for it to be exported , as it fails to meet the EU 's own standards , and secondly , we believe that it is hypocritical for us to spend ECU 11.2 a year on fighting cancer while at the same time supporting tobacco curing through market arrangements .
Instead , we are in favour of shifting production in these areas to other crops and in this way protecting the people who are dependent on this crop at presence , and for whom it is their basis for existence .
Andersson report ( A4-313 / 97 )
The main thrust of the report on the future organization of work is good .
Issues should , as far as possible , be sorted out in a decentralized way by agreements between the parties in the labour market , so-called partnership by agreement , which means that the parties themselves decide at what level the agreement is concluded .
There is no reason , however , to draw the European Commission into the partnership as suggested in the report .
Nonetheless , I voted for the report .
I am voting against the Andersson report .
The clear agreement between the views in this report and the Commission 's Green Paper merely confirms my view that the majority of the European Parliament fully share the Commission 's views on how the future European labour market is to be organized .
Although the report contains much which is good , the only parameters for success in the Andersson report are quantitative growth and increased profits .
So the report simply glosses over the negative effects which the proposals in the Commission 's Green Paper would have , such as the adverse effects which introducing an annual working hours standard would have for employees ' family life and their social life as a whole .
I think it is unacceptable that the Andersson report should demand that the Commission get involved in an Eu-wide regulation of national labour markets ( point 1 ) .
It does not make it any more acceptable that the report refers to the importance of the European partners on the labour market in this respect .
In fact , this would mean that the national trades unions and employers ' associations would be bypassed when it comes to their members ' interests , and that large parts of the labour market would come under EU legislation .
My aim is to support those circles in the Danish labour movement who want to hold onto the principles of retaining the right to negotiate freely amongst the parties on the labour market at national level and who want to work against any kind of EU involvement in agreements .
The same circles in the labour movement fully support broad international labour cooperation , which is a view which I also share .
In view of this , I am abstaining from the report .
I warmly welcome this Green Paper and the rapporteur 's work on it .
I hope that from discussions around this document , concrete actions will emerge .
Having experienced frustration last year when the previous British Government opposed a flexible EU policy on working time , I am glad to say that our new government is playing a leading part in such debates .
British Labour Members like myself are glad to see the rapporteur stressing lifelong learning as a policy to support at EU level as our government does at home .
He is right to emphasize the need to tailor policies to suit different people - in Britain for example our Chancellor has announced a massive increase in childcare , helping parents move from welfare into work .
We can all learn from best practice in other countries .
Where both management and staff dare to be flexible , to manage change rather than be its victims , the more secure all our economic futures will be .
I hope colleagues will back this report and move the debate on , to generate new ideas and share best current practice on the organization of work .
This can be a useful spur to national governments preparing their employment action plans for the Cardiff Summit next year .
The question of creating new forms of job organization given the current ongoing social restructuring touches three basic dimensions :
the dimension of a new division of labour in view of steady rises in productivity and efficiency , that is to say not only between paid labour and other forms of socially necessary work , and between men and women along with that , but also between the employed and the jobless ; -the dimension of the new opportunities for dismantling hierarchies and extending individual or collective areas of responsibility in employment as an essential element of working life , which new technologies and management strategies make possible today ; -the dimension of a more flexible and product-wise arrangement of immediate working processes in all areas of production and service.Mr Andersson 's report is primarily concerned with the third dimension , which largely addresses the interests of the wage and salary earners .
This is entirely positive , but does not really go far enough .
In view of the urgent problem of mass unemployment , it is necessary to tackle also the reorganization of work in the first two dimensions referred to .
We hope that the debate will continue and be extended - especially via the EU Commission , which might discover new ways to overcome certain obstacles still affecting the whole question of a European employment and labour policy .
Waddington report ( A4-372 / 97 )
Madam President , I welcome the Waddington report as a thorough , coherent response to the Commission communication on trafficking in women for the purposes of sexual exploitation .
It is very difficult to believe that such slavery still exists in this day and age , yet we read that trafficking in women is actually on the increase according to the International Organization for Migration .
This makes it all the more important for the European Union to have a coordinated strategy to combat it .
The Commission has estimated that half a million women a year are being trafficked although the true extent of the problem is unknown because of the secretive nature of the trade .
The high profits and the low risks generated from trafficking encourage the perpetrators to supply more and more women for sexual exploitation in the European Union .
Many of these desperate women are poor and vulnerable , marginalized from their own societies , who believe that life in another country will be rosier - an escape , a new start .
It is therefore essential that there be a multi-disciplinary , transnational European approach to this problem .
It is very encouraging that Member States have recognized that trafficking is a violation of human rights and they have a common interest in fighting it .
It is also encouraging that the programmes Stop and Daphne are in place .
However , there is a strong need for increased funding for these initiatives and I call for 1999 to be announced as the European Year against Violence against Women for this will be a further encouragement to increase those budget lines .
Finally it is important that women 's status in society today is included in the European Union 's enlargement negotiations , especially as the central and eastern European countries have quickly become the new breeding ground and easy access areas for trafficking in women and for women being brought into the European Union .
The huge increase in the trafficking of women is resulting in many thousands of women from the poorer regions of the world being subjected to sexual slavery .
These unfortunate victims come from Latin America , the Philippines and the countries of central and eastern europe .
They are often illiterate and uneducated and are directly recruited from small towns and villages with the promise of a lavish or well-paid job in Europe .
Once they arrive in Europe they are at the mercy of traffickers who confiscate their passports and force them into prostitution .
I welcome the fact that this issue has come within the remit of the Europol drugs unit .
However much more needs to be done .
There must be better coordination of police information and laws and sentencing policy need to be harmonized across the EU .
Those that ply this evil trade must be severely punished .
Once caught they should serve long sentences on a par with those convicted of major drug-trafficking offences .
The penalty must fit the crime .
We have today voted in favour of Waddington 's outstanding report on the trade in women .
We have done so even though it demands ratification of the Europol convention and extend the scope of the coming European information system ( EIS ) .
Europol is one of the many stages which have been taken towards a United States of Europe .
Trans-border police cooperation is always essential , but there is absolutely no reason to make it international .
The same applies to the EIS and all the Schengen work .
We accept the need to act in respect of the trade in women , but we believe this should be done at intergovernmental level .
The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament have today voted in favour of efforts to assist women who are victims of the trade in human beings .
This is a kind of slavery in which women from non-Member States are transported to the EU to be exploited , either by being forced into prostitution or through forced marriages or other work situations involving sexual exploitation .
These women are often in a highly unfortunate and vulnerable position .
It is therefore important that efforts be made both to help the victims and to combat the trade in human beings .
This is an international problem , and so it is important that the Commission should take the initiative .
Member States should cooperate on research and education , exchange information and experience etc .
We must combat the trade in human beings , and the most effective way of doing this is to act together .
The report illustrates some of the more dramatic dimensions of the problem .
However , it does not succeed in the end in getting to the root of the basic causes that have given rise to this scourge of society and have helped it to burgeon . Nor does it put its finger on who is really to blame for this present day slave trafficking .
For this reason , although it makes some interesting recommendations , it fails to put forward any recommendations which would lead to a fundamental and complete eradication of the problem .
It is perhaps more painful for " civilized ' countries to acknowledge their massive responsibilities for the economic and social collapse of entire countries , in the service of enormous European and multinational economic interests , leading to the degradation of an entire people .
The same law of the marketplace which acts against the dignity of citizens and workers in our own countries , has transformed other countries , in Europe and the Third World alike , into booty and merchandise .
It has created a " paradise ' of laws of the jungle enabling all-powerful international organized crime to act with impunity , trading in the dignity and in the very lives of human beings .
The way to tackle the problem is not through the imposition of severe punishments and through suppression with the assistance of Europol , which in the end only impact on the victims themselves and do not strike at the allpowerful and flexible circles of organized crime .
At the same time the Schengen Agreement is closing in around the immigrants , the victims , depriving them of basic rights and leaving them exposed to the mercy of lawlessness and the crime which turns this into profit .
The way to tackle the problem is through securing and safeguarding the rights of immigrants , through the provision of reception services and basic living conditions .
Even more so , it is through the development of relationships of mutual , equal and profitable cooperation with third countries .
It is through the growth of their economic base , which has been destroyed by the predatory exploitation of developed countries , enabling their citizens to work and to live with dignity in their homelands .
( The sitting was suspended at 12.55 p.m. and resumed at 3.00 p.m. )

Progress in the areas of justice and home affairs ( continuation )
The next item is the continuationof the debate on the oral questions from the Committee on Civil Liberties on the annual debate relating to progress in the area of justice and home affairs .
Mr President , please forgive me for commenting on the order of business at the start of this debate .
Yet I cannot avoid making two critical observations on the procedure for today 's debate , and I address my remarks to you , Mr President , together with a request .
For the third time in succession now we are experiencing how the debate on the success of cooperation in the area of justice and home affairs has been placed on the agenda in such a way that what occurs is what happened this afternoon , namely that we had to interrupt the discussion to make way for our important votes .
That is not good for the debate .
I would ask you to find another place on the agenda for such a central issue , which allows us to discuss this in context .
I have a second request to make , Mr President , together with another critical observation : I am very grateful to the Commissioner , Mrs Gradin , for concluding her speech this afternoon .
I would not have brought my speech to a close in her position , for the way in which this House thinks it can treat a Commissioner is unacceptable !
I say this particularly for our benefit , ladies and gentlemen , and would ask every one of us present here today to ensure in the groups that we do not ruin our reputation .
You cannot treat a Member of the Commission in this way with such an important debate !
I urgently request that we refrain from doing so in future .
If discussion is taking place at lunchtime - on this occasion Mrs Gradin was the victim ; normally it is other people , either speakers or representatives from the Council or Commission -this is intolerable .
No-one ever listens .
That is disgraceful for the Parliament of Europe !
I would therefore entreat you , Mr President , to make this a matter for discussion in the Conference of Presidents .
Thank you !
I should like to respond briefly to your two comments , which amounted , in fact , to a lengthy critical speech , and I shall certainly take note of , and transmit to the Conference of Presidents , your comments on the fact that the debates on this subject have been interrupted for the third time by the midday break . But I would also reflect back the criticism to you , particularly regarding the failure of speakers to keep to allocated speaking times , which has led to our being unable to keep to the planned timetables .
Furthermore , I apologize profusely to the Commissioner for the rumpus a moment or two ago , but we do not really know how to control the House when it is coming into session .
This is a recurrent problem , and I shall certainly inform the Conference of Presidents .
Mr President , just one sentence .
To give more weight Mr Schulz 's remarks , I would like to say that the PPE strongly supports every word he has just said .
Thank you , Mrs Reding .
All these comments will be transmitted to the relevant authorities .
I would ask you to keep to the allocated speaking times , which will avoid putting ourselves in a difficult situation .
Mr President , I also back up the colleagues who have just spoken .
I would like to begin by thanking the rapporteur who has accepted a great majority of the amendments that I proposed in the Commission on behalf of the Socialist Group .
Consequently , the motion before us , with the exception of one paragraph , has our complete approval .
I consider that there are two ways to deal with the annual report .
The first approach would be to match the advances achieved to the expectations of the citizens whom we represent .
From that point of view - and I shall return to this - there is a yawning gulf between these expectations and reality .
But we can also measure changes compared to the previous year . This is more realistic , and less discouraging .
This is what we did when we noted that the Parliament was now better informed and more often consulted , in accordance with article K6 .
The over-restrictive application of this rule was the first of our earlier criticisms .
We appreciated the fact that the Luxembourg presidency undertook to implement article K , paragraph 11 , of the Treaty of Amsterdam early , for it lays down the obligations of the Council and of the Commission unambiguously with regard to the Parliament .
Mr Nassauer emphasized this , this morning , and the President of the Council returned to it , and I thank him .
We also note progress in the choice of decision-making approaches , which are closer to the treaty , particularly in the area of joint action .
Our satisfaction in this respect is not total , however , as the list of the decisions of the Council also includes far too many resolutions which are not subject to our oversight .
Here , I mean , for example , the resolution on marriages of convenience , which was drafted in a totally opaque manner by the ' migrations ' group , without any information to the Parliament at any time , and therefore still less any consultation .
Here , however , was a document with substantial consequences , involving the right to live in a family situation .
There is cause for surprise at the adoption of a restrictive document on a subject which was not shown on the Council 's programme , at a time when the convention on the harmonization of rules in the immigration field , announced by Mme Gradin last year , has not seen the light of day .
Furthermore , as a general rule , we believe that the Council and the Commission do not give the necessary attention to the fields of asylum and immigration .
While we rejoice in the Commissioner 's initiative relating to temporary protection , we regret that the draft of the harmonization of procedures for granting refugee status and subsidiary protection - although in the Council 's programme for a considerable time past - has not even begun to be implemented .
In short , we note a number of areas of progress , but remain extremely critical on the slow pace of such progress , which does give European citizens the impression that , in these sensitive areas , no progress is being made at all .
This is true - and I am simplifying to the point of caricature - for the free circulation of persons , which is a subject of endless , serpentine complications .
This is also the case for the European legal space .
This was already the major priority of the Spanish Presidency in 1995 .
Even so , it is turning out difficult to give shape to this legal space .
Of course there are advances in our thinking .
Concrete proposals exist . There is no doubt about that .
The recent reports from our colleagues , Mrs Cederschiöld , Mr Orlando and Mr Bontempi prove that .
But progress is so timid , and the deadlines for implementation so long , that a wide avenue is open to the demagogues always on the look-out for whatever affects European credibility .
In this respect , I admit I was shocked by a defamatory advertisement published by the Europe of Nations Group in the French press , under the heading : Leave the big international criminals alone - Europe does not want to do anything about them , anyway .
It is interesting to note that those who are so ready to denounce the powerlessness of Europe are also those who are the most determined to deny Europe the resources it needs to be effective , by rejecting any new powers transferred to European institutions , and digging in their heels on unanimous voting , which we know is a powerful weapon of paralysis of decision-making - as the President of the Council has just emphasized in his morning speech .
And all this , of course , in the name of a narrow and restricted national sovereignty , which goes right against the principles that it is claimed to defend .
The two hundred magistrates meeting in Brussels last week , in the wake of the Geneva appeal , were right to point out the slow and sluggish pace of change in setting up a single Europe for legal affairs , which is completely at loggerheads with the festering sores of an archaic concept of national sovereignty .
Unfortunately , there are few chances of any real changes prior to the coming into force of the provisions of the Treaty of Amsterdam relating to the new procedures , and this promises many further years of rather uninspiring annual assessments !
Mr President , the Luxembourg presidency has innovated .
In order to reinforce parliamentary control in the field of combating crime , political asylum , free movement and so on , it decided to introduce the new rules for the Treaty of Amsterdam early and to consult the European Parliament , well before the ratification of the treaty made such consultation compulsory .
In doing this , the Luxembourg Presidency has really served the cause of transparency and democracy in Europe .
And it deserves our gratitude !
The Luxembourg Presidency also wished to innovate in other fields .
It wanted to take important decisions so that Europe should be better able to combat international crime , trafficking in men , women , and children , illegal immigration , the plague of paedophilia , and much more besides .
The presidency wanted to give substance to the wishes of the citizens in terms of concrete and effective measures , so that free circulation benefits the honest , and not criminals of all kinds . Alas , all this great effort and positive work has in so many cases been reduced to nothing by certain member countries , who have taken advantage of the compulsory unanimous vote required in the third pillar , to stand in the way of important dossiers .
This should be said loud and clear .
If essential measures to combat terrorism and organized crime cannot be successfully completed , the blame lies with certain member countries , who take the common interest hostage in the satisfaction of obscure national interests .
This is a pure and simple abuse , and it is high time , Mr President , that this should stop , as the only people to profit from such manoeuvrings are those working in the Mafia and other criminals .
In spite of that , the Luxembourg Presidency has successfully moved ahead on important dossiers , and my colleagues have already mentioned this .
The Luxembourg presidency would have had more to record on the assets side of the account , and if it has been unable to do so , it is certainly not the fault of Marc Fischbach , the excellent president in office , but rather more the rule of unanimous voting , which has once again demonstrated its harmful effects .
Mr President , Mr President of Council , ladies and gentlemen , we too are highly satisfied with the work carried out by Mr Nassauer and we note with satisfaction that Parliament is starting to be informed and consulted to an increasing extent , and this is very important to us .
Although we still have a long way to go in this sector , we think that Parliamentary control over such delicate issues , involving the heart of national sovereignty , so to speak , is of vital importance , particularly with regard to Europol , with regard to the Court of Justice , which we have to bring into operation as soon as possible , and , in general , obviously with regard to personal data on citizens .
It is on these two words - freedom and safety - that the future of Europe depends : the freedom of the citizens , freedom of movement , which obviously cannot be called into question by the very important and increasingly difficult fight against Mafia gangs and crimes of all kinds .
The future of our continent depends on this !
Mr President , progress has been made in the European judicial policy during the past year .
It has been mentioned that the Dutch Presidency has partly put into effect the Treaty of Amsterdam .
During the Dutch Presidency the action plan against major crime was developed .
Luxembourg has decided to consult us on all motions for a resolution , and the European Commission , Commissioner Gradin , submitted an initiative in this House for joint action with regard to the temporary protection of displaced persons .
Good things , therefore , during the past year .
But the liberals do not think this makes us well-off .
Because the shortcomings in the justice policy are still there in abundance .
Hardly any treaty agreement , and it says so in the papers , has been ratified by the Member States ; this includes the anti-fraud agreements , the Europol agreement , etc .
May I put it this way to Commissioner Gradin : the European Commission is economical with its right legislative initiative .
Yes , the Commission , Commissioner Gradin , says informally , we do not have enough staff .
No , the President says , that is no excuse .
Because too few staff in this sector of the European Commission shows that evidently too little priority is given to this policy area .
So it is all going too slowly .
What might happen and what should happen in the future ?
In the future there should be a strong coalition between the European Parliament and the European Commission , and in the future we should put pressure on both the European Council of Ministers of Justice and of Internal Affairs together .
This is necessary .
There is enough to do .
Mr President , I conclude by calling on the forthcoming British Presidency to show that Labour can pursue a better European justice policy than the Conservatives .
Mr President , cooperation in the field of justice and home affairs is certainly a delicate subject , as it affects an essential component of the sovereignty of Member States .
In this field of competency , the action of the Union can only and should only be subsidiary , and relate only to criminal actions or public order offences which are really transnational in nature .
This is a requirement for efficiency .
But rather than dream on about a common European legal area , which is in fact an extraordinary conception of an overbearing centralized European state , we would be closer to combatting organized crime , or illegal immigration , if we were to set up interstate cooperation , and make the court decisions taken in each one of the Member States immediately enforceable on a reciprocal basis , and to conceive of transnational procedures that would be based on the proposals of the judges in the Geneva appeal .
Instead of the vain attempt always to seek legal uniformization , which is inappropriate and contrary to the traditions and the legal philosophies of the Member States , the European Union 's efforts should focus , on the contrary , on really trans-national aspects , questions of law and public order .
On the admission of the rapporteur himself , the provisions of the Treaty of Amsterdam in the field of law and public order raise difficulties in terms of constitutional guarantees , as communitarization leads to the disappearance of democratic control by the national parliaments .
This state of affairs should itself suffice to condemn the treaty .
The European Parliament , which is so keen on safeguarding human rights and constitutional guarantees , should consider the consequences and draw the attention of public opinion to the dangers resident in the Treaty of Amsterdam , with regard to democratic control over European construction .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to join my colleagues in thanking Mr Fischbach for his work .
Mr Fischbach , on behalf of my group may I say again : the manner in which you have presided over the Council is , in our view , exemplary .
You can only operate within the framework of the existing law , yet the skill you have revealed in anticipating the outcome of Amsterdam shows that there can be a fruitful and constructive dialogue between Parliament and Council , which helps to break down mutual mistrust and also stabilize the democratic legitimization of Council action .
If the Council works with Parliament in the area of justice and home affairs , then this is one of the greatest advances -in contrast to Mr Buffetaut 's fear about the advent of a European superstate - because the constitutional reality , the basis of the Treaty , is of course the fact that there should be intergovernmental cooperation in these areas , and Amsterdam has reaffirmed this .
However , the danger we are frequently moaning about then arises : the national parliaments are unable to sufficiently exercise their control function any longer because trade has become Europeanized while both the control function and the legislative function have failed to devolve to the European Parliament .
This democratic deficit , this hole in democracy , can be remedied by working constructively and diligently with Parliament -and above all by making use of the facilities for the immediate instruction of Parliament through the Council - as you have done , Mr Fischbach .
I want to make a point of mentioning this here : the fact that last week Mr Schleder in his capacity as Chairman of the K4 Committee attended the Committee and gave us as up-to-date a progress report as never before on developments in the Justice and Home Affairs Council is clearly attributable to your initiative !
The advances that have been made can be added to -I agree with Mr Wiebenga , Madam Commissioner - by us working more closely together , Parliament and Commission , and by you making greater use of your right to initiate legislation .

I want to make one thing clear , as Mr Wiebenga has already intimated : if there is not enough staff in this area , then that is not the fault of Mrs Gradin , because she is fighting for more staff . Instead an appeal should be made to the Commission President , with whom Luxembourg has good contacts , to provide her with more staff .
My final remark : It says under item 10 of the resolution that the European Union should turn its attention to combatting marriages of convenience .
I am not familiar with this term .
I always thought that marriage and convenience are mutually exclusive !
What it should say is combatting sham marriages !
Mr President , something new has happened in the area of justice this year .
In this area the President-in-Office of the Council has made use of the European Parliament 's ability to play a constructive role .
Through that , Mr Fischbach , you have contributed to taking the European cooperation another step forward , for which we thank you .
When the European Parliament is shown respect , it also grows with the task .
Jobs are taken seriously and deadlines are met . That has been demonstrated during the autumn .
The plan of action against organized crime and the accompanying pieces of legislation were just right for the new relationship between the Council and Parliament .
The UK has privately communicated that this behaviour will be maintained and not deteriorate .
In this respect the Amsterdam Treaty is therefore being applied in practice before it has been ratified .
However , consultation also involves exchange .
In a civil relationship you are normally allowed to know the reason why someone rejects or welcomes a proposal .
Parliament should not of course be treated any less properly than is usual in civil life .
It is now time for the Council to start to say why it accepts certain things and why others are not accepted .
Such an exchange is necessary if Parliament is to be able to fulfil its important role as problem-solver in the European process .
Parliament must know the reason in order to be able to present new solutions and work out the difficult questions .
Our report must be discussed by the Council 's working group before a decision is taken by the Council so that there is a point of view , a reaction , from there and so people know the reason .
You need to have respect for the people with whom you have an exchange .
If the Council does not explain its points of view , the debate can come to a standstill , just as the IGC process showed before the decision on the Amsterdam Treaty .
It is important for the European balance of power that we now have an interinstitutional agreement which sets out concrete forms for this process .
Mr President , it is pleasing and encouraging that under the Luxembourg presidency we have seen some serious attention given to progress in the area of judicial and home affairs .
I congratulate the Luxembourg presidency on having brought Parliament into the consultative process at an early stage .
This is absolutely essential and we all welcome it .
I am quite confident that the steady progress in this area will continue under the forthcoming British presidency .
As more and more people in the European Union live , work , study and spend part of their lives in countries other than the one in which they were born or of which they are nominally citizens , this is going to become more and more necessary .
I want to refer to three points .
Firstly , while people must be punished if they have committed a crime , it is essential that while they are awaiting trial in another Member State accused persons should not find themselves in a more difficult situation than if they were in their own country .
The bureaucratic delays caused by translation difficulties or differences in legal systems should not mean that they are held for indefinite periods before they come to trial .
This is an area where it is important that we make progress , as is the question of the various penalties which courts can impose .
Many of the penalties which courts impose on their own citizens are not easy to apply to citizens of other countries .
I am thinking of things like community service , probation and so on .
We need to look closely at this area .
Finally , there is the role of Europol .
If we are to tackle the growth in international crime seriously and effectively , Europol is essential .
We cannot be at a disadvantage compared with the criminals in dealing with these matters .
At the same time , if we are going to create an operational role for Europol , we must ensure there are proper mechanisms in place for democratic accountability and for people to make justified complaints where they feel there has been unfairness .
We must have genuine democratic safeguards for Europol .
Mr President , I shall be brief , and I would wish simply to say to you that , indeed , the honourable Members who have spoken in this debate have effectively enriched it by their suggestions , by their proposals , and their criticisms which were , in the final analysis , constructive .
People always , or rather , often , say that the Parliament is not on the same side as the Council .
I must say to you that my experience is quite otherwise .
I say that , if the Council makes every effort to do its work properly , and if the Council makes the progress which is expected of it , and rightly so , by your Parliament , the Council will in this House find recognition and support .
Here , I would like above all to thank the honourable members and in particular , the members of the Committee of Public Freedom and Home Affairs , who have , Mr President , always supported me in my work .
I would like above all to thank your Parliament for having so rapidly and expeditiously responded , at the behest of the Council , to a number of requests for its opinion .
If indeed the Parliament had not reacted so rapidly and so directly , the Council would certainly not have been able to make the progress that we have recorded today in the field of the third pillar .
Having said that , I obviously share Mrs Lindeperg 's criticisms , insofar as we are making progress in an area , or in fields which are covered , as we all know , by the requirement for unanimous voting , and in particular in domains relating to fields which are most closely tied up with national sovereignty , and hence with national traditions , and dealing with prejudices and a degree of reticence on the part of one or another Member State .
This is the reason why I believe we should not despair .
We have proven that we could indeed make notable progress in this extremely sensitive field .
We shall continue to go on making progress , and I must say , Mr President , that I willingly accept that Mrs Lindeperg should complain that the Parliament has not been consulted on the draft resolution relating to marriages of convenience , the " Scheinehen ' .
I nevertheless prefer to be on the receiving end of this objection , rather than to have levelled against us a criticism of another kind , namely that the Council was reproached with not acting with enough speed and efficiency .
If indeed my conscience pricks me at all on this point , the reason is that , in the final analysis , for once , the proposal from the Presidency was accepted with such keenness by the Council , that I believed that it was preferable to have the matter dealt with here and now , rather than wait for the opinion of the Parliament between now and the beginning of next year .
Having said that , Mr President , please accept my wholehearted thanks for your support .
Mr President , I would also like to say thank you for a very interesting and rewarding debate on the third pillar and what has taken place during the past year .
In addition , I would like to say that I think the cooperation between the Commission and the various committees works excellently and we have had many rewarding meetings and exchanges during the year .
But just as Mr Fischbach says , it is clear that both you in this House and we in the Commission and the Council can complain about the inertia which working with intergovernmental cooperation entails .
That is the reason why several of the conventions which are on the tables of all the parliaments have not been ratified and why we have not got started with police cooperation etc .
Later I would like to give an answer to Mrs Lindeperg , among others , on the question of asylum .
The question of asylum and a report on asylum are now a priority , since we first gave priority to the question of temporary residence permits and admission .
A word about resources : When I arrived three years ago there were a handful of people in the task force which had to do all the immense work which has been done .
This working group is now in the process of becoming a reasonably sensible organization , but it is far from complete .
I would therefore appreciate it if both the Council and Parliament had a little more generous attitude so that many more initiatives could be taken .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 : 30 a.m.
Fifth R & D framework programme
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
( A4-0396 / 97 ) , by Mrs Quisthoudt-Rowohl , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Decision on the fifth framework programme of the European Community for research , technological development and demonstration activities ( 1998-2002 ) ( COM ( 97 ) 0142 - C4-0186 / 97 ) - + COM ( 97 ) 0439 - C4-0410 / 97-97 / 0119 ( COD ) ) - ( A4-0395 / 97 ) by Mrs Quisthoudt-Rowohl , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy on the proposal for a Council Decision on the fifth framework programme of the European Atomic Energy Community ( Euratom ) for research and teaching activities ( 1998-2002 ) ( COM ( 97 ) 0142 - C4-0234 / 97 & COM ( 97 ) 439-97 / 0120 ( CNS ) ) I would like to specify from the outset that , in order to avoid an interruption of the vote tomorrow , as there are 171 amendments to Mrs Quisthoudt-Rowohl 's report on the fifth framework programme of the European Community for research , technological development and demonstration activities , and as we also have the formal solemn session tomorrow at midday , the vote on this report will take place on Thursday , on the understanding that the deadline for notification of requests for separate votes and for split votes is fixed for this evening at 9 p.m. , to enable a proper preparation for this vote , which is a complex one .

On the other hand , the second report from Mrs Quisthoudt-Rowohl , on the fifth framework programme of the European Atomic Energy Community for training activities , will be put to the vote tomorrow , Wednesday .
So we should all be in agreement on the procedure for voting .
I want to state this clearly from the outset so that there can be no confusion : the vote on the first report on Thursday ; the vote on the second report , Wednesday , the reason being , I remind you , the interruption that will be caused to tomorrow 's votes by the formal session at midday .
Mr President , the amendments to the main report - not the Euratom report - are not yet available .
This makes it rather difficult for us to do our work on separate votes and split votes in time .
Could you do what you can to ensure those amendments are made available in the different languages this afternoon .
Otherwise , we cannot meet the deadline .
Mrs McNally , as I stated , we have 171 amendments , which is a substantial workload for our services , and in particular for the translators .
We are very conscious of the difficulties this causes for all of our parliamentary colleagues , but it is precisely for that reason that we are proposing to postpone the vote to Thursday , which will enable us , between now and then , or at least we hope so , to have all of the amendments in all languages , and hence to enable you to take the decisions which are your responsibilities as a political group .
I remind you that the deadline for tabling amendments is set for this evening at 9 p.m.
Under normal circumstances , you should have the necessary documents enabling you to present your requests for separate votes and split votes in good time .
So the timetable is agreed .
I shall now open the debate and naturally give the floor to our rapporteur , Mrs Quisthoudt-Rowohl , for ten minutes .
Mr President , first of all I would like to thank you for running through the timetable again so clearly .
It is obviously important for us to have the vote take place as quickly and efficently as possible .
We will try to make it all go smoothly .
Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are on the threshold of concluding the first reading of the fifth R & D framework programme which sets the course for sensible research funding for the years 1999 to 2004 .
The Commission has set out its ideas in several preliminary papers and in the final proposal .
How happy or unhappy individual Members are with this proposal , certainly how intensely Parliament has been working on it , is indicated by the 750 or so amendments originally made , which my colleagues and I have prepared , submitted and debated .
Were there very great differences of opinion ?
Which aspects have been especially significant to us as a Parliament ?
Firstly , we do not want as a Parliament to quit research policy for five years after the second reading of the framework programme .
That is why we are calling for transparent management of the later individual programmes , with a corresponding report-back obligation on the part of the Commission and a reassessment of the research focus halfway through the framework programme .
The content and priorities laid down by us correspond to a large extent to those of the Commission .
However , there are some , I believe , important additions and , above all , a differentiated and , in our view , clear arrangement of the thematically distinct programmes .
The much-vaunted practice of focusing does not mean continuing to produce the same contents under fewer headings .
Clarity and strategic organization are preferable to a purely logistical reduction in the number of topics .
Secondly , the third line of action -innovation and inclusion of SMEs -has been appreciably extended since the EU has obvious deficiencies in the area of innovation and product development vis-à-vis its international rivals .
Since it is often the small and medium-sized businesses who operate in a very innovative way and thereby create new jobs , it seemed important to us to offer a special type of support where the actual development does not quite fit exactly into one of the programmes .
Thirdly , the Joint Research Centre occupies a distinguished position on the European research landscape .
But as you know , Madam Commissioner , noblesse oblige .
Hence we have described the responsibilities of the Research Centre and its special role as an independent body more clearly and more elaborately .
We are giving it the chance to compete with other research establishments , to prove its worth and thereby attract additional funds .
Clearly , we would like to use the JRC as a contractor for the European Parliament .
The Members too need support with the scientific research behind their political work .
Obviously , the Joint Research Centre 's independence should not be overlooked here .
Fourthly , a central idea of European research promotion is the encouragement of so-called ' European added value ' .
We have discussed often enough what this term actually means .
In my view it goes beyond the mere promotion of opportunities , contacts and international researcher exchange , and we have talked enough about this too .
However , I must honestly admit that we have not succeeded either in coming up with a definition of what European added value might be , as you will see from the report .
Hence , special attention must be paid to this question when approving the specific programmes and selecting the actual individual projects .
Under the principle of subsidiarity there is a constant need to reassess and determine whether it is meaningful to promote from Brussels or whether more local alternatives might not be better .
Fifthly , the various legal bases for the framework programme and the Euratom programme do not allow us to devise a coherent and self-contained research programme for the European Union .
That is why we have tried with our amendments to coordinate both parts as far as possible and institutionally dovetail them with each other .
The cooperation of both programme committees should obviate frictional loss , encourage coordination and the joint use of findings , and thereby result in joint planning .
The desire to establish a system of joint funding , which my colleague Mr Linkohr sought with the fourth framework programme , I could not achieve either , unfortunately .
Point six : a few words on the question of funding .
The Commission appropriation of ECU 16.3 billion for the duration of the framework programme means in absolute terms a marked increase on the fourth framework programme ; in relative terms , however , it means a standstill .
This cannot be gratifying to us .
As elected representatives of the people , we do , however , witness the difficult budgetary situation everywhere in Europe .
This should not be kept secret from anyone .
That is why we have only distanced ourselves a little from the Commission 's proposal .
Even if the ECU 16.7 billion still subject to the financial perspective really is a lot of money , it only represents some 4 % of the total amount of government research spending in the EU .
To spend it to the best advantage presupposes efficient coordination with national or multinational programmes .
At the same time , the Commission should manage the individual programmes as efficiently and cost-effectively as possible .
The annual split allocation of sums for research and the costs of administration should provide the incentive for this .
There is transparency in everything here , too .
Ladies and gentlemen , I thank you all for your assistance , your constant suggestions , the controversial discussions with the other side of the House , and the support and encouragement for my work generally .
I have tried -I can tell you quite frankly - to put forward compromise solutions wherever fair , which may not represent the orthodoxy of my group , or indeed my own orthodoxy , but are intended to build bridges with other parts of this House .
We are united in one point : only research and innovation , as the basis for the development of quality products , can guarantee jobs on our continent .
We can no longer be the cheapest -those days are gone -nor do we want to be in this global economy of ours , but let us be the best !
In a further answer to Mrs McNally , I have been told that amendments should be ready at 5 p.m. , which will give you time to prepare your requests .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all congratulations to the rapporteur on her global view of this very important aspect of policy for the European Union .
With the fifth research framework programme , which is to run from 1998 to 2002 , the Commission wants to create a new concept for joint research policy .
It is to be tailored to people 's current problems and expectations , while at the same time supporting fundamental developments and trends .
I therefore welcome the fact that the Commission has expressly stated in one of its guidelines that the Community 's energy requirement should be catered for with the least possible pollution , that is to say by reducing C02 emissions .
The Commission has come out in favour of new and renewable energy sources .
Moreover , it has proved its positive attitude in the recent presentation of its White Paper on a policy for renewable energies .
The Commission is endeavouring here to increase the share of renewable energy sources from 6 to 12 % by the year 2010 .
A rethink on the part of the Commission towards alternative energies is plain to see and will positively affect the Union 's future development .
In keeping with the significance of renewable energy sources and biomass for the Union 's future energy policy , greater space should be devoted to biomass in the fifth framework programme .
From agriculture and the countryside 's point of view , biomass has even greater significance .
Besides the ecological aspects , it represents a chance for farmers and the rural population to tap new sources of income .
In this way , areas that are not required for food production can be used profitably .
The net output remains in the producing regions , and biomass contributes , as an inexhaustible source of energy , to the security , maintenance and independence of third countries .
It also helps to attain the stability targets set by the Kyoto Climate Conference .
In view of the importance of renewable energies , and biomass especially , for the future of European agriculture , the Commission should increase its budgetary commitment to ECU 1 , 141 million , to a level corresponding to the amount budgeted for research into nuclear fusion and nuclear fission .
And particularly in view of enlargement eastwards , biomass programmes for the countries of central and eastern europe , and the relevant know-how , should support these new technologies in these countries .
In addition , the Commission should also promote the use of biomass and other renewable energy sources through a minimum and Community-wide standard rate of tax .
The development of innovative technologies in the area of biological processes is equally important for agriculture .
I think we really should have a rethink here , and this should be encouraged through the structural funds too .
I hope that Parliament can also approve the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , which was carried unanimously there .
Mr President , before going into the merits of the extremely financial aspects , I would like to make two general considerations : in introducing its proposal , to which I believe it rightly attributes the utmost importance , the Commission expresses an opinion I share : the fifth framework programme should assist European society in entering the Twenty-first Century under the best conditions . In my opinion , one of the most significant aspects of this programme is that , unlike the previous ones , it is not solely based on technology but rather on problems , to such an extent that the Commission lists several criteria which inspire the framework programme : it should be based on scientific and technological excellence , it should be effective in relation to the main Union policies , it should have an added European value , it should be interesting not only from a scientific point of view but also from the point of view of European competitiveness in the world economy and should focus on the problems that affect the whole of society .
It seemed important to me to make this introduction , just as it seems important to make another introduction on the procedure .
Like the Commission , we hope we can achieve a majority vote on Council , because this is important .
Coming now to the extremely financial aspects , I believe that the Commission 's proposal , which provides for a 3.8 % increase compared with the previous programme , is important , even if we all know that far more is required in terms of the need to develop investments and research : the budget makes us take reality into account .
What we want to emphasize , however , is that , because the future financial prospects are uncertain , we also need to review the overall financing in the light of the new financial prospects ; not only , but , in particular , when the new member countries join , the overall maximum amount will have to be reviewed , because we think this proposal is only adequate for the 15 member countries .
Mr President , I would like to stress what an atypical situation we are actually in , because it would in fact be right for the Council to follow this discussion from now on , as it is a subject that requires a joint decision .
It is true that the Commission will make a proposal after our debate , but it is also true that Council should follow subjects as important as those given by a strategic programme such as the fifth framework programme for research and development .
Whilst pointing out this failure , I would like to draw your attention to the fact that we have all exaggerated somewhat .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy has voted 30 amendments and has certainly made a substantial contribution in quantity .
The part-session , however , will agree we concentrate on the essential , otherwise the individual governments will be in a good position to set the various opinions expressed in Parliament against each other .
We need to concentrate on the essential issues , as it will be easier to reach a joint decision on the matter and then we can reach a reconciliation .
If we get lost in a maze , Parliament can be sure of failure .
The time at which this presentation is made will be unique .
There is a sense of timing , in fact , on the eve of expansion with the new framework programme .
However , there is one aspect which the Committee on Economic Affairs has pointed out , which is the need to link this Fifth Framework Programme with the new situation which , from the geopolitical point of view , will be established within a few years with the expansion to the East and with the application of the Barcelona Agreement .
We should therefore think of a far broader scenario that is not just based on the added value for the Fifteen .
This approach emphasizes a need pointed out by the Committee on Economic Affairs that we should no longer plan for five years but for the next ten , twenty and thirty years , because it is only in this context that major investments can be made in research that will be of use to the entire Community .
Mr President , fundamentally the 4 % or so of the total EU spending on civil research is relatively little .
Nevertheless , I would like to hail the fifth framework programme for research , technological development and demonstration activities a comparatively successful instrument of programming .
Although I have to say the goal aspired to is in a bit of a cleft stick , which could do with some attention .
The European Parliament is of the opinion , like the Regional Committee , that R & D policy should make a positive contribution to cohesion .
At the same time , the needs of disadvantaged regions have frequently been neglected until now in the prioritizing of research projects .
Such approaches touch on the question of how far R & D policy , based on the principle of first-rate scientific and technological quality , can serve the objective of economic and social cohesion in the EU without watering down or even abandoning their own objectives .
Complementarity between cohesion policy , on the one hand , and R & D policy , on the other , seems hard to achieve as a solution .
Under article 130f of the treaty , the aim of R & D policy is to strengthen the scientific and technological foundations of industry in the Community and thereby promote the development of its international competitiveness .
The policy therefore supports companies , research centres and universities in their efforts to undertake research and technology development of a high quality .
The priority is still to improve international competitiveness by promoting top-quality research and development .
This intelligent conception of Community R & D policy , however , has the effect of limiting in many areas the opportunities for this policy to increase its contribution to cohesion .
What must be aimed for is improved complementarity between R & D and structural policy .
The European Parliament has called for serious integration of the structural funds and the framework programme with its resolution of 28 November 1996 on the perspectives for a European science and technology policy .
This concept is based on the development of an integrated approach , which makes use of existing synergies between both policies , while respecting the logic of each .
Structural policy should , according to this concept , help make it easier for disadvantaged regions to participate more thoroughly in the framework programme , by building up and promoting R & D capacities in these regions .
The joint R & D policy , in contrast , should assist in reducing the disparities that exist between the regions in the area of R & D , especially by the third measure -dissemination and use of findings -and the fourth measure - education and mobility of scientists .
My amendments serve this aim .
I hope they will be taken into consideration .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Transport and Tourism of the European Parliament has spent considerable time poring over the fifth framework programme , especially since sector-specific research was integrated into the field of transport in the past .
We had very positive experiences with this in the past , too , I would say .
There is noother area of research that is so politically motivated , by which I mean that transport research is also an instrument for implementing European policy .
We have already been able to use initial results as a basis for translating transport objectives into practice .
Hence it is natural that the Committee on Transport and Tourism has called for the introduction of a transport and mobility campaign to lend the necessary weight to this sector .
I think the approach seen in the Research Committee , that is to designate a specific area to transport , mobility and production , gives this request from the Committee on Transport and Tourism the necessary scope , and I can say on behalf of the Transport Committee that we find this approach acceptable .
It is precisely in the area of transport that problems need solving .
This will affect other key actions - I am thinking , for example , of the ' city of tomorrow ' .
There is a transport problem to be solved here . I am thinking of the whole question of intermodality .
How do we combine various modes of transport in order to solve the transport problem we have in Europe ?
Satellite-supported information systems are a very important sector too .
How can we make the information available to develop intelligent transport concepts ?
All these are things that need to be brought together and accounted for in this campaign .
On behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , I would like to thank the rapporteur , who was very receptive to the concerns of the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
While she was not able to accommodate us 100 % in her committee , I think , if this House approves the transport , mobility and production campaign and it is taken up by the Council , we will have reached an important milestone in uniting both research and the political intentions of this House .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as draftsman of the opinion of the Culture Committee I have mixed feelings on the report before us today , and I hope that this will turn to satisfaction after the vote .
On the one hand , I welcome the fact that our attempt to improve the situation of young researchers has found expression at two points in the report .
However , on the question of the information society , the majority of the Committee has , in my view , retreated to positions which , it is constantly being claimed in this House , do not form part of the European understanding of the information society .
While the Commission wanted to gear research towards a user-friendly information society , which did not go far enough for us in the Culture Committee -we wanted to broaden it through the criterion of ' substantive diversity ' -now there is only talk of information and communication technologies .
This is not a slip semantically .
Consequently , the Culture Committee 's proposals , which aimed for an improvement in education and cultural opportunities , especially in regard to the digitalization and virtualization of libraries and museums , as well as the creation of new interactive modes of access , have not been approved .
Matters of this nature or social-economic research was apparently considered an uncalled-for luxury by the Committee majority .
I think the two days we still have before the vote should be put to good use correcting certain biasses found in the present draft resolution in the sense I have indicated .
Mr President , the rapporteur , Mrs Quisthoudt-Rowohl , has had to contend with a huge number of amendments , far greater than we have ever had on previous occasions when dealing with the framework programme .
I think it reflects two things : the success of the framework programme , and the very great interest that the scientific community has taken in it .
But I also think that it reflects a concern about the resources that are available .
We have had reports from the Commission that national resources are tending to decline .
We know that , as a result of energy liberalization in the UK , for instance , the amount of gas research has declined .
We also know that Japan and the United States are increasing their expenditure .
So if we are trying to deal with problems of competitiveness , the total resources that we give are important .
Mrs Quisthoudt-Rowohl has certainly shown her willingness to compromise on this issue .
I hope that agreement will be maintained during the vote tomorrow when we seek to increase the amount over that proposed by the Commission .
All of us will have different views as to what is important .
For me , it is how we can make the research programme create jobs .
It is really how we use the research .
The innovative processes have got to be increased .
In particular , we need to make sure that science , technology and society are in harmony .
We need to pay more attention to that .
I should like to echo a point that Mrs Quisthoudt-Rowohl made , which is also referred to in a number of amendments .
Small companies have a difficulty .
In my own region I find that companies with fewer than about 50 employees do not always find it easy to get involved .
They have not got the resources .
They are not able to go out and find out what is going on .
We need to find a method of taking the information to them more effectively than we have been able to in the past .
I speak too for the Committee on Fisheries .
In my own area the fishermen are very small companies ; very often they are just one-boat families .
It is not easy for them to get involved .
The programme is not written in a way that makes it easy to put in what we need to do in the fisheries sector .
So in the opinion from the Fisheries Committee I have laid down some parameters which I hope the Commission will take note of when it produces the research action programme .
That is the only way I could handle the matter , given the way the framework proposals came forward .
I am sure the Commission will take note .
Mr President , Mrs QuisthoudtRowhol has been a very hardworking rapporteur .
She has had animated conversations and I think she will have had one or two more by the end of this week .
I would like to thank her and the staff who have been extremely helpful throughout our deliberations .
I am speaking principally for the Women 's Rights Committee but also for the Party of European Socialists .
The concept of mainstreaming was adopted by the European Commission ; mainstreaming means the incorporation of equal opportunities for women and men into all the Community 's policies and activities .
The fifth framework programme is one of the most important policies and activities .
It lays down criteria for research and development for four years , it has a huge budget - we hope - and it is highly regarded by the scientific community throughout the EU .
For reasons of oversight there was no mention of mainstreaming or of equal opportunities or the gender perspective in the original document .
I know that the Commissioner herself is committed to those issues and I am sure she will be able to accept the amendments put in by the Committee on Women 's Rights .
Indeed the Amsterdam Treaty , if ratified , makes it clear in article 3 that the European Community in all its activities has to have the aim of eliminating inequalities .
You may say , well it is not excluded ; but that is not good enough , colleagues .
It has to be spelled out and explicit and that is what our amendments have done .
We do not want to risk the fifth framework programme looking like a ' toys-for-the-boys ' programme .
It is meant for all citizens , men and women in the European Union .
Some amendments have been resubmitted after consultation with members of the Women 's Rights Committee so that we can see how far Parliament wants to be explicit about the need to promote equal opportunities .
Speaking for the Party of European Socialists I would like to say that the sum which is being put forward , although it is above that proposed by the Commission , is actually the minimum we think necessary to do justice to the needs of research and development in Europe .
We agree that four programmes are far more logical than the three originally suggested by the Commission .
You still have the concentration which was wanted by the Commissioner but you have something that is a little bit clearer to the scientific community .
As far as the financial breakdown is concerned , we have slight differences of opinion with the Commission and we would weight the programme slightly differently .
I hope that by Thursday when we vote it can be a massive majority from this Parliament so that we go into the Council negotiations not naked but fully clothed with a very strong position from this Parliament for a very important issue .
Parliament 's Committee on Employment and Social Affairs emphasises the importance of the social and financial study in its opinion of the fifth R & D framework programme .
This view has been given scanty consideration in the research committee 's report under discussion .
The framework programme should lay much greater emphasis on the issues of social exclusion , poverty , ageing , unemployment and the status of women .
The framework programme should also investigate changes in working life developments in the working community .
Good working conditions and a developing working community have an important influence on increased production in industry and , in turn , positive progress in the economy and employment .
For this reason , a study should also be planned for the issues of job protection and health and safety at work .
And technical studies do not exist as entities separate from society .
Studies and their results always have an influence on society , and this influence has to be respected .
EU research must itself promote employment and social cohesion in Europe .
It is vital that the national viewpoint be taken into account when planning and implementing research programmes .
When we consult the users of a study we should be listening to the real users - individuals and consumers .
For example , the users in a study on health are not only the health care organizations or the pharmaceutical industry , but , above all , the patients and their representative organizations .
Women have up till now been almost entirely absent from EU research planning and evaluation .
The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs propose that a fair balance of women and men be invited onto boards of experts in the planning and execution of the framework programme .
This will not automatically mean that competence and skills will dwindle .
There are qualified women around - you only have to look .
Mr President , allow me first of all to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Quisthoudt Rowohl , for the excellent work carried out and for her availability to find compromise solutions able to include the various requests , the various sensitivities .
I think we are submitting a good text to Parliament 's vote and we hope that the Commission and Council can take it into account .
I also hope that this Chamber will wish to correct any defects and approve the necessary inclusions , and here I am referring in particular to the aspect of social and economic research .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , unanimously approving the report I presented , had confirmed the choice of the Executive Committee which had limited the thematic programmes to three and paid special attention to the environment in the first and third .
This was not the choice of the Committee on Research which , raising the number of thematic programmes to four , still gave the environment a key sub-action , also leaving considerable room for research connected with environmental protection in the other key sub-action reserved for energy .
The Committee on the Environment had also approved the motion to reserve for the Joint Research Centre higher financing than that provided by the Commission , also asking the JRC to work for Parliament as well .
The Committee on Research has not accepted the increase but , in view of the amendments seeking to reduce the financing , has defended and confirmed that laid down by the Commission , in view of the important role played by the JRC as the means of implementing the fifth framework programme and as a neutral and independent scientific body .
We hope , Madam Commissioner , that , after this initial stage , a good dialogue will continue between Parliament and the Commission , with cooperation and transparency , so that together we can finally provide the European Union with an efficient and effective framework research programme that can begin to catch up on the serious European delay compared with the United States which , with their federal organization , have for some time been able to amass substantial financial resources and huge human resources .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , a declared aim of European policy is to make up for the dangerous , and by now almost permanent , way in which Europe is lagging behind the USA and Japan in terms of innovation .
Yet research comes before all technological innovation and , sadly , there is a lot of truth in the saying that the Europeans are good at making knowledge out of ECUs , but bad at making ECUs out of knowledge .
The Commission wants to change this through an increase in funds , concentration and greater flexibility .
This is apparent in its proposal for the fifth framework programme .
Where it is consistent , we support it .
Where it fails to keep its promises , we criticize it .
It is right to drastically reduce the number of subject-based programmes , and it is wrong to want to minister to virtually every particular interest .
Of course we cannot compensate for the decline in research sponsorship in the Member States through our budgetary allocations , but we can create considerable incentives for effective cooperation within the European scientific community and in collaboration with third countries .
This is of general political significance , too , for this European Union and its enlargement .
What we as socialists definitely do not want to see is a reduction in the amount of cooperation and coordination achieved in the area of European research and technological development .
Renationalization is the wrong response to the global challenges in research policy too .
My group is prepared to give the clear signals required , and in the budget for this programme if need be .
We have made compromises with the conservative side of this House .
The position reached on the budget is for us the minimum consensus .
It is very close to our pain threshold .
However , you do not need the gift of prophecy to predict that , without a strong parliamentary majority , we will be at a disadvantage vis-à-vis the Council , and that is why we will be voting in favour .
We find ourselves in a time of global changes affecting all areas of life .
In particular , the stormy developments taking place in information technology and biotechnology are going to radically alter our lives .
Hence associated social research is of major importance .
My group does not want to write this into the framework programme with just so many empty words , but rather give it a concrete shape and fund it properly .
Our proposals for this were rejected in the Research Committee by a slight majority .
Even after conservative colleagues had come out in favour of a socioeconomic campaign , especially on the subject of the information society , they could not resist the temptation to use their fortuitous majority on the day to reject this sensible amendment .
This was a mistake .
Let us put it right through , among other things , visibly improved funding for the programme 's fourth line of action , namely so-called human resources .
Let me say a few words on the Euratom programme , even if Parliament is still being consulted on it .
The Euratom treaty was successful .
It brought the Community considerable autonomy in energy provision , and this autonomy can be enjoyed today in the medium term using other forms of energy in an economical and environmentally compatible manner , and a lot less dangerously too .
For this reason , the majority of socialists are in favour of switching over .
There are only three areas that can be sensibly and profitably pursued , specifically research into the safety of existing reactors , research into the substitution of C02 -neutral energy sources and research into the safe disposal of radioactive waste .
The budget should be arranged accordingly .
Let me conclude by extending my personal thanks to the rapporteur .
She has worked hard .
She has quite literally worked out a lot of important compromises .
For this , much thanks .
I think her achievement should be acknowledged through the adoption of our few , but sound and necessary , amendments .
Then we can adopt the report as a whole by an impressive majority .
Mr President , the fifth framework programme represents a clear step forward in relation the fourth programme .
It centres on the priorities and in defining them it takes the interaction between science and society into account .
By proposing an increased budget for the next five years , it acknowledges the central role of research in contributing to public well-being , economic development and European competitiveness .
I would emphasize , however , that so far as the distribution of the funds between the actions is concerned , the degree of over-concentration on the first action is frightening countries like Portugal .
For my country , actions to further international cooperation and better results are still of fundamental importance .
It is natural for viewpoints to differ from one Member State to another .
The difficulty the last ' Research Council ' had in reaching an agreement proves this point .
But the widest gaps exist between those countries which favour research and want it concentrated on products for development , and those others , like Portugal , for whom the development and transfer of technology has to be their major preoccupation , together with mobility of research grants ; because that is the only way they can be sure of getting their share of the improvement in the efficiency of European research policy .
I would like to draw attention to two aspects which I tried to get included in the draft report on the framework programme , one of which was taken up by the Research Committee and the other rejected .
The first , which is reflected in the report , is the importance of including socio-economic research in the first action under the Fifth Programme .
In the face of Europe 's problems , which keep on getting more complicated , such as racism , xenophobia , unemployment , sustainable development , bio-ethics and public health , the development of the social dimension of research must take priority in our policy .
The second is the urgent need to develop a fully integrated marine science and technology policy , which will open the way to a genuine European policy on the oceans .
Unfortunately I was unable to get that proposal included .
I will conclude , Mr President , while on the subject of my proposals concerning the ocean , by reminding the House that with the Union signing the United Nations Convention on the oceans , the work of the Independent Commission on the Oceans , and Expo 98 in Lisbon , I am sure that a climate is being created in which a full-blown European Oceans Agency will fall into our laps one of these days .
Mr President , everyone is aware that the fifth framework programme is the foundation of the research policy of the Union for years to come .
The strategic structure devised by the Commission , in thematic programmes and in horizontal programmes , certainly directs community action to a greater extent than the four previous programmes , ensuring a better coordination of activities and avoiding overlaps and duplicates .
Moreover , the administrative simplification of the procedure will certainly provide the flexibility that was lacking at times of crisis , such as the case of BSE , and which is certainly necessary to ensure access to the programmes for thousands of small and medium-sized companies , that come up against legal , administrative and financial obstacles that prevent them from conducting research and from using the results of the research .
The Research Committee and the European Parliament can only confirm the importance of research as an answer to the growing social needs of the population with regard to health , safety , quality of life , employment and environment .
The decision to promote research in particular sectors , such as ageing and rare diseases , answers these needs .
The same can be said of research for the safeguard and protection of movable and immovable cultural assets , through the use of the new technologies applied to a sector , that represents our cultural wealth and our historic memory .
Moreover , Mr President , the international cooperation with third countries is certainly a winning policy , both for the applicant countries , for which joint research may act as a catalyst in the integration process , and for the third countries of the neighbouring Mediterranean , for which this research will mean employment , development , peace and political relations .
As chairman of the Committee on Research as well , I will conclude with great satisfaction by saying that the European Parliament has shown considerable support for the fifth framework programme through the commitment of all our colleagues and our rapporteur in particular , who has been really fantastic in his efforts and I think we are all truly very grateful to him .
Finally , I hope that a final effort of convergence will be made now to fortify our position even further .
To conclude , Mr President , we all certainly hope that the Council will play its part because research is the launching base for the economy and the basis to solve the serious employment problem .
Mr President , Commissioner , colleagues , on behalf of the liberal group I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on the spade work she has done .
Despite over 500 amendments , all noses in the Commission were made to point in the same direction as far as structure and substance is concerned .
Unfortunately the financial outline is still missing .
But before us is a clear , substantive proposal .
At the moment this is essential , colleagues .
After all , the Council has still not come up with a communal position .
This means that Parliament might perhaps be able to play a steering role and that is why , colleagues , it is of crucial importance that we set the budget tomorrow with a large majority .
My group has therefore submitted a proposal for the budget which I would like to explain .
The sectors in which most employment will be generated in the future , are information communication technology , ICT , as well as biotechnology .
We therefore have to invest in these sectors .
Research and technological development in the sphere of ICT must therefore be given a high priority in the fifth framework programme .
Europe after all is losing a market share in the global market for ICT , and this means loss of employment .
In this context we must make sure that soft and hardware development will not be considered too much as separate entities in the fifth framework programme .
The framework programme must promote innovation , and not obstruct it .
Industry must therefore also to a large extent be involved .
My second point , Mr President , concerns small and medium-sized enterprise within the framework programme , the generator of jobs .
The majority of SMEs does not invest in research and development .
We must stop creating false expectations for this group , but for a number of sectors in SME , such as the high-tech sector , and the transport sector , for instance , with its logistical system , there are excellent opportunities for projects with a European added value .
For these small companies in particular simplification of procedures is important .
We could also think of projects aimed at a specific branch within SME .
My last point , Mr President , concerns Euratom .
As long as the nuclear fusion programme does not offer any concrete perspective for delivering even one kilowatt power , not even within the next 50 years now more than ever , we should turn our minds to the development of new energy technologies .
My group will therefore be happy to support the proposal of the rapporteur for a reduction of ECU 100 million in the Euratom programme to ECU 1 , 300 million .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , we value the efforts made both by the Commission , in its proposal , and by Mrs Quisthoudt-Rowohl .
Nevertheless , we can see a few problems which I would like to mention briefly .
The Commission 's proposal , by reducing and concentrating the research effort , although well-intentioned , in practice can result in this effort ending up in those countries and regions with the greatest resources , the most technology and the best research infrastructure , thereby depriving the rest of the European Community of these resources . Given the current state of Europe , that is worrying .
Another problem which worries us is the fact that inequality is on the increase in Europe , as are unemployment and problems of social exclusion . Yet the proposal fails to attach enough importance to this social aspect .
We are also a little surprised that the procedure for choosing the four themes is not clear . It seems to be dictated by the multinationals , which needs to be put right in future versions .
Therefore our group 's vote will depend on the final proposal .
I should also like to say that we are pleased with the proposal to establish a science infrastructure aimed at providing a network for scientific awareness ( which is important in Europe ) and to enable us to compete . We are also pleased with the sensitivity shown in the proposal towards mental illness .
Mr President , I too should like to thank the rapporteur for her hard work .
Firstly , with regard to the Euratom framework programme , the promotion of nuclear energy has always characterized this programme and we are long overdue a change of vision , especially with regard to fusion .
Fusion is a complete white elephant , on which billions of ECUs have been wasted .
The fusion programme has not yet produced any energy .
It will need to deal with the waste if we are to end this extravagance .
The Greens have tabled a series of amendments with a view to converting the money spent on fusion to promoting sustainable and renewable energies .
I must insist that nuclear energy is not sustainable and produces CO2 .
If the rapporteur 's proposals are accepted , however , I would still emphasize the need for detailed examination of the programme and monitoring of the expenditure .
With regard to the effects of radiation on human beings , here we have an important breakthrough due to the work of Dr Mothersill in Ireland and the UK Medical Research Council team of Dr Eric Wright on genomic instability .
Mistrust of radiation and the nuclear industry has always characterized the population , and now radiation biologists are concluding that the public may well have been right all along .
They have found a previously unknown pathway by which radiation can subvert living cells .
Radiation , they say , may cause a much wider range of diseases than epidemiological studies predict .
Even low levels of exposure to radiation could be poisoning the human gene pool , wreaking damage on future generations .
The instability research from around the world has shown that the effects on the gene pool of this low-level radiation are quite horrifying .
The Sellafield complex in Cumbria has been the largest emitter of radiation in the UK , discharging radioactive gas and liquid into the Irish Sea .
The critical groups here have included fishermen working in the sea and people who eat seaweed .
These people could be exposed to levels of radiation that could harm them , and the numbers of people who have died or suffered from radiation released from Sellafield , nuclear weapons testing , the Chernobyl accident and from medical X-rays and radon in buildings could be much greater than anyone has dared to admit .
I have tabled an amendment which I would ask Parliament to accept .
It is absolutely scandalous that radiation protection is not a key action .
With regard to the allocation for biotechnology , this has been vastly increased .
While we accept the possibilities of biotechnology , the ethical issues must be widely addressed .
We do not accept the one-dimensional concentration on genetic engineering .
Here we have an accident waiting to happen which could affect us as badly as the nuclear industry .
Mr President , I join in the congratulations to the rapporteur .
This is a convention in this House but she certainly deserves them because she has put a lot of work into this report .
I like the phrase she used in her introductory speech ' europäisches Mehrwert ' , the concept of European added value .
We should allow this - and I commend it to the Commission and , for that matter , the Council - to inform the whole approach towards R & D in the future .
We have to look at ways in which Europe can add value to research which otherwise might be going on or , for that matter , to initiate research which is not likely to take off .
There are some obvious lessons to be drawn from applying that principle .
One is that if you reduce the amount of research put into the nuclear industry and transfer it to the sustainable energy field , then clearly you are going to add value both in terms of the effectiveness of the research programme and of the generation of employment .
Likewise , I wish to echo the points made about the value of supporting the small and medium-sized enterprises - a point made by Mr Schiedermeier about the impact on the outer regions of Europe and also by Mr Adam .

We talk a lot about innovation in the whole question of research and here you have a very innovative sector .
For example , in my own area in north-east Scotland the oil industry is very important to Europe and to the world .
But who are making the breakthroughs in technology ?
Often it is very small firms , which are literally at the cutting edge of development .
Certainly they are pushing forward new ideas for undersea technology .
This is going to be invaluable for giving Europe an advantage vis-à-vis the United States and Japan in the future .
I commend therefore this idea of European added value , especially for those who are at the leading edge but often need the support of the Commission .
My last point in this connection is to ask when people get research grants that they be paid on time , because sometimes these small industries cannot accept and sustain the losses involved by the failure to keep up the cash flow .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , I would like from the outset to make my own contribution , of course , to the concert of congratulations directed at Mrs Quisthoudt , and I do so the more willingly as what I am preparing to say will not always make very agreeable listening .
I therefore would like to say that I do congratulate her on her excellent work .
We are at present faced with a report which presents a number of difficulties in the field of research and development .
Even today , I cannot , through the amendments voted in the energy and research committee and through the hundreds of amendments registered here , in the plenary session , make out exactly what is the scientific orientation of the European Parliament - and that is a euphemism .
We did , however , get off to a good start , as some few months ago , when we voted in unanimously a resolution on the orientations of the scientific policy of the 21st Century .
But the fifth framework programme exercise doubtless has this peculiarity that it has brought everyone here with his or her own ideas , not to mention the ideas of the industrial , environmental , and other lobbies , to such an extent that the whole debate has been polluted by a mass of concepts which have actually confused the whole of the outline .
I therefore believe that you have the merit , Madam Rapporteur , of having set out a very clear , very precise orientation from the start , which was certainly not the one that we had voted in a few months earlier . But is it not true , as the saying goes , that only fools never change their minds ?
Consequently , it appears that you consulted your conscience , and believed that we were all wrong when we voted in the resolution on research for the 21st century .
However , it cannot be said either - and this exonerates you - that the debate in the research committee and the many amendments submitted have made your own thinking richer or have improved it .
I readily admit that you have much merit insofar as you have fought your way through this mass of amendments to clear a number of avenues for compromise , and I am delighted that you are here , today , slowly and carefully finding the way forward to the necessary compromise , with assistance from the coordinators from the major groups .
Doubtless congratulations are even more in order , after all these goings on , as regards the quality of the proposal by the Commission . For while we may not always have properly reread what we voted , the Commission , for its part , has learned a great deal .
To a degree , I am delighted at this , and we may be able to say now , with a little exaggeration only , that if the Council were to be committed to the proposals of the Commission , this would be the best solution for the Parliament .
However that may be , Madam Commissioner , I would like to ask you in a while to state your view on an important point for the voting tomorrow , i.e. the structure of the programme , and more precisely , the move from three thematic programmes to four .
Clearly , the Commission must be in agreement on this point , otherwise a number of problems will rear their heads .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , congratulations to our rapporteur , Mrs Quisthoudt .
She has worked very hard and has produced an extremely consistent report , for which I would like to thank her very much .
During the fourth framework programme it became clear that it was necessary to increase thematic orientation and to ensure that there would more market orientation , using the results of Cost and the Eureka project .
On that point the intention behind the fifth framework programme is satisfactory .
I therefore think that what this Parliament has proposed is in agreement with this , and so I hope that this structure will be taken over by the Council .
When we discuss finances , the United States and Japan are often mentioned .
So they should be , but let us look above all at what the Member States are doing .
When I hear Mr Tannert speak about the conservatives in this House , then I think he might be talking about the Confederal Group of the European United Left , but certainly not about my group .
Because as a ChristianDemocrat , I would like to say to Mr Tannert that I hope he is prepared to come to a compromise on that point too , when it concerns further subdivision ; that he would be prepared to readjust his position .
The issue here is the objectives of our research , and this first and foremost strengthens and improves our competitive position in Europe .
Information communication technology plays an extremely important part in this .
I also think that the sum we have now , ECU 3 , 900 million , is a minimum which must not be touched .
I also think it is extremely important that SMEs , where possible , are involved , through , amongst other things , grouping with larger companies ; branch organizations could also play a part .
I think it is important that communal research centres are brought more up to date .
The procedure must be altered , to include more periodical evaluation , seeing to it that more resources from third parties are obtained , and in particular ensuring that researchers can work on a temporary basis .
This would stimulate their procedures considerably .
Mr President , our rapporteur has made a considerable effort to bring about coherence , thanks to the concertation carried out with such talent in this House .
Even so , I would support four amendments .
We have on a number of occasions emphasized that research infrastructures should provide for the networking of poles of excellence , and also for networking between platforms of experimentation and modular demonstrators used when testing and validating new technologies .
I propose therefore to merge Amendment Nos 61 and 81 into a single , transversal amendment , Amendment No 109 .
Our Committee also emphasized the need to ensure that research served enterprise competitiveness and employment .
For this to occur , the exploitation of results for economic purposes must be promoted , by means of the appropriate protection of intellectual property , which ensures a distinction is made between public and private research organizations .
This is the aim of my Amendment No 110 , which will also promote the exchange of results between the various research laboratories in the European Union , and innovation in small and medium-sized companies .
It is also essential to prepare for the means of transportation and interconnection which will promote a truly European space .
My Amendment No 107 goes in the direction of more integration and harmonization between the various transportation systems .
Finally , scientific and technical cooperation with third party industrial countries , and with the newly emerging countries , should not create a Trojan Horse for our competitors , but should above all lead to balanced cooperation in the interests of the Union itself .
The text of the Commission does not give us enough guarantees in this respect .
My Amendment No 108 proposes placing cooperation with these countries in a framework which takes account of the interests of the Union and rules of reciprocity .
With regard to the Euratom programme , its aim is essentially to further improve nuclear security and prepare for the reactors of the future , in particular by reducing nuclear waste and increasing energy yields .
With regard to the remainder , the Group Union for Europe supports virtually all the amendments of the rapporteur , and in particular , the breakdown proposed by the rapporteur of the budget of the fifth framework programme for research .
The Union for Europe nevertheless will support amendments whose purpose it is to recognize the role of women in European research policy .
As a result of this exercise , this House will ensure a sustainable and viable future for European research , its interoperability , and its excellence , while reinforcing Union cohesion .
The purpose of these proposals is to confirm the place of research in Europe , by relying on European added value , but also reinforcing the competitiveness of Europe within a world context which is increasingly competitive , on both the scientific and technological levels .
Mr President , I think there has been an interesting and concerted effort on the part of the rapporteur and the Committee on Research covering a wide spectrum of activities and initiatives .
My own basic observation is this : I fear that both the Commission proposal and the stance of the European Parliament are driven absolutely and unilaterally by the logic of competitiveness .
Of course European society takes an interest in the competitiveness of its products in the face of other world powers . However , a big problem that has arisen concerning modern technology is the tremendous distance between it and a society which is confused and incapable of facing up to this technology and which still has deep moral problems in its regard .
Witness the issues raised over cloning , witness the issues over BSE , witness the issues of genetic engineering in various agricultural products .
In this sense I think that the comments made by the Committee on Social Affairs hit the nail on the head when they talk about a lack of intervention in issues such as the workplace , working conditions etc . , or by the Committee on Culture , which are correct in pointing out that we are promoting information technology without promoting an information society .
I think that this gulf should be bridged .
A gulf has also appeared in the issues relating to who exploits this programme of research and technology , in other words the potential of the huge conglomerates and institutions on the one hand , and the huge vacuum and difficulties faced by small and medium-sized businesses on the other .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur for this report .
Admittedly , we in the Green Group do not agree with you on all questions , but we think you have done a very good job to be able to keep track of all the 700 amendments which there were on the Committee .
You are to be commended for that .
I would also like to commend the Commission , since I think that the Commission 's original proposals were very good in many respects .
Now on the part of the Committee we have improved it further , but unfortunately there are also a number of things which I must say have been made worse .
This has a lot to do with money , but it also has a lot to do with details , which Mr Desama talked about earlier .
Some of the improvements we have made include introducing a lot on sustainable development , that it should be environmentally friendly and ecologically correct etc .
But I am a little afraid that this is only cosmetic .
If you look a bit more closely at Amendment No 78 , the Committee 's proposal on the objective with regard to future energy reads as follows : The objective of this thematic programme is therefore research and the sustainable use of existing sources of energy .
The existing source of energy in my own country of Sweden , for example , is in fact nuclear power .
Nuclear power cannot be a sustainable source of energy .
People therefore have doubts about much of the wording found here .
Sustainable energy use is , of course , the renewable sources of energy .
That is the area where we must invest more money , not in keeping old nuclear power , which Sweden , for example , is now finally beginning to phase out .
Instead we need a new drive from the EU which can show us how to replace nuclear power with renewable energy sources .
These are therefore the wrong signals to the Member States .
Many of the improvements which have been made in the Committee 's proposal require some clarification .
There are many fine words about sustainable development , but we also need to show by example .
In Amendment No 154 , for example , we have said that we do not want cloning of people , but we also need to say that we do not want cloning of either people or animals .
That is just as important because otherwise the research will continue and that will bring us closer and closer to what is ethically wrong .
In Amendment No 45 we have set up economic frameworks and want to have more money for things to do with energy and the environment .
With regard to Amendment No 160 we have added a proposal which is basically that we want to clarify that 60 per cent of what goes to energy for the future should be for renewable sources of energy and 75 % for demonstration .
There are no other changes in Amendment No 160 .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too would like to convey my thanks and respect to the rapporteur .
To reconcile so many different opinions in this House requires not only considerable skill , but great self-denial also .
I know a lot of hard work has gone into this .
Let me start with an example from history .
Thousands of years ago the Chinese built the first ocean-going ships .
They already had the compass before the Europeans left the Mediterranean .
Nevertheless , the Europeans went on to conquer the globe and not the Chinese .
Why ?
The Chinese did not want to .
They did not want to use their technology for this purpose whereas the Europeans did .
We are faced with a similar problem in regard to research .
We can only make things available , funds , ideas ; whether the Europeans , Europe 's researchers , make use of them , however , is up to them .
This brings me to something I am actually sorry about , namely that we are relatively guarded about the proposal where the funds are concerned .
I am aware of the financial constraints , and I am no illusionist either .
All the same , it is not enough for Europe to catch up on the USA or Japan , or to relegate the newly industrialized countries of Southeast Asia to second or third place .
Efforts need to be made in the Member States and in the companies .
Investment in research must retain or regain a high , even moral , standing in Europe .
That is what it is all about .
Perhaps a signal for such vitality will come from this debate and the discussions on the fourth framework programme .
At least I would like to think so .
Just let me say a few words , as time is short , on the Euratom section since I am very satisfied with most of the other aspects .
It is no secret that I regret cuts having been made in the Euratom programme .
I can barely understand this since we need the funds .
Unlike some of my colleagues , I am of the opinion that we need them for fusion .
We need the funds for nuclear safety , especially when central and eastern European states join us . As you know , these all have Soviet reactors , if they have reactors at all .
We must increase safety .
Hence we do not need less money , but more .
Even if it is not nice to say as much , I say it here .
Finally , I hope that the Commission will have as much leeway as possible in research policy .
The Commission has the responsibility and it should also have the opportunity to transfer funds from one side to another on its own responsibility .
You cannot plan research ; instead you have to expect surprises , and respond to them accordingly .
I wish the Commission a happy hand in this .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , during the course of the intensive work that preceded the Commission 's document , the European Parliament pointed out important and original aspects such as attention to small and medium-sized businesses with an international calling , districts with a high technological density , that are included in a dedicated action , and to technologies on the conservation of cultural assets , included in the context of the city of the future .
In the structure of the thematic programmes , our Committee , guided brilliantly by Mr Quisthoudt-Rowohl , tried to maintain the focussing effort , which has been the guiding factor in the work on the fifth framework programme .
And yet we have amended the action on sustainable development by adding two key actions on energy and extended the action on marine technologies to include surface transport .
The main idea is that we are developing towards a single system of mobility , including all means of transport .
I should point out that this amendment should be understood to be an addition ; we did not intend to dilute the resources on marine technologies , but to increase the budget for a global transport action .
To find this additional allocation , we are asking both for something to be taken from the biological sciences and for the total budget to be increased slightly .
I am delighted that the space applications have been included in the relevant thematic projects . I also maintain the need for research into microgravity to be conducted at the international space station , an extremely new scientific opportunity for which the United States are preparing far more systematically than us Europeans and for which the action of the European Union should be supplementary to that of the ESA .
To conclude , a word of praise for our rapporteur and in favour of a political commitment to research as a fundamental means of building our future .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , Madam Rapporteur , I come from the North Sea coast , and it is very important where I live to make sure before setting sail anywhere that the cargo is evenly distributed , otherwise the vessel will start to roll and list .
It is my opinion that the Research Committee 's resolution conceals the same danger .
What has happened ?
In spring this House unanimously adopted a report from our colleague Claude Desama , in which it was clearly stated that research should contribute to the European welfare-state model , not just to industrial competitiveness .
Then the latter-day freebooters , the lobbyists , came along and stood up for particular interests .
Hence , the ship is now starting to list , I feel , and this second pillar - the question of how things stand with risk assessment , sustainability and deliberation , and who has the opportunities in our society under what conditions -has been washed overboard .
Ladies and gentlemen , this is also an important site factor for Europe and for our society .
Not just technology , but how we treat each other , how we live , these are the key elements for our future development , for the interests of Europe 's citizens .
We said quite clearly at the time : it is a matter of finding a socio-economic model of sustainable growth .
We said : we want risk assessment , we want to clarify the question of participation and the role of the social partners in our society .
All this has vanished .
That is why I would like to urgently request again that we get things back on an even keel .
It is a question of research efforts and , of course , finding money for these research efforts in this socioeconomic area .
Obviously , this is a new baby .
We did not introduce it until the fourth framework programme .
There were problems .
Things improved with the new leader in Mitsos .
But that is no reason to say we have reached the end of the road .
What is it all about ?
It concerns , for example , the question of information and communication technologies , who has access and under what circumstances .
The gender issue , the change in employment due to teleworking and , of course , the question of worker participation and the change in job organization are also significant .
All this needs to be fully reflected if we intend to explore and continue to introduce certain technologies .
For this reason , I am making an urgent plea that Amendment No 117 and , of course , Amendment No 123 be adopted so that our ship , the research vessel for the future , can stay on an even keel and steer the proper course .
Mr President , we have now reached a determining moment in the process leading to the adoption and implementation of the fifth framework programme for research .
Above all , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Quisthoudt-Rowohl , for the remarkable manner in which she has carried through the complex task of preparing this paper .
I would like also to thank very sincerely all those who , in the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , contributed through their work with the political groups and by taking preparatory initiatives , to advancing our thinking on the fifth framework programme .
Here , I have in mind the members of the research committee in general , and the rapporteurs , and members of the ten other associated committees .
The Commission welcomes the draft opinion of Parliament on the fifth framework programme with real satisfaction .
Parliament has been able to seize this occasion to make its imprint .
I note that its amendments go in the direction of the Commission 's proposal , and that we are very close to one another on nearly all fundamental points .
The fifth framework programme has been conceived as a break with the past .
Its novelty is manifest in its three major features .
First , a resolute orientation towards the major political , social , and economic objectives of the European Union , beginning with the improvement of the employment situation and the reinforcement of European competitiveness .
Subsequently , concentration of resources on a limited number of themes and objectives , in order to raise the impact of actions envisaged to maximum .
Finally , the introduction of new themes and the definition of new modes of action , the first of which are the key actions .
On all these points , the draft opinion of Parliament supports the proposal of the Commission .
In certain cases , it even reinforces the innovative aspects .
The Commission therefore intends , in a revised version of its proposal , to accept a number of essential amendments , in both their spirit and content , although may be not in the precise manner in which they are now formulated .
I shall not go into detailed comment on each amendment , and I shall concentrate on the three points around which the debate of the research committee has been structured : structure , content , and financial aspects .
First , structure .
The Commission agrees with the formulation proposed for the organization of the fifth framework programme into four thematic programmes .
This ensures that we remain very close to our own proposal , and keep the determination to concentrate our effort and integrate into it a pluridisciplinary approach towards problems .
This is the message that the college of commissioners has asked me to send to the Parliament .
The setting up of a new programme on the combined themes of the environment and energy is justified .
As has been shown by the discussions on climate change that have just been completed in Kyoto , the problems raised in these two fields need to be dealt with in a highly integrated fashion .
In order to respond to the challenge before us , we need to be bold .
To divide the new programme into two sub-programmes would be an over-timid approach .
The Commission will therefore propose a formula which is better adapted to this configuration .
The adoption of this new structure will , of course , lead to a reallocation of key actions .
This will entail an adjustment of the financial equilibria .
A number of approaches could all be said to have equal justification .
I note that the choices made so far by the Parliament and the Commission , although they do not totally coincide , do in fact have much in common .
Overall , I am delighted to see that the Parliament and the Commission can agree on the idea that we need a limited number of programmes .
This consensus will be extremely useful as a means to respond to all those who were looking forward to an increasing number of programmes .
Now , content .
First , further to the breaking down of the energy key action into two key actions focusing on the one hand on sustainable energy use , and on the other hand on the development of cleaner and more competitive supply-side solutions , the two major new features introduced by the amendments are the key actions devoted to the problems of population ageing and climate change , respectively .
In the Commission 's proposal , these two themes had already appeared under the category of generic research activities .
To make them key actions would make it possible , at the political level , to highlight the importance of these questions for the future of the European Union .
The Commission emphasizes that it agrees with the spirit of the amendments proposed on these various points .
On the other hand , it does not agree on a number of amendments introducing modifications in the content or in the allocation of key actions , which would lead to moving away from the integrated and multi-disciplinary problemsolving approach .
A sectorial , discipline-based approach is on occasion a tempting one .
It has all the force of tradition , but often leads to a partial grasp on problems , and to the dispersion of resources .
A further comment on the socio-economic aspects .
The Parliament has emphasized the need to take socioeconomic aspects into account to a very high degree , and the Commission shares this point of view .
The Commission is indeed keen to ensure that the socio-economic aspects have a substantial position in the fifth framework programme .
We nevertheless believe that the best manner to deal with these questions is to do so , on the one hand , within the key actions context , as regards aspects relating to the field of the major thematic programmes , and on the other hand in the framework of the special activity of the ' improvement in human potential ' programme , in respect of general aspects , or other aspects not dealt with in other programmes .
The Commission is resolved to give socio-economic questions an important role in the fifth framework programme .
It nevertheless believes that it is still preferable to do so by using the formula it has proposed , rather than to do so through special key actions in the various programmes .
I shall conclude with financial aspects .
Here , I believe congratulations are in order , concerning the remarkable convergence between the proposals of the Parliament and those of the Commission , and the very strong signal which has thus been sent to the Member States and to the Council .
The draft opinion proposes a fifth framework programme with an ECU 16.7 billion spending allocation , some ECU 400 million more than proposed by the Commission .
In a context of budget restrictions and compressed public research expenditure , when facing up to our competitors from North America and Japan , who are not letting up on their research efforts , the European Union cannot allow itself to cut back or to allow a levelling off of the resources allocated to research at the European level .
In accordance with the provisions of Agenda 2000 , the amount proposed by the Commission has been calculated on the basis of the principle of an increase in the resources allocated to research slightly outstripping the rate of growth in GNP in the European Union .
To fix the level of proposed financial allocation to research , the Commission has had to take into account many external constraints .
The Commission notes with satisfaction the message contained in the draft opinion of the Parliament .
It nevertheless maintains its proposal , for reasons that the Parliament will easily understand , which are related to the role that the Commission will be called on to play in seeking out a compromise .
The Commission furthermore accepts the very useful amendment of the Committee on Budgets , adopted by the research committee , which translates into operational terms the interdependency between the decision to adopt the fifth framework programme and its financial allocation , and negotiation on the future financial prospects of the European Union .
The details of the Commission 's position on the various amendments will be set down in the minutes of this plenary session .
More particularly , I would like to accept the amendments from Mrs McNally , on the need to keep monitoring and on ensuring a better balance between men and women in the ' Improvement of human potential ' programme , and to introduce the question of equality of opportunity under this theme , as regards socioeconomic research .
Furthermore , the Commission will in the Spring of 1998 organize a conference on women and the sciences .
For my part , I wish to conclude my general comments with two further remarks .
First , I wish to underscore the quality of the proposals arising from the work of the research committee and other committees involved .
This testifies to the growing interest that an increasingly large number of members of Parliament are giving to the research policy which is essential if the European Union is to pursue its objectives .
Within the perspectives defined by Agenda 2000 , research is indeed at the heart of the political action of the European Union , alongside other policies dealing with learning and knowledge in the field of education , and innovation .
I therefore wish , for my part , to see increased dialogue between ourselves during the implementation phase of our programmes .
My second remark is operational in nature .
We have not reached the end of the road , and we have still a long way to go .
The Council must now give its opinion .
Our hope is that it can adopt a common position at the Research Council of 12 February , and this is not guaranteed .
To date , the positions of the Member States are on occasion quite far from one another .
In parallel to this , discussion will get underway on the specific programmes , based on the working document presented by the Commission in November .
The objective is the formal adoption of the framework programme in 1998 for effective implementation of specific programmes in 1999 .
The months to come will therefore still be extremely dense in terms of thinking and in debates .
I know I can count on the European Parliament to play its role during this process .
I would like to express my thanks in anticipation of the efforts that the Parliament will deploy in assisting us to achieve our final aim , which is to place European research at the service of European citizens .
The European Parliament represents the citizens .
It is the expression of their interests .
The Parliament 's active involvement in the process of decision-making contributes to ensuring that the major scientific and technological choices at the European level are made on a democratic basis .
In the light of the urgency and the extent of the problems which Europeans need to face up to , and of the contribution that research is able to make to solving those problems , I am certain that your Assembly will do everything within its power to ensure that this new framework programme is launched as soon as possible .
The debate is closed .
The votes will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m. and on Thursday at 9.30 a.m.

Energy policy
The next item is the report ( A4-0308 / 97 ) by Mr Scapagnini 's , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy on the Commission communication : " An overall view of energy policy and actions ' ( COM ( 97 ) 0167 - C4-0205 / 97 ) .

As Commissioner Papoutsis cannot be present this evening and as our debate will have to be interrupted at 5.30 for Commission Question Time , with the consent of the House I now invite Commissioner Papoutsis to speak .

Mr President , I would like to take this opportunity first and foremost to apologise to the Members of this House as I will not be able to be present at this evening 's sitting .
I have to say that I have been waiting since 11.30 this morning for us to debate the Scapagnini report , but unfortunately there has been a great deal of delay , and I can understand why , over the important issue of the budget .
However , this does not allow me to stay here until this evening , given the fact that tomorrow morning the Energy Charter meeting is being held in Brussels and we have high hopes that tomorrow the 30 sanctions of the Energy Charter will be tabled with a view to putting it into effect .
As you can understand , by your leave and with the backing of Parliament , the European Commission must be present at this great event for the inception of the Energy Charter .
Returning to the issue at hand , Mr President , I would like first of all to thank the rapporteur , Mr Scapagnini , for his clear and constructive report .
The Commission agrees in principle with the proposed resolution which adopts many of the findings of the Commission communication .
The energy situation which prevails today both in the European Union and in the rest of the world demands well supported and coordinated actions .
For this reason it is important that we fully understand the challenges that confront us .
The chief aim of the Commission Communication is to describe the enormous challenges facing the energy sector and the actions that have been taken at a European level .
Our objective is simple and unequivocal - to improve transparency .
Moreover , the Commission Communication was the first stage in the setting up of a framework programme for energy policy , a framework programme for respective actions at a European level .
In his report Mr Scapagnini demonstrated that the European Parliament is fully aware of the situation and is ready to support the Commission in this regard .
On behalf of the European Commission I would therefore like to thank you for your positive stance and for your support .
In this communication the Commission underlines three important issues faced by the energy sector :
The first is the issue of the security of supply .
All kinds of analyses , all forecasts lead to the certain conclusion that energy dependency on external supply will increase significantly .
The Community must consider this fact and , in consequence , must take the necessary action .
Secondly , the energy sector plays a leading role in efforts to improve the competitiveness of Europe .
Efficient and profitable energy systems can make a major contribution to the improvement of competitiveness by ensuring appropriate production and transportation structures , while at the same time ensuring the free circulation of energy products .
Finally , the energy sector is of vital importance with respect to the protection of the environment .
In all energy policies , in all energy actions , the objective of continuous evolution must be observed .
Today , following the Kyoto Summit , the issue of greenhouse gases is of particular importance .
There are a number of environmental objectives which must be reflected fully in our energy policy .
The resolution that we are proposing demonstrates that the European Parliament concurs with these views .
Mr President , please allow me to comment specifically on certain important points raised in the resolution :
The European Commission shares the view that it is desirable that a chapter on energy be included in the treaty .
Unfortunately , however , at the recent Intergovernmental Conference in Amsterdam it was not possible to reach an agreement on such a chapter .
It appears that at that time this issue was not yet ripe enough to form the subject of an agreement of the Member States .
Notwithstanding , the Commission will continue to introduce recommendations aimed at making the European Union energy policy more cohesive , through the use , as and when indicated , of the legal bases in force today .
With regard to regenerative energy sources , the Commission is fully aware of the support for actions in this area .
As you know , we recently introduced the White Paper on a community strategy and a plan of action for regenerative energy sources .
Now I await your reactions , your thoughts on the White Paper and subsequently we will have the opportunity to debate this issue extensively in the near future .
Mr President , I would also like to thank Parliament for its support concerning the institution of a framework programme for European Union energy policy .
As you are aware , this programme was approved by the Commission on 18 November , just one month ago .
The framework programme comprises all the actions that have been taken so far in the context of the separate programmes , such as Save II , concerning energy output , Altener , concerning regenerative energy sources , and also Synergy , on cooperation with third countries .
It also provides for specific actions at the level of energy analyses and forecasts in the energy sector concerning nuclear safety and the clean use of coal . All these actions have been coordinated and integrated under the roof of the basic resolution for the framework programme itself .
The proposal for the framework programme is also aimed at the formation of longterm stable conditions for the incorporation of all kinds of actions at the energy level .
The framework programme is also necessary for the creation of a clear legal basis for all of these actions .
It is the view of the Commission that the framework programme will not only create better conditions for coordinating the special actions of the energy policy , but will also provide for a better establishing of targets for actions at the energy level , that is , for those actions which are run on the basis of other community policies such as the structural funds and the programmes of external technical assistance .
The proposal for the framework programme will be one of the basic priorities of the British Presidency .
The initial reactions of the Member States have been positive , and I especially count on your support , so that we can come to a timely decision on the framework programme .
I hope that you will continue to support the serious measures for the implementation of the energy policy , based on the unified philosophy of the present new programme .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission concurs to a very great extent with the proposed resolution in the Scapagnini report on the general picture of the energy policy and appropriate actions .
I would like to finish by once again thanking the rapporteur , Mr Scapagnini , for his excellent report .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is Question Time to the Commission ( B4-1002 / 97 ) .
However , before we start , Mr Smith has asked for the floor on a point of order .
Mr President , my Question No 76 is on transport of nuclear fuels .
I , in my innocence , assumed that this question would be answered by the Commissioner responsible for transport but I find it is in ' Other questions ' .
Can you register my concern at this , Mr President , and can you endeavour to find an explanation as to why this question was not included in the section to be dealt with by the Commissioner responsible for transport ?
Mr Smith , I will make a note of your concern , but as you know , it is up to the Commission to decide which of the Commissioners respond to the questions which have been raised .
It is not our responsibility .
In any case , your comment will be noted not only by me , but will also appear in the verbatim report of proceedings . Your opinions are always valued .
I would like to thank the Commissioner for his answer , which I thought was detailed and good .
I would also like to say that I appreciate the reports the Commission has made against various countries for breaching the procurement regulation , including the report directed at my own country of Sweden .
Let me just take up one more question .
Companies should obviously , as far as possible , report when they do not get their rights according to the procurement regulation .
We also know that they have difficulty doing that because they can get on the wrong side of prospective clients , important clients .
Therefore there is an idea that we should set up some kind of procurement ombudsman , i.e. someone who could receive these reports and make a case against the local and government authorities who do not follow the rules .
Is the Commissioner aware of this ?
I know that work is being done on this in Eurochambers .
What is the Commissioner 's basic position on this ?
Thank you for that supplementary question .
Firstly , I would like to point out that the Commission has actually brought a considerable number of infringement actions against the Member States .
I would also like to say that many infringement actions derive from notifications given by companies and point out that , within the scope of the broader consultation opened up by the Green Paper on public contracts , that gave rise to a further 300 contributions , one aspect much taken into consideration is that which seems to make the notification of things going wrong more effective .
Finally , I would remind the author of the question that the company , or the person making the request , can now remain anonymous , if it wishes to do so .
Mr Monti 's replies indeed show that what he and questioner Cars state is and remains a problem .
There is too much opportunity for escape .
Public institutions , local authorities , and other authorities putting out to tender - and this also happens frequently in transport - may not take the cheapest option , but then they offer the excuse that the firm chosen was the best .
Then it turns out , Mr Monti , that it is always national firms who are given preference .
That is why not only the representative , but in my opinion also the Commissioner , should keep a closer eye on things , so that it is not the national firms only who are awarded contracts , but that instead contracts are spread over the entire Community .
A report from you on this issue would be very welcome .
Mr President , this is one of the most important topics for the actual completion of the single market , and it is precisely for that reason that we are giving it the greatest attention , as Parliament will see as soon as the Commission presents the communication on consultation resulting from the Green Paper at the beginning of 1998 .
Mr Wijsenbeek reminds us that , at times , the contracting authorities have the same difficulties .
From this point of view , the simplification aspects , that are taken into account in the Green Paper as one of the essential factors , have their own significance and I cannot fail to agree with the author of the question when he says that , from the point of view of the single market , it is to be hoped that tender proceedings will result in contracts being awarded to nonnational companies to an ever greater extent .
This is taking place more and more , although not at the rate we would like , and a whole series of actions , provided for in the Green Paper , on the information , training plan and so on , seek to integrate to an ever greater extent this as yet not completely single public contracts market .
Mr Commissioner , are you aware that architects experience particular difficulties when it comes to public procurement .
The architects find it hard to sort out real conditions exactly and that sometimes , even with minor projects , there 400 to 500 enquiries for public tenders , which can lead to problems .
This is a particular and important aspect of a broader problem and , when it does not relate to large companies or to companies in general , but to professionals or to professional offices , the aspect of comprehensive information is even more important .
With this objective in mind in the next actions relating to contracts , those which , I repeat once again , appropriately consult the Green Paper , the aspect of electronic information will be taken into consideration and emphasized in particular .
Just last week we held a very large conference in Brussels with participants from all the Member States on Electronic Procurement , which is a means of providing a better explanation of the information aspects of the substantial contracts market .
As the author is not present , Question No 26 falls .
Question No 27 by Veronica Hardstaff ( H-0906 / 97 )
Subject : The use of E111 forms in Member States
Is the Commission aware that EU citizens are experiencing difficulties in some Member States in obtaining medical treatment using the E111 form ?
Is it permissible for doctors in some countries to refuse to accept a valid E111 , claiming it should be renewed every year , when this is no longer the case , and then make a considerable charge for the consultation and medicines ?
Regulation 1408 / 71 on the coordination of social security schemes for migrant workers guarantees that a person staying temporarily in a Member State of the European Union or the EEA other than the one where he or she is insured will be entitled to all immediate necessary benefits in kind , that is , to all urgent medical treatment which is necessary with regard to his or her state of health .
These benefits are provided under the same conditions as for nationals of that state .
In such a case of temporary stay , the person should obtain an E111 form before departure .
This form indicates that the person is affiliated to a social security scheme of a Member State , and has to be presented to the sickness insurance institution in the country of stay .
This institution is reimbursed by the institution of the competent state .
The E111 form may be valid for a limited period only , or it may have no limitation as regards the period of validity .
This is a matter for the competent institution in each Member State to determine , according to the objective of the Community rules on social security for migrant workers , which aims to coordinate , not to harmonize , the national rules of social security systems .
However , it is clear that a valid E111 form cannot be refused by a doctor or an institution of the place of stay ; and whenever the Commission has had to deal with cases where European Union citizens experience difficulties in obtaining medical treatment using the form , we have strongly intervened to have the rules respected .
However it should be emphasized that the E111 form is satisfactorily used by millions of tourists every year .
Moreover , I would like to draw your attention to the fact that there is also a possibility for persons who have had difficulties in using the E111 form to be reimbursed directly by their competent institution .
In this case , when they are obliged to pay for the emergency medical treatment themselves , they may be reimbursed only after they have returned to the country where they are insured .
I am quite sure that my constituent 's E111 was in a better state than this one , which was issued in 1990 .
However , when he presented it at a hospital in France , the specialist he saw ripped it up and came to a private agreement with him that he should pay a fee , instead of advising him that he should go to the appropriate office to get reimbursement .
He then got in contact both with the Department of Health and Social Security in Britain , and with myself , and I and my staff also got in touch with the Department of Health and Social Security , which suggested that I should raise it with you to try and ensure that this sort of thing does not happen , and that medical staff in all our Member States are reminded of their duty to advise people who are ill who come to them to go to the office to obtain reimbursement .
Just very quickly ; I very much regret the difficulty your constituent had .
You did not say whether the constituent was finally reimbursed but you are making the point that we want to see a better system put into place , and I take note of what you say .
Of course the person did the right thing , he went to his department when he got back to his own country of residence and got reimbursed .
It should not happen that way .
There was a fault in the first instance in that the person was not sent to the proper institution .
But I will certainly look into the possibility of getting better information to all those involved .
I would like to thank the Commissioner for his reply to Mrs Hardstaff .
But following on from Mrs Hardstaff 's question , would the Commissioner care to comment on the fact that the E111 does not appear to cover all medical costs in an emergency situation .
Some of my constituents have been left with a bill , even after using the E111 form .
Will the Commissioner therefore be recommending that citizens of the European Union should be taking out additional medical insurance to cover the shortfall on the E111 form as they travel across the European Union ?
It is an interesting point .
There are two main possibilities of obtaining medical care outside the state of residence .
The first is that a person staying temporarily outside the competent Member State is entitled to all necessary medical benefits in kind , using the E111 form .
Secondly , a person can move to another Member State in order to undergo treatment , but should obtain the prior authorization of the competent sickness institution , that is , form E112 , in order to be properly reimbursed .
The Court of Justice has been asked to determine whether the current rules are compatible with the Treaty provisions on free movement of goods and services .
We are awaiting the outcome of that judgment .
When we have it I will be better able to answer Mr Truscott 's further point .
As the author is not present , Question No 28 falls .
Question No 29 by James Fitzsimons ( H-0921 / 97 )
Subject : Toy safety
Given growing concern about the use of PVC ( polyvinyl chloride ) in children 's toys , given that PVC can have chemicals added to it that can be hazardous to children if ingested and that certain Member States have already acted to have toys containing PVC removed from shops , is the Commission prepared to investigate the matter with a view to introducing European-wide rules ?
I should like to say to Mr Fitzsimons that the Commission is well aware of the issues he has raised .
The growing concern mentioned by Mr Fitzsimons relates to the use of soft PVC in toys and childcare articles such as teething rings , and not of PVC in general .
The chemicals referred to are , in particular , some plasticizers .
They are called phthalates , and are used to make PVC soft .
The Commission has reacted promptly to the initiatives taken by certain Member States and , in particular , by the Danish authorities in the framework of the Community rapid alert system .
These initiatives concerned three teethers which are made in China , which brought the issue to the attention of the public and the authorities all over Europe .
The Danish Environmental Protection Agency alleged that these teethers leached an amount of phthalates judged inadmissible for babies .
Representatives of the Member States were invited by the Commission to a meeting of the emergencies committee dealing with consumer health in October 1997 to discuss the issue , given its potential implications for consumer health and safety .
Significant differences concerning test methods and conditions were highlighted and there was a general consensus on the need for harmonized test protocols .
The urgency of the matter led to the decision to consult the Scientific Committee on Toxicology , which met on 17 November of this year .
The committee decided to further investigate the issue and a working group on phthalates focusing specifically on toys and childcare articles , composed of prominent academics and researchers , held its first meeting on 8 December 1997 .
It will deliver its findings in the first half of 1998 .
In the meantime research on those substances has been going on with the support of several Commission services .
Besides the outcome of the working group that I mentioned , the investigation of the matter with a view to introducing European-wide regulation in this field as requested by Mr Fitzsimons is already under way .
Most of the chemicals involved are amongst the substances identified as priorities by Regulation 793 / 93 on evaluation and control of the risks of existing substances .
This means that risk assessments are currently being carried out by the Member States which have been designated as rapporteurs in this case , namely the Netherlands , Sweden and Norway , Regulation 793 / 93 being EEA-relevant .
The first results of these assessments are expected shortly .
The results of the investigations will allow the Commission to propose if necessary the appropriate measures to be taken at European level to regulate the use of these substances in toys and in other products as well .
I thank the Commissioner for his reply .
I am very pleased that research is being carried out with regard to the concern about toys .
There is quite considerable concern in the Member States that too often Christmas , which should be a time of joy , is a time of tragedy .
Only in the last few days the European Consumers Association has issued a statement in this regard .
Further to what the Commissioner has said , is the Commission aware that several PVC toys have already been taken off the market in Spain , Sweden and Italy ?
Given this situation , would the Commissioner now ensure that some ground rules are laid down concerning the manufacture and sale of such toys ?
Would he also ensure that all other Member States remove such toys from their shelves before this Christmas ?
In reply to Mr Fitzsimons , the Commission is aware of the voluntary withdrawal by toys distributors in several Member States of these particular items .
For the time being no ban has been implemented by the Member States in general .
So far as this particular distributor is concerned , they have agreed to voluntarily withdraw from the markets where they have been contested .
The Commission and the Member States await the outcome and the opinion of the Scientific Committee , before taking the adequate measures to restrict the use of soft PVC in toys .
What is needed is harmonization of the testing methods , and that is being considered by the working group .
As soon as the information is available the necessary action will be taken .
Mr Commissioner , I am having some difficulty with what you are telling us .
Toy safety is regulated by a guideline from 1988 , in which it is stipulated that the Commission shall ensure by 1989 that the appropriate technical standards shall be enacted to guarantee this safety .
I ask you why it was only two years ago that the Commission applied to the CEN to set legal limits for organic chemical substances and plasticizers , which we are debating now .
And why , after two years , has this still not been done ?
There was a misunderstanding here , I feel , because what we are talking about here ...
Mr Flynn , it is not that I want to give permission to speak .
But when you can understand the language in which the question is asked , you answer straight away , while I - being no polyglot - am still listening to the skilful work of the interpreters .
That is why there has to be a short pause between the end of the question and your reply .
The floor is yours .
I appreciate your point , Mr President .
There must be no misunderstanding .
What we are talking about here is the question about plasticizers in PVC toys .
As far as the note I have here is concerned , we are talking about the fact that this group has been set up to deal specifically with the complaints that have been received .
As soon as the opinion has been received the matter will be addressed .
But the complaints have been dealt with in so far as the importer or the distributor has withdrawn the product , so there is no danger consequently .
Concerning the Member States where it has been contested , you are quite right , because there are differences in testing procedures .
It is precisely to do that and to harmonize the testing procedures that the working group is sitting to deal with the matter .
Mr Flynn , I think Mr Martin wants to put a supplementary question .
It is very encouraging that the Commission has taken the action it has .
I wonder if you have gone far enough .
The fact is that this product can still be legally on the market in 12 of our 15 Member States .
I understand that you need scientific evidence , but in the United States they would withdraw the product and then , if the scientific evidence proved the product to be safe , allow it back on the market .
In the meantime we are allowing this product , which there are serious concerns over , to remain on the market .
I wonder if we should not be taking action now to remove it from the market and then , if the scientific evidence happily proves it to be safe , we can allow it back on the market .
I am advised that the Commission does not have the legal power to do that under the existing situation and that a standardization is under way , but is not going to be ready before the year 2002 .
Because of what you say and because of the difference in the testing procedures , which cannot be agreed , it is going to take some time .
I will bring the matter to the attention of the relevant Commissioner and make the point that you have addressed .
Ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , it is now 6.03 p.m. and an act of solidarity with those who have suffered the effects of terrorism is about to start in Hall 5 of IPE II , under the aegis of the European Parliament and at the instigation of the President of this institution , to mark the presence here today of the family of Mr Miguel Angel Blanco , the town councillor murdered by ETA .
As you can imagine , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to be present at that ceremony , and I am sure you would too .
However , to be working here today in Parliament is also an expression of solidarity , because the terrorists , who are totalitarian fascists , want to destroy democracy . Therefore , by continuing to work within our democratic institutions we are displaying our solidarity , and also showing the terrorists that though they may murder democrats in such a despicable manner , they cannot kill democracy itself .
As they deal with the same subject , the following questions will be taken together :
Question No 30 by Hugh McMahon ( H-0872 / 97 )
Subject : Removal of age limits in Commission recruitment
I congratulate the Commissioner on his recent announcement on BBC Radio that he intends to remove any reference to age limits in recruitment advertisements for Commission posts .
This is a most welcome move by the Commission which encompasses the full sense of equal opportunities as adopted in article 6a of the Treaty of Amsterdam .
Can the Commissioner say when his proposal will be put to the Commission and become official Commission policy , and whether this will be in time for the next recruitment round in 1998 , as he indicated in his radio broadcast ?
Question No 31 by Bryan Cassidy ( H-0875 / 97 )
Subject : Equal opportunities for older workers in recruitment to the European Commission
The reports of the Commissioner 's recent change in view in his intended removal of age limits in recruitment notices for the European Commission are most welcome and we look forward to this policy taking effect in 1998 .
In the framework of inter-institutional cooperation for EU recruitment competitions , will the Commission be encouraging other EU institutions to follow its own example , once this becomes official Commission policy ? Question No 32 by Elly Plooij-van Gorsel ( H-0937 / 97 )
Subject : EU action to remove age limits in recruitment
The Commission 's recent announcement of the removal of age limits in recruitment notices for the European Commission follows closely the recent publication of draft legislation in the Netherlands to ban all reference to age in job advertisements .
Does the Commission expect legal actions to be undertaken against other institutions , on the basis of the non-discrimination clause in the Treaty of Amsterdam or of national anti-age discrimination legislation in , for example , the Netherlands , if they continue to set age limits for recruitment ?
Mr President , in January I am presenting for debate the proposal that would abolish age limits in recruitment advertisements for the Commission .
If the Commission approves the proposal , age limits will vanish from any competitions from then on .
As for current or future practice concerning other institutions , discussions are under way within the normal Community frameworks .
That is why I do not wish to comment on any possible future arrangements or any legal matters pertaining to them .
I thank the Commissioner for taking this matter up and for acting so efficiently and effectively .
Could I make the point that he might consider in the discussions with the other institutions , pointing out to them that they must try and live up to the spirit and practice of the Amsterdam Treaty , particularly those aspects dealing with discrimination in employment .
I refer in particular to the institution of which we are Members , because it appears to be one of the most laggard in retaining the archaic practice of ageism in employment .
Would he take the opportunity then in the discussions that are going on - and we know it is a delicate matter - of pointing out that the spirit of the Amsterdam Treaty demands that all European institutions set an example for other Community citizens ?
We have informed the other institutions , including the European Parliament , of our intentions .
Perhaps you also have possibilities to express your views in this procedure .
We in the Commission came to the conclusion in the preparatory discussions that any age limit in the publication of a post would be very inappropriate , taking into account the spirit of the Amsterdam Treaty .
At the same time , of course , when we recruit people we need to have a good age structure , so young people will be recruited in the future .
There will be some senior people but there will be no age limit in the notice of competition .
I too wish to thank the Commissioner for the very encouraging news he has given us this afternoon .
However , we know that there is many a slip ' twixt cup and lip and that a recommendation to the Commission does not necessarily mean that the Commission , as a collegiate body , will accept it .
Firstly , I should like to ask him what he judges his chances are of getting it through the Commission and , secondly , what happens after that ?
Does it mean that there has to be a revision of all the Staff Regulations , which are common between all the institutions ?
If I expected my chances to be very limited I would not have announced my intention here .
As far as the legal side is concerned , our Staff Regulations do not oblige us to use age limits , so no changes are necessary there .
However , when we publicize new posts they must go through the normal procedures with the joint committees .
For that reason , last week we had political consultations with the staff organizations on the matter .
We have given them further information .
I expect , if everything goes as planned , that in January we will try to take a first decision , which means that we will abolish age limits and right after that publish the new general competition for officials , so that we do not remain on the level of general decisions but pass directly to the next European competition for officials without age limits , which would be organized in 1998 .
Parliament has put a great deal of effort recently into including the outlawing of discrimination on the basis of age into the Treaty of Amsterdam .
This was successful .
I am pleased , therefore , that the Netherlands has been the first country to implement this .
I am also pleased , of course , with the Commission 's decision to no longer set any age limits in its job advertisements .
But I would like to take you up on how you will police this .
Would the Commission be prepared to issue a yearly overview to Parliament on the actual appointment policy , so that we can see what the ages are of the people who haven been appointed ?
Secondly , you said , you will be able to get things changed in Parliament yourselves .
I can tell you that we have talked with the President and the Secretary-General on numerous occasions , but Parliament is very conservative on this issue .
I think it must be to do with the average age of members of Parliament .
Mr President , I am responsible for the recruitment of personnel in the Commission .
My responsibilities include taking decisions on all manner of recruitment issues .
After the decision has been made to end age limits , I 'll be responsible for the matter and I 'll attend to it .
They will no longer exist .
But if you want to see a list of those situations where age limits will be imposed , contrary to this decision , I will gladly prepare one , although it 'll be very short .
Actually , there won 't be anything on it .
Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel wishes to speak on a point of order .
Mr President , it seems to me - and this really a point of order - that a question should be given a response .
My question was by no means answered .
I fully respect Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel 's opinion , but in order to comply with the Rules of Procedure I must now allow Mr Truscott to put a supplementary question .
Mr Liikanen , when replying to Mr Truscott you are free to say whatever you wish .
I wish to thank the Commissioner for his answer .
Would he join with me in calling on all EU institutions to abide by the spirit of the Amsterdam draft Treaty on anti-discrimination on ageism ?
In the light of that , does he have any target date for the phasing out of age limits in all the EU institutions ?
Mr President , I am sorry , I misunderstood the question .
Of course we will be able , if need be , to provide information on a yearly basis on the ages of staff recruited in a general way .
There is no problem in that .
As for the Amsterdam Treaty , we are all bound by it in the same way , obviously , but we should I think refrain from commenting on the recruitment policies of other institutions .
I am responsible for what the Commission does and you have the right to observe .
What other institutions do is rather harder for me to take a view on from the legal point of view .
Question No 33 by Jonas Sjöstedt ( H-0895 / 97 )
Subject : Implications for the Member States of the European Parliament 's first reading of the 1998 budget
The European Parliament 's first reading of the 1998 budget entails an increase of payment authorizations of ECU 1 700 million over the Council 's first reading .
For some Member States this increase implies perceptible costs for their national budgets in the form of higher membership contributions .
For others it implies greater amounts flowing back in the form , for example , of structural fund support .
Will the Commission describe the economic implications for the Member States of the European Parliament 's first reading as compared to the Council 's first reading ?
Which countries will gain and which will lose as a result of the European Parliament 's proposal ?
Mr President , I thank Mr Sjöstedt for his important question .
In the first debate on the 1998 budget in the European Parliament appropriation was increased by ECU 1.7 milliard .
The sum is meant to cover the extra costs set aside for Member States and the Third World .
The Member States , however , must also fund these additional costs .
The Commission is requested to specify to the Member States the future net benefit of these increases .
The Commission has often made it clear that it does not consider it possible to unambiguously gauge the merits of Union membership .
The advantages surpass mere considerations of bookkeeping .
For example , the effects of freeing up trade on economic growth and living standards are impossible to measure in each individual Member State .
Just as hard to assess is the influence the internal markets will have on growth , or the economic significance for Member States of the strategy being undertaken for membership .
Jacques Santer presented a document to the Ecofin Council on this issue on 13th October of this year .
The document is now available on the Internet on the Europe home pages in the eleven official languages of the Community .
I would like to state that the increases in expenditure proposed by the European Parliament and the way they are to be funded are subject to the same interpretation of the juste retour system as any other budget .
This being the case , the Commission does not consider it appropriate to make detailed assessments .
I thank the Commissioner for his friendly reply .
I promise to read the document which the Commission 's President , Mr Santer , has drawn up and which is on the Internet .
I thought , however , that having such a good grasp of the budget ( as I know you have , you know where the money comes from and where it goes ) , you could perhaps at least give a small pointer in the principal directions .
Mr President , the increases proposed by Parliament will fall into place like the employment initiative in Europe or the Socrates programme .
These are things that have a general importance for employment and youth exchange programmes throughout Europe .
I wouldn 't like to make judgements as to how a Member State might benefit one way or the other .
I believe that everyone will gain .
But , obviously , each Member State , just like parliament , has the right to make its own assessments .
The Commissioner will know that in the Netherlands a lively discussion is taking place as to who are so-called net payers .
My question to the Commissioner is : when can all relevant figures be issued , so that the discussion can at least be based on real figures ?
Mr President , the document , which was submitted to at the Ecofin Council and is now available to everyone , contains our assessment of the extent to which resources for structural funding or agricultural funding have been divided up among the various countries .
There again it assesses to what extent these break down into payments to the Commission in the form of VAT or GNP and to what extent they come from traditional national resources , mainly customs duties .
The document is now available and people can make their own judgements accordingly .
But I would stress that the issue is a complicated one , partly owing to all these problems on the outside .
As we now , for example , prepare for enlargement , we will invest heavily in straightening out the economies of the central and eastern European countries .
It will mean better security for Europe and , in the future , greater prosperity .
European companies will be involved in many such projects , but it is extremely difficult to tell which countries will reap the greatest rewards , and which the smallest .
But , as I said , the information relating to structural funding and agricultural funding is contained in the document I mentioned , which is at your disposal .
I would like to say to the Commissioner that what I believe Mr Sjöstedt and also Mr Cornelissen are seeking is not a measure of these indirect effects , which are of course always the result of everything , but what people want is quite simply a solid statistical basis with regard to the precise financial payments inwards and outwards .
Such a thing must in all likelihood exist .
We have of course payments coming in which clearly come from various countries .
It is also the case that each budget item obviously has a destination in a particular country .
It must be possible to make this simple division , i.e. according to the direct financial destination , both with regard to the EU 's total budget and , in this case , with regard to the increases which Parliament has proposed .
I would also like to agree with Mr Cornelissen that it would be desirable if the big debate taking place all over our countries in the Union could be based on a very thorough statistical foundation .
Mr , President , as I said , this information , which relates to agricultural and structural funding , are in the document distributed by the Commission , which is available to everyone .
It accounts for more than 80 % of the budget .
Then , in the matters of external relations and administration , things get pretty complicated .
There will also be questions of interpretation relating to internal policy .
But I will say again why this matter of expenditure is not so simple .
For example , when we make guarantee funding payments in agriculture , often an exporting company might be , for instance , a company in Belgium which exports agricultural produce from France or Holland .
That is why things do not always balance out .
The other example is that we often require in our community programmes projects to involve companies or research institutes in at least three Member States .
But the account we are paying in to is generally geared to one Member State .

It is never possible to get fully accurate information on this , but we have strong indicators from a precise knowledge of how much everyone pays to the Community , what structural funds there are and what each Member State gets , and what is paid out of agricultural guarantee funds . Though some of it might move from one country to another .
Thank you very much , Mr Liikanen .
Mrs van Putten wishes to speak on a point of order .
Mr President , I would like to offer my apologies for having been held up , and arriving a little too late for the reply to my question .
I would like to express my reget .
Thank you , Mrs van Putten , but the Presidency has already received your apologies . We realize that Members have a great deal of work to do during the part-sessions .
Furthermore , in your particular case , the Presidency is aware of the highly responsible way in which you work .

The 1985 regulation sets out the Community rules for driving times and rest periods and article 4 ( 2 ) of the regulation exempts passenger vehicles carrying nine or fewer persons including the driver from the requirements relating to driving times and rest periods which are checked by means of a tachograph. article 13 ( a ) of that regulation permits national derogations which allow Member States to have passenger vehicles carrying up to 17 persons to be exempt from the requirements of the regulation .
The United Kingdom has taken advantage of this national derogation in respect of minibuses .
Within the EU United Kingdom rules are the exception .
There is , however , no inconsistency within Community law since other Member States have decided not to use the derogation for minibuses .
It means , however , that UK minibuses may only benefit from the exemption when they operate within the territory of the United Kingdom .
Maintaining a high level of road safety and the enforcement of driving times and rest periods has particular importance in international passenger transport which normally involves relatively long-distance driving .
The Commission , therefore , does not intend to propose any further exemptions from the requirements to fit minibuses with a tachograph .
I should like to thank Commissioner Kinnock for his enlightening reply .
I will certainly pass it on to a group of charity workers in my constituency who are trying to organize a trip to the European Union .
My follow-up question is : Does Commissioner Kinnock think that this national derogation is unhelpful and , as a result , would he be making any recommendations on a personal level to UK manufacturers to instal tachographs as a matter of course in the UK ?
That would deal with these difficulties .
I apologize if I come in too quickly , Mr President . I am used to responding in the Westminster fashion , which is to respond instantly to a question .
I understand the problem identified by the honourable Member .
However , I have to say that the arrangements for the installation of tachographs and the observation of driving times and so on that follows from that appear to have caused no problems in other Member States .
It is , of course , for the United Kingdom Government to decide whether they want to change from using the derogation to coming into full compliance with the law .
If that was to occur , the impediments to travel from the United Kingdom to the rest of the European Union in minibuses would disappear .
Thank you , Mr Kinnock , but may I remind you that whereas in the House of Commons you use a single language , here we work in 11 different languages .
Question No 35 by Tommy Waidelich ( H-0774 / 97 )
Subject : Commission document on road safety

A fresh approach to road safety is being discussed in Sweden , under which emphasis is placed amongst other things on the sharing of responsibility for road safety , between road users and those responsible for designing and operating the road transport system , and importance is also attached to the coordination of measures at local , national and European levels .
In view of this , will the Commission state how many people have been killed or seriously injured in road accidents in Sweden and the rest of the EU in recent years , indicate the social cost of such deaths in Sweden and say whether it intends to take the necessary measures to reduce the number of people killed and seriously injured on Member States ' roads ?
I am grateful to the honourable Member for his question .
Sweden has a relatively good record on road safety with a death and injury rate that happily is below the European Union average .
Nevertheless , as the Swedish Government has repeatedly made clear , there is no cause for complacency when in 1994 , for instance , the number of people killed in traffic accidents in Sweden was 560 and the number injured was 21 , 083 .
The Swedish Minister , Mrs Uusmann , and her colleagues are to be commended for their latest efforts , to which the honourable Member has referred in his question .
The Commission has calculated that the direct cost of road accidents , based on the cost of police , medical and emergency services and vehicle repairs , and the economic output lost as a result of deaths , is ECU 45 billion a year in the Community as a whole .
When divided by the 45 , 000 fatalities annually caused by road accidents , this produces an average cost of a million ECUs per death .
In its communication last April on promoting road safety in the European Union , the Commission set out in detail its plans to build on the first action programme which ran from 1993 to 1996 .
The Commission 's actions to try to strengthen road safety will focus on three main areas .
Firstly , information gathering and dissemination in order to identify particular features of accidents and to assist with the development of policy priorities .
Secondly , initiating and supporting measures that can help prevent accidents , with an emphasis on the human factor and its interface with the traffic environment .
Thirdly , initiating and supporting measures to reduce the consequences of accidents when they occur .
Whenever possible we will , of course , promote the transfer of good practice , working in conjunction with national and local authorities , police forces , manufacturers and driver organizations .
I would like to thank the Commissioner for his answer .
I think that the strategy which the Commission is now putting forward is very sensible in many ways .
I also believe that it will help the transport cooperation which is currently taking place in the various Member States .
Just as the Commissioner said , it is the case that even though the number of accidents in Sweden has gone down , there is still a great desire to improve road safety .
Our vision is to achieve zero injuries and zero deaths in one year .
I think above all that the profitability calculations which the Commission emphasizes are a very positive new way of working , to quite simply provide more encouragement for the work on profitability calculations in the question of traffic safety measures .
Just as the Commissioner said , people then include the costs of accidents .
In that way we can also justify efforts in a financial way .
Lastly I would just like to put a follow-up question : Does the Commissioner believe that during the next year more concrete initiatives are going to be taken on the basis of this programme ?
I am thinking , among other things , of the directive on vehicle safety etc .
Thank you , Mr Waidelich .
Mr Kinnock , you now have the floor - in the European Parliament , not the House of Commons .
Mr President , they might have only one language in the House of Commons , there are however a variety of accidents which from time to time cause difficulty with understanding .
That is apart from the political reasons for failures of understanding , of course .
Could I say to Mr Waidelich that I am grateful for the comment that he made in his supplementary .
There are further initiatives to be contemplated by the Commission , not least the pursuit of a proposal last made in the late 1980s on trying to secure a uniform lower level of tolerated blood alcohol content amongst drivers .
I think it appropriate to particularly draw attention to this at this time of year .
Road casualties are not only sometimes higher around Christmas and the New Year but have a particular tragedy attached to them .
All efforts to reduce accidents on the roads are obviously worthwhile , not only because of the huge savings that accrue but most of all because every life saved is a tragedy avoided , not only for the family that is bereaved of a loved one , but also of course for the people responsible for causing deaths and injuries .
I would just take this opportunity provided by the honourable Member 's question to make a special appeal that right throughout the Union this year people will avoid drinking and driving and show particular care , especially in winter weather , to try to save lives and avoid tragedy .
I am also interested in this question .
I think that the reply from the Commissioner is good with regard to the general contributions which the EU and the Commission can make , such as providing and gathering information .
It is perhaps going a bit too far to believe the Commission should produce a unified report on avoiding injury in the individual Member States .
I have a supplementary question .
This seems to be mostly about roads .
It would be very interesting to know , based on what we are now discussing , which kinds of traffic are safer or less safe , especially which kinds are safer , so that we who are able to encourage traffic measures concentrate on the right kind of traffic .
Is it possible to get a reasonably satisfactory answer to this question ?
I am grateful to the honourable Member for his question .
It permits me to point out that in the course of the work that I described in outline earlier , our efforts to examine the human factor in accidents and the interface with the environment include attention to the effect of different kinds of infrastructure on the potential for accidents .
The traditional method of making measurements and assessments of this kind is found wanting simply because it does not take into account particular sets of circumstances .
For instance , an improved road might contribute to the prevention of accidents .
However , it can also induce increases in speed which increase the severity of accidents .
We are trying in our work therefore to make distinctions within the general definitions that will assist local and national authorities in the design of infrastructure to enhance to the greatest possible extent the safety of road travel .
I hope that the honourable Member , like others , will not only seek to exploit the information that we are able eventually to provide but to see that it is applied effectively at local level .
Question No 36 by Florus Wijsenbeek ( H-0785 / 97 )
Subject : Rail shuttle between the Netherlands and Poland
Is the Commission aware that the rail goods shuttle between the Netherlands and Poland operated by Poltrein BV has had to close down because of a lack of cooperation and because of bureaucracy on the part of the Poles ?
Is the Commission prepared to take steps to enable this contribution towards shifting transport from roads to the railways to continue ?
The Commission is aware of the problems identified by the honourable Member in his question which have been experienced by Poltrein in developing or trying to develop an intermodal shuttle service between Almelo in the Netherlands and Pozna in Poland .
It is , however , incorrect to state that the service has had to close down .
It is , in fact , continuing on a twice-weekly basis .
Some of the problems which Poltrein has experienced have been of a commercial nature .
The operating company recently informed the Commission that it is in negotiations for a possible merger .
One consequence of that merger would be a modification of the service to run from Rotterdam to ód & # x017C ; in Poland , which should help to make the service commercially viable .
The operator has also informed the Commission of a number of operating problems due to customs procedures in Poland and difficulties with the Polish railways as well as with rail companies in the European Union .
The Commission intends to raise these problems , where appropriate , in the relevant subcommittees of the European Community Poland-Europe Committee , with a view to resolving them and with a view also to trying to improve the viability of this type of service which could potentially be extremely valuable .
I would like to draw the Commissioner 's attention to the fact - and this may be question of translation - that in my question it says in Dutch : " would eventually have to stop ' , in other words would eventually have to stop their operations .
It does not say that they have already been stopped .
But , Commissioner , I am very grateful to you for your answer and that you want to raise the matter during the talks with Poland .
But I would nonetheless like to point out , that while things continue the way they are , while the train stops for an extremely long time and very frequently , as result of long border procedures and constant closing of border posts , then rail transport in Eastern Europe , and beyond Poland in the CIS be disastrous .
Quite the reverse , road operations will gain power , and the Commissioner will know that Polish and Hungarian road use is increasing extremely rapidly ; so this is totally contrary to the Commissioner 's wishes .
Would he , in addition to raising the matter , like to make concrete proposals and , if necessary , give Polish Customs a helping hand to speed up the matter ?
Mr President , I have no supplementary question .
I enjoyed my one question in question time .
However , since you are giving me the floor , I might be permitted a comment .
I am far from criticizing the way you conduct your office .
Only , when we have so many questions to the Commissioner -and I have been waiting for months now , Mr Kinnock , to put a question myself - then it is bad if you permit too many supplementaries , because it is entirely up to you how many you allow .
This means , therefore , that I will not get another chance today and must wait another three months .
No , Mr Schmid , that is not a matter for my own free will , but is stipulated by our Rules of Procedure .
All I can do , Mr Schmid , is try to interpret the Rules of Procedure as flexibly as possible , but I must also make sure that we keep to time , otherwise other questions suffer .
However , you can make your views known to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities , to see if we need to modify Question Time . I am sure that committee will be very interested in your views .
Mr Cornelissen has the floor , for a supplementary question .
With reference to the Commissioner 's good news that the rail freight freeway between Rotterdam and Italy will soon be commencing , am I to understand from his response that sufficient agreements have been made to prevent problems at the internal borders , and , Mr President , will he go as far as to make an estimate of the average speed of the freeway ?
On the basis of information as recent as last week , I have every reason to suppose that the service with the first rail freight freeway will commence within weeks .
I would not want to be more specific than that .
I do not want to made a liar for the sake of a couple of days .
But we are not far away from the commencement of the service .
Since the time allocated to this set of questions has now expired , Questions Nos 37 to 42 will be dealt with in writing .
This question concerns the closure of Chernobyl and more particularly about the completion of two nuclear power stations which have to serve as alternative energy capacity .
In answer to the question , I would like to say that the Commission was asked by the relevant Ukrainian organizations to provide partial funding by means of a Euratom loan for the completion of these two reactors .
In this context and in accordance with the relevant Euratom procedure the administration of the Commission has taken a number of measures with a view to forming a judgment of the various aspects of the project to enable the Commission in due course to take a responsible decision .
The Commission can confirm that the EIB is at present preparing its recommendation with regards to the completion and the upgrading of the two reactors R4 and K2 .
The Commission also confirms that the American firm Stone & Webster is at present conducting an economic analysis of the project as part of the Ukrainian request for a supplementary loan for the R4 / K2 project .
The Commission , moreover , is presently financing EU consultants through the Tacis programme to help Ukrainian organizations gather the data which it has to submit according to Euratom and EBRD procedures for financiers .
This obviously also applies to cost estimates , and as far as the accuracy of this estimate is concerned , the cost estimate for the two reactors must , as with all industrial projects , be adjusted constantly , in order to , amongst other things , include contingencies for the project .
This factor should be taken into account when earlier estimates are referred to , such as the estimate used by international panel chaired by Professor Surrey .
Risk analyses have confirmed that the most important risks for the R4 / K2 project have been mapped and have reasonably been taken into account in the estimate , including contingencies .
I would furthermore like to point out that a continuous exchange of views is taking place between financiers and the project management .
This way the economic and financial analyses of Euratom and EBRD are always based on the most recent data .
I am extremely surprised by the Commissioner 's response and I can only characterize it as gobbledygook .
The study commissioned by the EBRD under the memorandum of understanding by Professor Surrey is the only official study and I would like to ask the Commissioner if he has actually read it .
I would recommend that he do so .
It is quite clear that nuclear power can never be the least cost option and the least cost option must be adopted under the memorandum of understanding .
Furthermore , can I have the Commission 's confirmation that it will stick to the memorandum 's criteria as to safety and that we will always ensure its safety is equal to that of the EU ?
I do not want to hear another gobbledygook response .
I really want the Commissioner to read the report .
It is extremely serious because we could have another Chernobyl .
I am just surprised as the respected representative , because the respected representative will know that when the Surrey report was published , it received serious criticism from the clients , and that a number of shortcomings were found , in particular with respect to the proposition that all thermal power stations are in operational condition , whilst most of the thermal power stations in the Ukraine are twenty years old .
I would like to mention another point of criticism .
No estimate had been included for the investments needed for thermal power stations , in particular with regard to the clean-up of the environment .
Another point of criticism was that the investments in R4 / K2 was not spread over the entire lifespan of these power stations , but merely over ten years .
Finally , it contained no analysis of the macroeconomic consequences of the recommendation to import coal and gas .
So as a result of the criticism it was decided to charge Stone & Webster to undertake a supplementary investigation .
This expert consultancy , which has been asked by the United States to conduct a further investigation , is currently undertaking this , and during the first phase we asked Stone & Webster to continue calculating an economic computer model with different parameters , and this resulted in a report to the bank which was used by the working party of the Board of Directors of the EBRD in August and September 1997 .
This report concluded in terms of probability that one unit would probably reach the least cost phase very soon , namely in the year 2002 , and that later this might also be the case for the second unit .
The Board of Directors asked the bank to compute this analysis further and Stone & Webster is presently engaged in this .
At the end of January a second report is expected , after which the Board of Directors of the EBRD will discuss it further in February 1998 .
Finally , I can inform the respected representative that the question of safety standards will obviously be examined closely , because that is what it is ultimately all about , and that when these two unfinished power stations are completed , it will be done in way which corresponds with safety requirements in the West .
Question No 44 by Heidi Hautala ( H-0861 / 97 )
Subject : Proposed project for the completion of Khmelnitski 2 and Rovno 4 nuclear reactors ( k2 / r4 ) in the Ukraine
The President of the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) , in answer to a question of mine in the EMAC Committee on October 28th , stated that EIB employs the Least Cost planning principle in its economic advice to Euratom on nuclear loans , but their advice that Mochovce was not Least Cost was ignored .
For the completion of k2 / r4 , the only valid official Least Cost Study under the Memorandum of Understanding ( MOU ) shows that the project is far from Least Cost , though efforts are being made to get around this .
As Ukraine addresses its under-priced energy supplies , the proposed project will become even less Least Cost .
Could Euratom afford to again ignore the opinion of the EIB , or will the Commission accept , for Euratom , the official view of EIB as final on the economics of the completion project , rather than granting a loan which would as a consequence not actually help the Ukraine ?
This concerns questions about to the role of the European Investment Bank in all of this .
The Investment Bank is requested to make recommendations concerning all Euratom loans , and these recommendations will be taken into account by the Commission in the decision process .
I would like to point out , however , that the decisions on Euratom loans is not within the province of the Commission , and that it will be taken on the basis of a broad range of internal analyses and external studies from competent institutions .
As far as the EIB recommendation with regard to Mochovce is concerned , I would like to remind you that the Commission did not take a decision , as the Slovak authorities decided to withdraw their loan application to the EBRD and Euratom before a definite decision was taken .
The Slovak authorities consider it more desirable to complete the Mochovce reactors themselves , and this means that the European Commission is no longer involved in the project , and it therefore cannot give a guarantee that there will eventually be a level of safety which meets Western standards .
As far as the K2 / R4 project is concerned , the Commission is awaiting the recommendation by the EIB concerning financial and economic aspects .
In due course the Commission will take its decision in complete accordance with the appropriate decision by the Council .
As far as the economic aspects are concerned , the Commission is basing its evaluation on a series of external analyses , including the position of the EIB and the EBRD .
Mr President , my question in a way referred to whether the economic recommendations made by the European investment banks have any importance when the Commission can make a resolution based on something quite separate from economic questions .
The issue is obviously a serious one as the question arises as to what the Commission 's officially undeclared and , as it were , subliminally expressed thinking will be behind decisions taken when it embarks on the Euratom projects .
Would it possibly be that the Commission will be doing all it can to support new projects in the nuclear power industry in Eastern Europe ?
There are many of us who would be against this .
We cannot accept that the nuclear power industry be continually showered with new projects , when in fact it would be a lot more economical , rational and safer to lend support to , for example , natural gas .
I am fully aware of the interest in this Parliament on the state of affairs concerning the closure of Chernobyl , because that is what we are ultimately discussing , and it is also why we are presently having a debate on what type of alternative energy capacity will be installed .
During the past year I have regularly tried to inform the European Parliament about the situation , and about the further progress in regard to the decisions which were taken by the G7 at the time , to see to it as much as possible that the original promise by the Ukrainian government to close Chernobyl by 2000 would be realised .
We are presently in a critical phase : at the time the G7 promised to examine and cooperate so that the two incomplete reactors would be completed in a responsible way , and on the basis of generally accepted safety conditions . The Commission for its part has , during the past months , promised to co-finance this completion to a maximum of 50 % of this project , on conditions and on the basis of advice such as is customary with Euratom loans .
With respect to Euratom loans , the first prerequisite of these is the economic survival chances of project concerned , whilst as far as the EBRD loans are concerned , the least cost elements also play a part , as well as a number of other conditions laid down in the EBRD statutes .
To complete all this , Stone & Webster is presently conducting a supplementary study , about which I informed to the previous questioner . During the first few months of next year we therefore expect there to be more clarity on the position of the EBRD or on alternative funding possibilities , as it is in any case certain that , whatever the advice from the EIB with regard to the participation of Euratom , the Commission will never be able to go any further than funding 50 % of the project .
So should the EBRD at some point not be able to provide its loan on the basis of the recommendations , alternative possibilities will have to sought .
In the event that these are not found , then the categorical closure of Chernobyl in the year 2000 will be in danger .
That is what is at stake .
One thing to conclude , Mr President .
It goes without saying , of course , that the Commission does not pursue a nuclear policy , in the sense of trying to obtain as many nuclear contracts for industries in the Member States .
That absolutely cannot be the intention .
We are trying to arrive at a sensible solution here , which is entirely related to our fear that the safety of power stations in Chernobyl which are still operational will not be sufficiently guaranteed .
I would like to add once again : Chernobyl draws most attention because of the disaster at the time , but we have grave concerns about a number of different installations , also in the accession countries , where we need all the attention we can muster to try and improve their safety .
We have now come to the end of the time allocated for questions to the Commission , so Questions Nos 45 to 90 will be answered in writing .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.05 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Beef and veal posing a potential health risk
The next item is the statement by the Commission on beef and veal products posing a potential health risk
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am grateful for the opportunity to inform Parliament about some developments in relation to aspects of Community veterinary policy .
I would like to refer first to the question of what is known as SAM or specified risk material .
As far as this problem is concerned , I would like to remind you that the Commission wanted to resolve this question a year ago , but was not supported by the Member States .
I admit that this is a difficult decision , but in my opinion it is necessary and fully justified in terms of health policy .
I later argued that a decision should be taken in July on the basis of scientific recommendations then available .
But it was clear even then that this decision would have to be amended before it came into force as further scientific recommendations appeared .
Unfortunately the Member States could not reach agreement on this either .
Yesterday the Standing Veterinary Committee decided to postpone the date for introducing the Commission 's proposal by three months .
But no-one should assume that this 3-month postponement offers an opportunity to weaken the decision .
We intend exactly the opposite .
We not only need to refine some technical details of the decision , but must also take account of the completely new scientific discoveries which we have only just obtained , and which further reinforce us in our preventive strategy .
Several Member States have already introduced national measures for specified risk material , and I emphasize that none of them intends to lower the high level of protection which they aim for in this way , quite the reverse .
But it is all the more necessary to harmonize the measures at Community level .
To come to a second area , you certainly know about the new scientific discoveries which have recently been announced in the United Kingdom .
These have persuaded the British government to introduce some stricter measures .
The recommendation by SEAC , the British scientific advisory committee , has resulted in new findings about the infectiousness of certain nervous tissue along the spinal column and of red bone marrow .
These findings have been checked by the Commission 's Standing Scientific Committee , and are mentioned in a statement which was published last week .
I can assure you that we will take full account of this statement in reviewing the decision about specified risk material over the next few weeks .
The United Kingdom had the option of either informing consumers and giving them the opportunity to decide for themselves , or stipulating that meat must be deboned before being marketed .
The British government decided on the second option .
The deboning regulation for beef which is sold in the United Kingdom will apply equally to beef from other Member States and third countries .
This is neither - as was falsely stated - a full-scale embargo nor a violation of Community law .
All other proposed measures by the United Kingdom regarding beef and beef products from other Member States and third countries are now being checked by the Commission departments for conformity to Community law .
Another important aspect , which was mentioned in the statement by the Commission 's Standing Scientific Committee and has resulted in all sorts of speculation in the media , is the danger from sheep meat .
Let me emphasize that there is no link with any suspected danger from scrapie .
We have been exposed to scrapie for centuries , and there is no reason to assume that it can now be passed on to humans .
On the other hand , we know from tests that BSE can be passed on to sheep , and if they are infected it causes symptoms which are very similar to those of scrapie .
The Scientific Committee therefore pointed out the risk that sheep might be infected with BSE if they come into contact with infected meat or bonemeal , and that this results in some risk .
Last month I submitted a proposal for a decision to the Council of Agriculture Ministers on the acceptance of the negotiated draft agreement . This is the agreement with the USA , which in my opinion has a chance of succeeding in the Community .
We managed to retain our level of protection in the area of public health , and to persuade the Americans , for the first time , to recognize the regionalization principle as the basis of Community animal health policy .
Unfortunately , only a few days before the Council discussed the Commission 's proposal for the first time , the USA published its proposal about recognizing the situation about animal health , and it is unacceptable to the European Union .
The US Department of Agriculture has not recognized some Member States as free of epidemics like swine fever or Newcastle disease , although these diseases have not occurred in these Member States for a long time .
We have invited the US authorities to come to the Community and check the situation for itself .
Following this invitation , a team from the US Department of Agriculture came to Europe last week , to give itself a picture of the measures for combatting epidemics in the Member States .
However , I would like to mention here another problem regarding the USA , which has occurred recently .
The USA announced last Friday that it is temporarily suspending imports of ruminants and ruminant products from EU Member States and certain other European countries , because of concerns about BSE .
It decided to impose this ban until satisfactory information is received about the control and monitoring of BSE in the relevant states .
The USA obviously has a perfect right to take precautionary measures for health protection from BSE risks .
However , the Commission is not of the opinion that this particular measure is justified , or that it is compatible with the USA 's international obligations under the world trade agreement on health and phytosanitary measures .
As basis for such measures , the SBS agreement recognizes the regulations of the appropriate international organizations , in this case the IEO .
In its letter to the authorities of the Member States , the USA claimed that it is BSE-free according to IEO criteria , and would act within the IEO trade regulations .
Neither of these claims is correct .
The USA has only recently banned the feeding of scrapie-infected sheep to cattle , and furthermore has no animal carcass disposal plants operating to the standards required to destroy the BSE agent .
Moreover , the IEO allows trade with countries in which BSE is present , but the USA has banned all imports from Europe , even from those states without a single case of BSE so far .
I very much regret that the USA has taken this action , particularly so suddenly , without prior consultation and at a crucial point in our discussions about the conclusion of the veterinary agreement .
As you can deduce from my explanations and the presence of my colleague Emma Bonino , the Commission is guided in these important health questions by a high level of consumer protection , both on the internal market and in trade with third countries .
Mr President , Mr Fischler , like my colleagues I have been listening to you attentively , and you will not be surprised to hear that what you have said certainly does not make us all perfectly happy .
But as I have often said elsewhere , being MEPs does not give us an automatic right to happiness .
Allow me to make a few comments .
In the last few days , I have again and again defended the view that the decision to postpone the implementation of the regulations on specified risk materials does not spell imminent disaster .
Admittedly , I would have liked us to have at last had a safe , protected system by 1 January .
Now let me consider four points which are important in this context and also create tension between the two scientific bodies with which we are concerned , namely the Scientific Steering Committee and the Standing Veterinary Committee .
Before getting into detail , I want to ask you , Mr Fischler , and perhaps you too , Mrs Bonino , whether you believe competition between these bodies is now , at last , at an end , and that the Scientific Steering Committee and the Standing Veterinary Committee are both giving equal priority to health policy and preventive consumer protection ?
Or do you believe , Mr Fischler , that it is still the case - and I know this is an assumption - that the Standing Veterinary Committee , at least , represents the individual interests of the Member States from which the representatives come , and not necessarily the position of the whole European Union ?
Now let me say something about the individual points .
The position is that the proposal on specified risk material has been postponed by three months , from 1 January to 1 April .
We have three or four areas to consider .
If we leave out the USA , there are three main areas .
Do you think we will have succeeded in clarifying all these questions in the remaining time ? I think even the scientists - who all happen to be men - will use the Christmas holiday period to celebrate Christmas .
What will happen about cosmetics and pharmaceuticals ?
Are you sure that we will succeed in regulating this area , both within the European Union and relations with the USA , and also in regulating what happens to pharmaceuticals which have already been produced ?
How will you evaluate the new specification of specified risk materials , even in the Standing Veterinary Committee ?
Will you include the spine ?
Will you include the lungs , ganglia and so on ?
How will you ensure geographic distinction , and will you encourage the Standing Veterinary Committee to cooperate with the Scientific Steering Committee ?
One last point in my first speaking time - because luckily I have another speaking time at the end - the USA .
Mr Fischler , it is ridiculous for the USA to say the control facilities in the Union would be insufficient .
Are you prepared to go before the WTO arbitration tribunal and tell the USA that what they are doing with hormones and pesticides is a scandal ?
If they think that they are clean as regards BSE , we want that shown before the WTO arbitration tribunal !
Are you prepared to do this for the European Union ?
Mr President , I explicitly welcome the present decision , because it gives us the opportunity to make the necessary corrections and adjustments to earlier decisions .
I say this , knowing that of course we are on a tightrope in this sensitive debate , to ensure that preventive consumer protection is an absolute priority in future , but equally to represent matters more realistically and more distinctly , particularly the risk materials decision and the different regional rates of incidence of BSE .
Let me say quite clearly that it was a wrong scientific and political ideology from the start to define a part of a potentially infectious animal as doubtful in terms of health policy , so that the rest could still be sold .
Furthermore , the new scientific discoveries are not so new .
I would point out , in particular , that a number of scientists , the minority opinion , pointed out the problem of lymphatic and nervous tissues , but from 1990 onward they were repeatedly shot down .
But at the same time , that means far too little was actually done in the past , precisely in the areas where BSE exists .
Either an animal is healthy and suitable to be fed to humans or it is not .
There is no in-between where BSE is concerned !
So I think it is right to take other criteria , such as geographical location , more into account here , as well as evaluation of the materials .
In this connection , I would also like to say clearly that both the announcement by the USA and the announcement by Mr Cunningham must be explicitly rejected .
With his announcement , Mr Cunningham is endangering the goodwill we have shown in the BSE monitoring committee about moving step by step towards abolition of the export ban under clearly stated conditions .
The announcement breaks the law , so to speak , by going against a current decision by the Standing Veterinary Committee , and will eventually backfire against Britain 's own interests .
I also propose , Mr Fischler and Mrs Bonino , that we take the opportunity to talk with you at the end of January or beginning of February in Parliament 's standing committees .
At the same time , our group will ask the chairman of the Scientific Steering Committee to report to the parliamentary committees , so that at the beginning of February , before the final decision , we can have a transparent and open debate involving Parliament .
I also think the decision now made is not a gamble with preventive consumer protection , but gives us an opportunity to correct many things in the well-intentioned panic decision of 30 July of this year , and get things moving in the right direction .
Mr President , it seems to me that the three months we are taking before implementing these regulations - that is , by 1 April 1998 - demonstrate that more cautious decisions are being taken without panic .
For the time being we should take care not to thwart this attempt to reflect , to use this period of time to extend our knowledge from the viewpoint that health protection is of greater concern , knowledge which , we have to say , is not yet sufficiently reassuring .
The simpler , more trivial , but even more agonizing question asked by the people remains unanswered : how can we still be infected by mad cow disease , by Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease ?
No-one has yet managed to tell them .
When we were in Great Britain , we talked to families of victims of the disease : they told us they ate a perfectly normal diet , the same as those of other members of the family , certainly not a dangerous diet , in the sense that they had not eaten brain or other so-called parts at risk , those we are now banning .
These answers are therefore the first we have to find , and I think that , once again , we can find them in Great Britain .
In my opinion , the English scientists , who quickly found an early answer on transmissibility from BSE to Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease , already know many of these answers .
With regard to the Americans , Commission Fischler , I do not think they know a lot about the situation in Europe , but even if they do not say much , they make it clear that they are in favour of dialogue .
So , frankness , clarity and decision first , but always towards a single solution : not to promote trade , but to protect public health .
Mr President , this is obviously an initial reaction , and clearly we are going to have to come back to this in more detail .
Firstly , I want to put on record deep concern about what the United States has done .
That has to be resisted firmly , because it sends a very negative international signal that is not fair to the Union at large or to some of the Member States within it .
I am afraid that it could have a cascade effect and certainly will damage consumer confidence within Europe , irrespective of its actual trade effect .
Secondly , I am not entirely clear from listening to the Commission whether the incipient ban on trade into the United Kingdom has the goodwill of the Commissioner or not .
I hope that further partitioning of the market will not be upheld by the Commission .
It would be wrong , pending legislation being adopted in three months , to have additional internal bans . That should be resisted .
Finally , I should like to ask whether it is the politics of the scientific community or the science of the political community that is holding up the SAM legislation , because every time we delay these things , again we raise doubts in the consumer 's mind .
Even if there is very low probability of risk , we damage both consumer confidence and producer confidence .
Mr President , Commissioner Fischler , Commissioner Bonino , you will remember our discussion in the monitoring committee , when the risk material measure was introduced , about regionalization , that is , restrictions to this measure , and Mr Fischler , you will also remember the constructive disagreement we had , because we argued that if we have no regionalization , that is , no restrictions , we also have no possibility of organizing an escape from BSE .
You decided the opposite , and that is just where you fell into the trap .
You did not think where the raw materials for pharmaceutical and cosmetic products come from .
You had to decide on an exceptional regulation , and now Borchert , led by Germany and not wanting the risk material to be removed , blocks it , and lets you fall into the trap , and you have to postpone your measure by three months .
In my opinion , the danger of infection by BSE was in the early years , but of course it must also be taken seriously that over three months worth of material which should really not be in the food chain will now continue to be consumed .
If you had included a restriction , you would also have had no disagreement with the USA .
I obviously think it is a scandal that under Borchert 's leadership the opportunity to recognize New Zealand and Australia as BSE-free was blocked , although that would be possible if Germany is not recognized .
Here the Council is blocking at the cost of consumer protection .
But , Mr Fischler , Mrs Bonino , if you had followed our suggestion of including a restriction and not staking everything just on the internal market , we would not have the present situation .
I hope it can be retrieved .
I repeat , we have not reached the end of BSE .
Regionalization also involves risks , but we must do it , to get protection going in an organized way and provide a low-risk escape route from BSE - because it is impossible to avoid all risk .
For our part , Mr Fischler , Mrs Bonino , we will continue to make constructive proposals and cooperate in this matter for the benefit of everyone , I hope , including consumers .
Mr President , I wish to begin by saying how much I appreciate the Commission 's presence here in strength tonight .
This reflects its concern , which we all share in this House , about the depth of the crisis and the way in which it is expanding - it seems to be in a lot of directions at once .
This must give us all grave cause for concern , because I worry that the whole issue is getting out of hand as well as , arguably , out of proportion .
I should like to thank Commissioner Fischler for his frankness and openness in explaining to us each step which has been taken and in sharing with us the various decisions taken by the Scientific and Veterinary Committee .
I look forward also to hearing from Commissioner Bonino in due course her perspective on these matters .
It is equally positive that it is now quite clearly a majority view that this is a European problem and that we have to have harmonization on a European level .
Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf was correct that regionalization , which I have been stressing as a possible way out for some time , is now being taken very seriously .
Perhaps if anything positive can come out of the United States ' position , it is that we are now looking seriously at that as an option .
Certainly I deplore what the US has done .
It seems to me to be typical of the high-handed way in which it behaves when its trade interests are at stake .
At other times it invokes the WTO to prevent deals which the EU believes in , such as the trade in bananas , to give one example .
What is to be done ?
This is what the farmers are asking .
The farmers in Scotland are saying : tell us what we have to do and we will do it ; we will take all the eradication measures necessary , we will produce certification .
We need to have a clear indication from the British Government and from the Commission .
There is a clear anxiety and determination to find a solution - not to hide behind smoke-screens but to find a solution .
I was intrigued by Commissioner Fischler 's statement that the British Government had various options .
It could have declared risks .
For example , it could have compared the risk of eating lamb chops or other meat on the bone with smoking cigarettes , or drinking alcohol .
This is an option .
I wonder whether the Commissioner feels that would have been more helpful than what seems to be a total ban on all kinds of bone-in meat .
I wonder where the Commissioner thinks we are going in the near future .
The anger on both sides of the North Channel with the Irish , Scottish and Welsh farmers all at each other 's throats has been caused by the frustration of not knowing how to go on from where we are .
One last point : could the Commissioner confirm that the failure to address the problem of the exchange rate and the compensation of the British pound has been an exacerbating factor , which is clearly within the competence of the Member States to resolve ?
Mr President , first of all I am saddened that we do not have a resolution before us tonight and that we do not have a vote on this particular subject .
That should be put on record .
Since March 1997 , beef farmers in my constituency in Northern Ireland have watched their business being destroyed by the effects of BSE .
They have waited in vain for a positive position to come forward from Europe and , indeed , from two United Kingdom Governments .
All we have experienced is two steps forward and three steps backwards on every occasion .
Their patience has been pushed to the limit and the miracle is that it did not boil over before .
While no-one wants to see public demonstration , I have to say I understand the anxiety and share their concern .
There has been a trailing of feet by the Commission and the Council .
We need and require a sharper decisionmaking process , one that can end the duplicity .
Farmers in the United Kingdom suffer not only from the BSE problems but also from the strength of the pound sterling .
No decision has been taken to date by the United Kingdom Government to compensate for the green pound differential .
That is , of course , an internal UK problem but it is aggravated by the advantage that exists for other Member States to export into our market .
This is the point UK farmers rebel against .
One can understand this and could be forgiven for believing that the advantage other Member States have at present encourages them to maintain the status quo .
The unfair competition must end .
Quite frankly , if Mr Cunningham takes the decision to ensure that unfair beef from other Member States will not enter the United Kingdom after 1 January , then he will have my total support .
I would like to put two questions to the two Commissioners who I am pleased to see here and who are at the coalface of this problem .
The first one is : on the beef certified herd scheme , are you now going to accept the decisions that have come forward and have been accepted by the United Kingdom Government ?
Will you in January , at the next Council meeting , agree that the beef certified herd scheme is acceptable , is positive and can be adopted by Europe as a scheme that is safe ?
Will you also move decisively - not drag your feet - on the bornafter date scheme ?
Unless we get positive answers on those two points then the farmers in the United Kingdom will continue to demonstrate and they will do it , quite frankly , with my support .
Mr President , we return to this issue in a very specific context , a context of the risk of a fall in guaranteed prices of around 20 % to 30 % , at a time when we have not recovered from the consequences of the BSE crisis .
We discovered that a dead cow was used for meal in Belgium .
We discovered later that even in Luxembourg a cow was infected with bovine spongiform encephalopathy , and its carcass was also turned into meal .
We have come to the conclusion that controls are apparently ineffective .
We held a committee of inquiry . Its chairman is here .
We have a committee monitoring the results of the inquiry .
Its rapporteur is also here .
The United States , which is going to send us hormone meat , can enjoy the luxury of rejecting our meat , on the pretext that it is hazardous .
New scientific data has told us that meat has become hazardous .
Our British friends , who had no hesitation in contaminating everything they could , are now lording it over us saying they do not want to be contaminated by us now ! The pharmaceutical pressure group is continuing to back gelatin in medication capsules and so forth .
Even Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf has concerns , although he had no scruples before , and acted to prevent a motion of censure and was not worried about environmental problems , despite being a member of the Green Group .
I think we were wrong to walk away from the political shock waves that would have been provoked by putting the burden of responsibility fairly and squarely on the Commission 's shoulders .
The abscess would have been drained immediately .
Instead all this is going to go on indefinitely .
Mr President , I would like to ask Commissioner Fischler what exactly he is doing here .
Is he wanting us to sympathize with him in the plight that is caused by this postponement ?
Is he wanting to share with us the difficulties that come from the confusion we still have about tallow derivatives and about pharmaceuticals which seem , within the committees , to be inducing some sort of paralysis ?
Or is he wanting to say to us that he understands that other people , including in the United Kingdom , are now having to take unilateral action because of a series of decisions that have not been made despite what we understood , at the Agriculture Council last July and subsequently , was to be a particular course of action ?
I think the United Kingdom is right to do what it has done .
The Commissioner acknowledged - he is shaking his head now , but I think he acknowledged - that the UK is not in violation of any treaty or legal obligations in terms of requiring imported meat coming into the country from 1 January - which is when the new provision should have come into effect - to be accompanied by certification that specific risk materials have been removed and also to require that that meat , when sold in the shops , is sold off the bone , as is now the case for United Kingdom products .
The problem is - and I put it to Commissioner Bonino , who is going to reply to this debate - that it sometimes seems to observers , who have the safety of the consumer first and foremost in their minds , that we are not really making the rules properly in this discussion .
Yes , there must be new precautions and to some extent new safety measures .
But when safety measures are in place and appear to be working , they should also be acknowledged .
That is a grievance in the United Kingdom ; that the rules seem constantly to be changing .
The other thing I would say in conclusion is that we have another question which I particularly put to Mrs Bonino , and that concerns the confusion that is coming out of the scientific advisory committees now in terms of what they are actually recommending .
Curious things went round the world about sheep meat , about lamb .
It took us quite some time to find out what was actually being said by the learned individuals concerned .
We do not have a definitive statement yet about what exactly is intended by this committee .
That cannot be right .
It seems to me , therefore , that we now have the three worst possible ingredients as we face the new year .
I say this with some sadness because I acknowledge what everyone here , including the two Commissioners , has done .
We have nervous consumers who are often nervous for no reason .
We have a farming industry which is in ruins , and we have Member States that are at odds once more because they are scrabbling around with directives and instructions that they cannot properly understand , precisely because of the lack of harmonization that Commissioner Fischler referred to at the outset .
That cannot be right , it cannot be good .
We have got to do better in the new year .
Mr President , I thank the Commissioner for his statement .
I am seriously concerned , as many others are , with the ever-deteriorating state of the beef market and the confusion being created with regard to the vital matter of public health .
We have in the European Union a common market in beef and in other products .
This market has worked extremely well and when serious animal health problems arise , such as foot-and-mouth disease , swine fever or Newcastle disease , the geographical area involved is isolated and suspended from the common trade arrangements until that disease is controlled and eradicated .
This system has served Europe well and can , if correctly used , eradicate BSE completely from the British herd .
This is our objective .
Very steady progress is now , perhaps belatedly , being made .
The disease figures show this very clearly .
There is no doubt that the British Government made very serious mistakes in its handling of the BSE crisis , but after much delay it has now put in place a well funded and scientifically based eradication programme which is working well .
But the support of other Member States is being put at risk by the ban imposed by the government yesterday or the day before on imports of bone-in beef and lamb , and also the failure by the authorities in Britain to keep the ports open , as is required by the operation of the single market .
The disastrous tit-for-tat mishandling is destroying all our efforts to rebuild consumer trust and confidence through the complete eradication of the disease .
It has also given huge advantage to our trading partners at the expense of our own producers , also without scientific base .
On behalf of the thousands of beef producers I want to appeal to the Commission and the British Government to act together to pay more attention to the real scientists and less to the biased commentators who are continuously getting it wrong .
Mr President , I would like to begin my brief contribution by again thanking Commissioner Fischler for his openness and frankness from the very moment that this very serious matter arose .
But I have to say that the continuing campaign in Great Britain against the import of Irish beef is and must be a matter of concern for all committed Members of the European Union .
It is my view that the European Commission cannot stand idly by on this matter .
It must protect the interests of all Member States .
One Member State cannot be allowed to write the rules as it goes along .
One country cannot be allowed to disrupt the single market .
I am particularly angry at the attacks being made on Irish beef .
There is growing evidence that British supermarkets and depots are being warned not to purchase Irish beef .
Irish beef is known throughout Europe as a quality product .
I challenge the British authorities to let the consumers make up their own minds and ensure that Irish beef is sold in British supermarkets .
Every country has a right to promote its produce , but not at the expense of others ' .
What Britain is seeking to do at present is effectively to rig the market in its own favour .
The single market is based on the premise of a fair marketing environment .
Clearly , at this moment in time , Britain will not accept this basic ground rule .
Hopefully , in the days ahead , we can redouble our political and diplomatic efforts in order to ensure the restoration of a balanced and fair competitive situation .
Clearly the British Government is using Ireland as a scapegoat for its failure to address the genuine problems of its own farmers .
Mr President , I should like to ask Commissioner Fischler how he can justify the decision to postpone the enforcement of the ban on specified risk materials and whether it is not indeed appropriate that it has been postponed until April Fools ' Day .
If the problem is damage to our beef markets and to consumer confidence , is the solution not to take the toughest measures to restore that consumer confidence ?
We know there is much less BSE on the continent than in the United Kingdom , but we also know there is some .
The toughest measures must be taken on the continent , as they have been in the UK .
I suspect the Commissioner agrees , otherwise he would not have given tacit approval tonight to Mr Cunningham 's actions .
I would like to ask Commissioner Bonino : is the United States not dealing with Europe now as it dealt with the UK in 1989 ?
It may be that the way they have done it was inelegant , but is their intention not honest ?
They say they want to protect the safety and integrity of their food supplies .
Why is it that we have to attack the United States when what they appear to be doing is retaining consumer confidence in food there , in the way that we should be here in Europe ?
Mr President , the two Commissioners will know that while there is a crisis in the agriculture industry in Wales , Scotland and England , there is catastrophe in the north of Ireland .
They will also know that the three MEPs in this House representing Northern Ireland met the Prime Minister last Wednesday and he told us that he was going to negotiate a package with European help .
Can the Commissioner tell us tonight whether the British Government put forward proposals for such a package and whether that package will be forthcoming ?
I might say that I associate myself entirely with the remarks made by my colleague , Mr Nicholson , and no doubt if Mr Hume were here he would be saying the same thing .

Mr President , I wish to begin by congratulating the Commissioner on his position with the proposals , of course , as always to protect consumer health .
All farmers put consumer health first but the British farmer is fed up with being kicked around like a political football .
We have reached a stage where something has to be done .
I should like to ask the Commissioner the following points . Firstly , has the British farmer been discriminated against by the present British Government , as I believe it has , with its suggestion that it has to take British beef off the bone ?
For those of us who like beef on the bone , what is the justification ?
Has it just responded immediately to a SEAC suggestion ?
As Mr Cox said , it is destroying consumer confidence .
We have heard all along about the problems of the beef industry from our Irish and other colleagues and the pressures on the industry at the moment .
Has the British Government applied for funding to help the revaluation of the pound ?
If so , or if not , when does that opportunity disappear ?
Is it within the next month ?
I have two questions for the Commissioner to which I would like , if possible , an answer : if the UK unilaterally bans beef coming into the United Kingdom from which the risk material has not been removed , can the Commissioner invoke article 169 and take it before the Court of Justice ?
I have one final question as the Commissioner for the environment is here .
I heard the other day of yet another attack on the British farmer , namely that the Government is about impose a tax on fertilizer - that is just as an aside .
Is that true ?
Mr President , Mrs Bonino looked quite frightened that she had just become responsible for environmental policy .
Let me make a few short remarks on the debate .
Can we please be clear about one thing : British farmers are certainly very much affected , but they are affected because a government did nothing for ten years .
The situation cannot improve dramatically because something has changed in the last year .
Let me say something about a possible lifting of the export ban for parts of Great Britain .
Mr Fischler will certainly do the same .
Yes , Great Britain has made proposals since May .
But presumably we all expect a scientific committee to take a view on this subject .
That is surely our understanding of safety , consumer confidence and health protection .
The Scientific Steering Committee quite clearly made additional demands .
If we want to work seriously here and not just worry about how we look from the outside , not just make the quick press report - I say that as selfcriticism - we should read the extensive reports , which are also available on the Internet very carefully , then we would know what this steering committee says about sheep , cattle , and other animals .
It is not easy to read , but we can read it , and then we know .
There are still needs now .
The steering committee says there is still no functioning certified herd scheme , not even in Northern Ireland .
I will be the first to support it when there is one .
I agree with those who say a postponement of this proposal is a good thing , if it will then be watertight .
Because we want it to be watertight .
If the USA believes it is BSE-free because it says it is , we must recognize that BSE-free is very clearly defined by the IEO , the International Epidemic Organization in Paris .
According to it , the USA is not BSEfree , to put it equally clearly .
And if the USA then thinks that it can ban certain imports and not others , that is wrong .
I expect the Commission to take action against it .
Also , Mr Fischler made a very clear distinction .
He said that meat can enter Great Britain on the bone and must be deboned there .
That is not an import ban .
Not to allow meat in at all is an import ban , and I definitely would not support that unless there were good reasons !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I only want to speak on a few points which have been made here .
My colleague , Mrs Bonino , will deal comprehensively with the various points of view .
First , so that there are no misunderstandings here , the Commission first went to the Standing Veterinary Committee , which has decision-making authority , with the application to introduce certain modifications of the July decision .
However , after hardly one Member State supported the Commission 's proposal , we then decided to apply for a postponement , above all to ensure that various medicines , which in some cases are necessary to life , continue to be available on 1 January , and this was agreed .
I would also like to make it clear that the Standing Veterinary Committee and the Scientific Committee have nothing in common except the word ' committee ' .
It is quite clear that the representatives on the Standing Veterinary Committee represent the opinions of the Member States and nothing else !
But what we also received at the same time - and we must add , to be fair - is a new list of risk materials , this time from the Scientific Committee .
This list is considerably broader and longer than the list which we had in July .
We must quite simply acknowledge , and I would like to emphasize it in this context , that things can still continue to develop on the BSE problem , even scientifically , because new discoveries are always becoming available .
And we want to take account of the new discoveries as they become available .
In fact that has been our approach .
So what matters now is to put together the various risks the scientists have flagged up , depending on the type of risk material involved , combined with the variety of risks according to the geographical origin of the animals , and to derive an appropriate final or further evaluation .
We need a certain minimum time for this .
We have therefore not made it easy for ourselves , but we have said that we shall prepare , comprehensively and quickly , an appropriate proposal , which will be prepared sufficiently promptly to enable us to come to a new decision within these three months .
Mrs Bonino will certainly explain the content to you in more detail , if that is what you want .
But we also need an overall risk assessment to proceed sensibly .
Regarding the question of the so-called certified herd schemes , which has been mentioned several times , the situation has since developed as follows . Mrs Roth-Behrendt described the start very precisely .
We received a working document from the British government , and it was assessed by the Scientific Committee and judged to be insufficient .
But what was missing was clearly stated .
This morning , we received from the British government the last , crucial element of the missing items , which is that it is prepared to set up completely separate slaughterhouses , and is 100 % prepared to take account of the demands of the Scientific Committee .
We are therefore in a new situation , and must now do an appropriate assessment , discuss it in the Commission and make a decision .
Regarding Irish meat , I would like to state very clearly that the Commission has protested strongly about the interference which has taken place in various British ports .
However , I can report to you that the Irish Minister of Agriculture himself said today at the Agriculture Council that he is quite satisfied with the actions which the British government has meanwhile taken .
One thing is true of both Ireland and Northern Ireland , which is that we recognize completely the difficult market situation which has occurred on the island of Ireland .
We therefore made a decision last Friday to take meat into intervention again , exceptionally , for these two regions , the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland , at 50 % of the quantities which were applied for .
This is the highest percentage that we have ever accepted in the last few months .
We are therefore trying to take full account of those difficulties .
Regarding the question of the SAM ban , or the United Kingdom measures , I have already pointed out that the measures taken in relation to deboning do not contravene Community law .
But we are in the process of checking the other measures in detail , and identifying any treaty violations .
Of course we shall proceed in parallel , as we must also proceed in relation to other states .
Finally , regarding the USA , I would like to say quite clearly that our scientific committees , applying the IEO criteria , have not granted the USA BSE-free status .
We are therefore amazed that they are proceeding unilaterally against European states and , so to speak , using two different yardsticks .
I would also like to emphasize that of course we have protested appropriately against it .
I myself will be meeting the American minister responsible early next year , and I hope to clear these new difficulties out of the way .
If not , of course we must investigate whether we can bring the USA before the WTO on this issue .
These are probably the most important questions involving my responsibility .
Thank you !
Mr President , I do not have much to add because Mr Fischler 's introduction and reply were extremely exhaustive .
However , I would like to make three comments .
First , this debate shows how difficult the practice of transparency is . In effect , we have just been describing problems to you in precise detail , and explaining that science evolves and changes , and that of course we need time to draw the consequences .
And suddenly you do not like that .
So we have to find some form of agreement .
If you want transparency , that implies that you are sometimes told , ladies and gentlemen , that the situation has changed because the Scientific Committee has changed its position , and we are here to tell you about it .
But if you do not want us here , we will not come any more .
Secondly , the proposal on specified risk material was presented to the Council in December 1996 .
The Council rejected the proposal .
Another scientific opinion followed .
Finally , the proposal of 30 July was approved .
Suddenly , there was a realisation that there was also a problem relating to pharmaceutical products , finished products and tallow derivatives for cosmetics .
An amendment was proposed to the Council , which rejected it .
It was supported by five countries .
There was no other possibility except deferral for three months in order to harmonize modifications so far as possible , and to take a decision relating to finished products , taking account of new scientific advice .
That is why the reply cannot be either yes or no .
The situation is not all white or all black , and the Commission cannot put pressure on science , I am sure you understand .
Thirdly , there is the problem of geographic origin , which everyone is talking about and in relation to which , unfortunately , the Scientific Committee has not drawn up any precise criteria .
It is saying a classification on the geographical origin of tissue and product will be developed as soon as possible , and so on .
So the Commission has returned to the Scientific Committee and pressed it to provide criteria , after which the Commission will see whether these criteria can be applied in a single market .
That is the situation .
But if you think every time we come here we are going to give you a reply which will be black and white at the same time , I am very sorry , because in that case there is no point in transparency .
It is easy enough to make statements , ladies and gentlemen , but sometimes we need to work together as well and remember that we are analysing and applying a principle of precaution .
Several factors therefore need to be taken into consideration , including costbenefit among other things .
Mr Martinez , if firing a Commission could have resolved the BSE problem it would have been very easy , you know , because a new Commission could simply have been brought in to replace the old one .
But where disease is concerned , things are a little bit more complicated .
As for political shockwaves , these occurred , but my impression is that this was not nearly so much in the Commission as in public opinion .
I have one final response , and a frank one , to make to Mr Nicholson .
We are not dragging our feet , nor are we wasting time .
The Commission 's services have worked for the last eight months under a pressure which is frankly difficult to bear , I can assure you .
And the response of the British government to the problems we put to it only came this morning .
We were well aware that it is a learning process , and that we still have a lot more to discover , but for that we need time and it has put our work under well-nigh intolerable pressure .
I understand the frustration of the producers , indeed I share their concerns , but frankly I was not the person who invented BSE !
We are working with all the energy we can muster and at full capacity in terms of time and thought processes to resolve these problems .
But Members of Parliament will understand that sometimes we need to work together and not limit ourselves to statements for external consumption , which tend towards the populist and , I am sorry to say , do not help us make very much progress .
The debate is closed .
Mr President , I would just like the commissioners to wait to hear the point of order .
No , if it is addressed to the commissioners it is not a point of order .
You can only make points of order to the Chair .
Mr President , a question was asked which is of vital importance throughout the European Union , and got no answer .
I am sorry but we are over time .
I understand the importance of this matter but we could take all night dealing with it .
Energy policy ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the debate on the report ( A4-0308 / 97 ) by Mr Scapagnini , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , on the Commission communication ' An overall view of energy policy and actions ' ( COM ( 97 ) 0167 -C4-0205 / 97 )
Mr President , I want to try to get the interrupted debate on the Scapagnini report going again .
Energy policy requires a global attitude and global political action .
Even the title of the Commission 's statement suggests that .
The climate summit in Kyoto made the need for this global attitude clear , at least as far as the effect of energy policy on climate is concerned .
But it also revealed how far apart understanding and implementation are .
There is hardly a policy area where the gulf between what should be and what is , between a normative requirement on the one hand and actual policies on the other , is as wide as in energy and climate policy .
The Commission 's statement needs to be evaluated against this background .
It presents us with the known arguments for the need for a global attitude and strategy in the energy field .
There is the continually increasing dependence of the European Union on energy imports , and the resulting future risks .
There is the rapid growth of world energy consumption and the associated shortage of supply , and not least there is the considerable increase in worldwide environmental problems and their long term effect .
All this suggests that the European Union should have increased authority in energy policy , but we have not secured it , even in the Amsterdam Treaty .
There is no clear , specific legal basis in the treaty .
What is left , if you will excuse the comparison , is like the chatter of house-sparrows about the autumn migration to the south .
The Commission 's statement is an accurate but visionless compendium of all Community initiatives in the energy field .
What remains to be done in this context ?
What remains is to improve international cooperation on energy .
What remains is to assess the energy and environment policies of the Member States regularly - that is new - and to try to coordinate them towards Community goals .
We need synergy effects , not mutual blockades or zero-sum games .
The implementation of the internal energy market guidelines for liberalization and integration of energy markets must be driven forward .
What remains is to continue to work on the Community energy tax , which has failed up to now , and to encourage research , technological development and demonstration of renewable energy resources .
I am anxious to know what is finally left of what we put into the fifth research programme .
In short , what remains is to keep to the idea of an outline energy policy programme , and to strengthen energy policy actions through cooperation between the Member States .
This requires periodic reports about national activities and their effects .
The rapporteur , Mr Scapagnini , sees this stimulation of the Commission , and assesses it as suitable .
What I would like to see in future - I only want to mention it briefly - would be specific implementation strategies ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , I wish to congratulate Mr Scapagnini on this report .
It is a comprehensive report and calls for many of the things which the Liberal Group has supported .
We are beginning to realize now how wise it would have been to write a chapter on energy into the Maastricht Treaty .
Particularly in the light of the failure of the Kyoto Conference , the problems of our energy policy are becoming much more apparent .
I regret one thing in this report , namely that the Commission appears to have given up on its campaign to introduce rational planning techniques into the electricity and gas sectors .
These techniques would certainly show us the way forward .
The Commission put them forward before and seems now to have withdrawn from that .
The Commission has to look wider too .
We have to look for five leitmotifs for energy policy in the European Union .
First , we have to introduce a major programme of investment in energy conservation in Europe .
Second , we have to encourage consumers and firms to use energy more efficiently .
Third , we have to cut the costs of energy efficiency in homes and offices .
Fourth , we have to make new buildings and machinery , vehicles and appliances more energy efficient , and work is being done on this .
Finally , we have to increase support for renewable sources of energy .
It is essential that these are done .
The Commission is beginning to show the way forward , but if we are serious about it we are going to have to put the money behind our political intentions .
Mr President , when we talk about the energy policy goals of the Community , I think of Fontane .
It is a broad field , and I must add that it is in thick fog , because we have no uniform energy policy goals .
I can make this clear to you with a few examples .
We always say that we must definitely become less dependent on imports .
Then the example of the nuclear industry is given , and everyone forgets that of course we must import the uranium for that .
We always talk about energy efficiency , but we do exactly the opposite .
I would just remind you of the Save programme .
We always talk about renewable energy .
I would just remind you of the Altener programme .
It has been cut to ECU 22 million for two years , which is ridiculous when we have paid ECU 250 million per year for 15 years for fusion .
We also talk about renewable energy creating many jobs , and being good for the environment , but nothing happens .
What we need in the end is an energy tax .
What we need in the end is renewable energy , energy efficiency .
In the end we must use all possible means to continue to develop these .
We cannot do that with the pittance left over because everything is going into fusion .
We also urgently need codecision by the European Parliament , and furthermore we must have a separate energy chapter at last .
We have none of that .
So I can only conclude with the words of Brecht : the circumstances are not right , because the Council blocks everything , and as long as that continues we will have no energy policy goals , but go on sprinkling a little everywhere with the watering-can , and putting all our money into fusion , when all we know about it is that it may produce energy in the year 2080 or 2050 at the earliest .
Mr President , I share the general disappointment at the failure of the Amsterdam Treaty to take on board the business it was supposed to discuss , which was the formation of an energy chapter .
The European Union started with two energy Treaties : the European Coal and Steel Community and the Euratom Treaty .
The European Coal and Steel Community has served energy well and the Euratom Treaty , although anachronistic and definitely a 1957 Treaty , has been a very powerful impetus to one form of energy - nuclear energy .
If the EU has a competence , things happen .
As far as Kyoto is concerned , there are only three things you can do in order to diminish CO2 emissions : one is to rely on nuclear energy - but there are very big risks and problems involved in that ; secondly , you use energy more rationally and , thirdly , you turn to renewable energy sources .
If we had an equivalent to the Euratom Treaty - I would call it the Eurenew Treaty , a treaty on renewable energy - we could do something .
This would make things happen in Europe and give considerable added value to the European Union 's work on energy .
I have to say that I find the second part of conclusion 11 by Mr Scapagnini unacceptable , because it recommends additional help to nuclear power .
This is not the answer .
I am also very disappointed at the reported reaction of the Council of Ministers to this communication from the Commission .
It is a very sensible communication .
It makes it absolutely clear that if you seriously want to do what we said in Kyoto we would do , you cannot do it without a legal base or without giving yourself the competence that was given so effectively when the European Union started back in the 1950s .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mr Scapagnini in his absence , on a succinct report .
It lays down some valuable guides for our consideration of the energy framework proposals which have just been approved by the Commission .
We really have to move energy issues up the political agenda . We ought to have the same basis as for the environment .
The legislation should be subject to qualified majority voting .
The fact is that energy consumption is increasing .
In 1996 , the last year for which we have figures , it was up by 3 % in world terms and 3.6 % in the European Union .
The starting point has got to be a strengthening of the analysis of energy demand .
Unless you have the figures you cannot determine policy .
We need to look in much more detail at consumption per capita , energy intensity , electricity intensity and the primary fuels that we are using for electricity production .
I must tell you , Mr President - although in your case you will already know - that the liberalized market may make this even more difficult than it was before .
We have to concentrate very strongly on the question of energy efficiency : the energy efficiency of production and of use .
Unless we get those things right , all the other things that we talk about will just be straws in the wind .
I want to draw attention to a factor which I drew attention to earlier in the debate on the research programme .
It is small companies that have the greatest difficulty in making use of the resources that we have at Community level .
I am talking about companies of less than 50 people .
That is an area where we have to make a much greater effort .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Aid to shipbuilding
The next item is the report ( A4-0377 / 97 ) by Mr Sindal , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the proposal for a Council Regulation amending Council Regulation 3094 / 95 thereby further prolonging the relevant provisions of the Seventh Council Directive on aid to shipbuilding ( COM ( 97 ) 0469 -C4-0526 / 97-97 / 0248 ( CNS ) )
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first I would like to thank Mr Sindal , because he said clearly that prolongation is right , and I am not going to say much about that , but let us come to the point .
We agree .
As long as the USA does not ratify the OECD agreement about eliminating order-related shipbuilding subsidies , preventing its implementation , we must ensure that the shipyards in our Community have at least half a chance against the highly subsidized shipyards in Asia , as well as other shipyards around us .
But we must take care that , if we decide on a common upper limit with the prolongation , the Member States make use of it , so that we do not have support in one Member State but not in another , because then we have a new distortion of competition within the Union .
I also share Mr Sindal 's ideas about the debate should the USA still fail to ratify the OECD agreement .
I find the Commission 's idea of submitting our own subsidy regime correct in principle , but we should check it very carefully .
Yes , Mr Karel van Miert , we both know that ; we must be careful , subsidies must always be for a limited period , and they must be degressive .
Those are the first two principles .
Let me also mention two more principles .
We must take care that the so-called investment subsidies which are to be newly created are not mixed , linked or duplicated with the subsidies for research and development .
Second , we must take care that the investment subsidies are not linked to the traditional support areas of regional aid .
Then of course some shipyards would drop out although they are much more competitive than others .
Their chances would be reduced .
We must take this up with the shipbuilding sector .
Third , we must take care that the support rates in the Union are as uniform as possible , to prevent further distortions within the Union .
There will certainly be an exciting debate about this in the next year .
Mr President , I agree with Mr Sindal that there is a need to prolong the Seventh Directive .
It is essential that we do not have a period without legislation in this field .
But it is also vital for the US to ratify the OECD agreement .
Like Mr Sindal , I would like to hear what the Commission is doing to put pressure on the American government , and whether the Commission can say how far the US has got with its own deliberations .
On the other hand , I am very concerned at the Commission 's proposal for the Council Directive on new rules on aid to the shipbuilding industry .
It is quite simply unacceptable .
The Union 's aim must of course be to phase out aid to the shipbuilding industry .
The Commission 's proposal replaces relatively transparent operating aid with less transparent forms of aid which will favour some shipyards rather than others .
The shipbuilding industry must prepare itself to survive without aid .
We will of course come back to this proposal on a later occasion , but for the moment I can say that it is not my cup of tea .
I can understand the Commission 's argument that we must have clear rules and not end up in a vacuum if the US does not ratify .
If the US does not ratify the OECD agreement , other countries may perhaps start adopting policies which distort competition .
So you - and you in particular , Mr van Miert - must make every effort to put pressure on the US Congress to ratify the OECD agreement by the end of next year .
Mr President , I approve the regulation which is proposed , and the report by our colleague , Mr Sindal , but I am concerned about the recent approach of the Commission .
It is anticipating the application of the 1994 OECD agreement by proposing to ban state aid from 2001 .
The United States would not fail to interpret this as a signal from Brussels encouragement not to ratify the OECD agreement .
The Commission has got us used to making unilateral concessions .
This was the case for agriculture within the framework of the GATT agreements and for the aeronautical industry with the Boeing-McDonnell Douglas merger .
Today , such ready acquiescence would be a new blow to European shipyards , which are suffering by serious difficulties .
Employment has fallen from 280 , 000 to less than 80 , 000 in twenty years , and many yards have been closed .
In the face of social dumping from certain third countries , we have to maintain existing assistance in a system which promotes the acquisition of ships built in European shipyards .
In the immediate future , should we not also renegotiate the OECD agreement , and consider it as null and void if the United States do not ratify it by the end of 1998 ?
Mr President , until the 1970s my country , Sweden , was one of the great shipyard nations of Europe .
That is no longer so .
There is virtually no building of new vessels at all in Sweden any more , only repair shipyards for large vessels .
There are of course many different reasons for this .
One of them , however , is that there has been such tough competition with state subsidies from other countries that Sweden has not been able to maintain a shipbuilding industry .
That is also why the OECD agreement of 1994 raised such hopes in Sweden that fairer terms of global competition would make it possible to begin to compete again when new tonnage was to be built .
That is also why it is regrettable that this agreement , which should be able to provide reasonably fair terms of competition , has not yet come into force .
Obviously I support Mr Sindal 's report , which is based on the idea that once the USA ratifies the agreement it will also be respected within the EU .
Until then it is , however , quite reasonable to continue with a certain amount of state subsidy so that the industry is not wiped out .
In my party we have also proposed that Sweden should again be able to give the shipbuilding industry a limited state subsidy in order to be on equal terms with other countries .
I am therefore going to vote for the report .
I would like to start by thanking Mr Sindal and the committee for the speed with which this report was produced , because we have to make a decision on the prolongation of this seventh directive by the end of the year .
I had hoped there might have been no further need to debate this , and that might have been the case had the United States in the end ratified the OECD agreement .
It is the only country not to have done so .
There is nothing I can do about that , and I have to say to Mrs Riis-Jörgenson that a Commissioner can do a lot for competition , but one thing I cannot yet do is force the American Congress to ratify an agreement .
I cannot do that , I have not got that far , I can have another think about how I might achieve it in future , but for the moment I am afraid I cannot give you any satisfaction on that front .
For that matter I would like to say straight away , ladies and gentlemen , that we should distinguish between the issue today and what we will have to discuss in the near future , namely what will happen afterwards .
This is a prolongation by a year until the end of next year , and if in 1998 the United States once more fails to ratify the OECD agreement , then we will have to have joint discussions about a new regulation .
The Commission has made proposals for that .
You may think what you like about them .
But when the time comes I will be delighted to present them to you in committee and debate them in this House .
But today I have already had a foretaste of that debate .
Some think subsidies should be abolished as soon as possible .
I also listened to Mr Querbes , who would like to continue them indefinitely .
But I would remind you that during the years 1990-1995 ECU 5 billion in government support was spent on shipbuilding in the European Union .
So those who claim that the European Union has not been pursuing a broad policy to try to enable our shipyards to adapt , do not know what they are talking about .
By the way , I have to say to Mr Querbes that I also completely disagree with him about Boeing , but I cannot do anything about the fact that some people in France have got a completely wrong idea of the situation .
Everyone here in this Parliament knows that much better than Mr Querbes .
So I am obviously going to disregard what he said , because if someone is that far off the truth there is nothing to be done .
I would like to conclude then by setting a rendezvous for the next debate , and I have already said that I am looking forward to that debate , because I believe the Commission has made a major effort in the proposals it has submitted in order to offer a solution which will mean that contractual government support , that is , operational support , can indeed be abolished in principle in the year 2000 at the latest .
If there is a majority in the Council of Ministers to do this earlier , that will not be a problem for the Commission .
On the other hand , we also want to offer our shipyards the opportunity in the future to carry out the necessary innovation , research and development , modernization of the existing yards , and , if necessary , to claim government assistance , because , in the future , when government support is no longer possible , we , the European Commission - and I am not speaking just for myself , but certainly for Mr Bangemann as well - wish to offer as many opportunities to shipyards as we can .
We must ensure that we keep enough shipyards in Europe in the future for objective as well as for purely economic reasons .
I would like to leave it at that , Mr President , but again , I already look forward to our next debate , which is bound to take place in a few months time .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Services of general interest in Europe
The next item is the report ( A4-0357 / 97 ) by Mrs Billingham , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the Commission communication ' Services of general interest in Europe ' ( COM ( 96 ) 0443 -C4-0507 / 96 )
Mr President , it is almost a year since I began this report .
In the search for consensus on this complex issue I have consulted widely throughout the Union and taken suggestions from all sides of this House .
The report is a response to a Commission communication which quite rightly takes as part of its theme the concept that services of general interest lie at the very heart of the European model of society .
My research confirms that .
How the services are delivered is not at issue .
It is the quality of the service that counts .
Services are provided in a myriad of ways across Europe .
They are delivered in monopoly and in competitive situations , by private companies , public bodies or by public-private partnerships .
But it is the product and not the process that matters to consumers .
My report focuses on economic public services which provide commercial goods or , more often , services for which there is payment .
The notion of a people 's Europe where social cohesion and economic growth are dependent upon the delivery of good services right across the Community underpins this report .
Europe has been strong in trade and in industry with a bias towards business but weaker in its support for its citizens .
Public services have a noble history and are valued by citizens , but standards vary .
We must iron out some of these discrepancies and put in place a blueprint for systematic improvements in all specific areas of public services .
The report recognizes the primary role of Member States in defining public services , with the European Union having a secondary role of fixing the minimal level of service , a universal service , examples of which have already been taken on board in postal services , broadcasting and telecommunications .
I have identified three major areas where the EU can take a leading part .
First of all we must have a clear definition of services which fall within the general interest area .
Secondly , there should be a specification of basic universal services that should be expected by any citizen .
Thirdly , there has to be regulation ensuring that the specified levels of service are delivered consistently across the whole territory of the EU .
The EU should adopt a supervisory role to ensure that national regulators work to a consistent standard .
The painful history of my own country - of badly managed privatization - is a warning to the rest of the Union from which we can learn a lesson .
I have used the experiences in Member States , the Commission 's communication , the Commission itself and many helpful opinions and advice received from colleagues , organizations , representatives and interested parties in arriving at my conclusion .
My report before you today welcomes the new article 7 ( d ) and calls for it to be implemented and calls for a number of other additional actions to be taken .
Firstly I call for a charter of principles : principles for a service of economic interests to be drawn up by the Commission ; secondly , I require and ask for democratic scrutiny for the Commission activity in that field to be developed in Parliament in the form of an observatory .
The report also asks for Green and White Papers to be published by the Commission , laying out a timetable plan to translate treaty and charter aspirations into action and also seeks a special responsibility for public services to be attributed to one of the Commissioners and one of the Commission 's Directorates General and for Parliamentary committees to have a specific brief within this area .
This report has been an excellent example of all sides of Parliament coming together to produce what I hope is a sensible document .
I thank colleagues for that .
If we achieve a consensus here tomorrow at the vote , we will be making history .
It will be the very first time that Parliament has achieved a common position on public services .
I hope that we can do it .
If we do , we will send a clear message to the Commission and the Council that Parliament is united in its determination to demonstrate that this is indeed a people 's Europe , a Europe which works to make its citizens ' lives better and a Europe which is set purposefully to achieve a fairer and more cohesive future for all its citizens .
Mr President , this communication from the Commission on services of general interest gives an account of the future objectives with regard to the interest in opening up protected sectors or monopolies to competition , while at the same time we want the citizens to have access to services of general interest on the same terms and at reasonable prices , which is good .
I think there is a central theme in the Commission 's communication , which I also think Mrs Billingham arrived at in the end . It is that people must recognize the multiplicity of the scope of services and the various organizations in the various Member States , that there are big differences because of tradition , that there are different methods and that people should also recognize the principle of subsidiarity and that it is the Member States who in fact decide who should carry out the services , whether it should be private or public companies , and also whether special rights should be granted as long as people stay within competition law .
It is good to have a debate in the form of a Green Paper , which is proposed .
I believe , you see , that there needs to be a very broad debate in the Community about this .
It must also be allowed to take its time . It is not something which can be implemented quickly .
On the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs we also believe that a consequential analysis should be done when services of general interest are deregulated in order to see the effects on social security , employment and , not least , on the environment as well as in peripheral areas .
Experience from Sweden , Finland and the UK , where deregulation has been carried out in many areas , shows that there are both positive and negative effects and that people should also pay attention to the need for clear , socially justified rules .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , in its statement the Commission advocates an open economic model and marketing dynamics in the production of public utility services .
The Committee on Regional Policy believes the principle is to be upheld as long as there is balance between competition on the market and the safeguarding of services .
A totally free market , with no special arrangements , can , if things go wrong , endanger the provision of all the basic services we need , particularly in peripheral and sparsely-populated regions .
On the other hand , legislation on public utility services cannot be allowed to preserve service monopolies .
There is a need to improve general services , and their efficiency , in a continually changing operational environment .
Just as important is the quality of services and their suitability for the individual and the community .
That is why public services cannot be allowed to go the way of a heavily regulated pan-European system , but responsibility for their production and operations should be defined nationally , regionally and , frequently , locally as well .
At Community level it is mainly the principles of security and fairness that are appropriate in this issue .
The Community could also demand the creation of national principles , and , within them , principles to do with equality among citizens .
One key principle of fairness is pricing , which regional differences can affect very greatly in a fully market-based system .
In essential services , like , for example , the postal services , " the same price for all ' principle is still justifiable .
The Committee on Regional Policy once again stresses that the liberalization of public utility services , making them competitive on the market , cannot endanger the provision of recognized basic services anywhere in the union .
In peripheral regions subsidized and publicly provided services are often the only alternative , as , for example , with public transport .
May I first of all congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Billingham .
The report now before us is , as she said herself , more than a compromise ; it is a foundation response to the Commission 's statement , something we can build on .
But as she quite rightly says herself : it is the quality that counts ; we are providing a product for consumers .
This means that we have to see universal service for the public in general , and not , as some people think , that public services are there for the employees .
They are there for the public .
Now it is up to the Commission to draw up a number of definitions , because it is easy to refer in one 's statement to the general interest .
But the general interest is a broad notion which everyone interprets rightly or wrongly , but in any case differently .
Let me give you two examples from the transport sector .
First example : air traffic control .
For years under national control , cooperating badly , leading to all kinds of obstacles in European air transport .
This means that guidance must be given positively to arrive at a communal service .
Let me give you another example , and unfortunately I cannot say of the Committee on Transport and Tourism 's resolution what I was able to say of Mrs Billingham 's , namely that the more it was rewritten the better it became .
Mine seemed to deteriorate .
If we look at the postal services - we already talked about this yesterday - I really cannot see what actually should be a universal service .
Rail transport is a typical example of how a monopoly leads to obstruction in the internal market .
The Commission should do something about this .
We then agree with the exceptions to the rule of the best service for the consumer when it concerns peripheral regions and islands , but in any case , we have a long way to go , and a lot to deliberate about before we arrive at genuine service of general interest in Europe within the principles of article 7d of the old treaty .
Mr President , like everyone else here tonight , I have to welcome Mrs Billingham 's report .
She has put a lot into it and has carefully considered all the issues , and it is an extremely balanced and reasonable report in response to the Commission 's White Paper .
In that context , with regard to the White Paper , I wish , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , to draw attention to the following .
Whilst the Commission points out in the White Paper that consumers can benefit from the liberalization of public services , the very same process will mean that in some peripheral regions and where there is no possibility of profit in that service , the liberalization might result in services only being available at a price which excludes many consumers , or may simply mean that there will be no service at all .
It is for that reason that the importance of accepting the need , at least in principle , for a universal level of service , must be recognized .
Within the European Union the principle of universal service must be defined in the context of the Treaties , and in particular with regard to article 129 .
At the same time , the principle of public service must be protected by guarantees of consumer representation and guarantees about the affordability of those services .
We must recognize the right of the public and of different Member States to provide public services in a flexible and variable way , ensuring that they can be provided by very many different actors or business activities , respecting above all , I think , the traditional methods that exist in different Member States .
Diversity is something we must continue to respect .
Public services have the possibility , if we continue to use them positively , to nurture new dynamic , environmentfriendly industries and build new sectors of the mixed economy , which will generate new jobs .
It is for that reason that I suggest that we must enshrine a special place within the treaties for public services of common interest , ensure that they are protected from the most rigorous application of competition policy and ensure in future that citizens have a right , as a minimum , to a guaranteed level of public services in order to maintain solidarity throughout the Union .
Mr President , services of general interest in Europe are necessary and important .
It is important for those who are affected , who need a functioning infrastructure with important goods of daily life such as water , electricity , gas , and so on , even in remote regions outside the economic conurbations .
These services are also important for a functioning transport infrastructure and a functioning infrastructure in the field of modern communication technologies .
This applies not only to the traditional post , but also to radiotelephony , the Internet , etcetera .
However , what is important for the Community , and in that sense for us all , is that all these services are offered within the economic framework which characterizes our Community as a whole , the framework of a competitive regime which is worthy of the name .
It was certainly not easy to unite these two points of view .
To talk of squaring the circle would probably be over the top , but Mrs Billingham should nevertheless be congratulated on finally putting together a text on which a broad consensus can be reached .
For the Institutional Committee , of course , institutional questions were at the forefront of the considerations .
In this respect we largely agree with the developments to the Billingham report in the various stages of its discussion .
Much has changed here , and very much for the better .
So again , heartfelt best wishes !
Admittedly we still have some reservations , for example concerning the legal nature of a special charter for such services .
We still have serious reservations about the institutional structure which is mentioned in paragraph 12 of the report , although there have already been clear improvements compared to the predecessors of this report and the draft report .
I would like us to reach a good joint conclusion even without paragraph 12 .
If we are successful , it will have been a joint achievement of which many in this Chamber can rightly be proud , and which we can hope will finally provide something for the citizens of this Community .
I hope that then we will really have services of general interest in the European Union which we can accept in both form and content .
Mr President , Mrs Billingham 's report is welcome because , for once , it has enabled Mr Herman and myself to agree on the same text , although for somewhat different reasons perhaps .
In the field of public services , that has not happened for a very long time .
In addition , this is the final stage of a trend which began in September 1996 with the communication from the Commission .
This put an end to a very lengthy dialogue of the deaf , involving on the one hand the Commission , which wished to impose its policy in the field of telecommunications , and on the other hand Parliament , which wanted at all costs to slow down the rather senseless wave of uncontrolled liberalization .
We have undertaken to put greater controls on liberalization , particularly in the debates and discussions relating to directives on energy , electricity , gas and finally the postal services .
The Commission then came to the conclusion that the world was not made up of binary oppositions , and that there were not on the one hand people wedded to the past who defended public services , as opposed to those who were wedded to the future and in favour of liberalization , but that we were working together for the achievement of the single market , and that this had no sense or future unless based on an appropriate balance and the complementary defence of both the general interest and the rules of the competitive market .
As we were engaged in the Intergovernmental Conference , we all devoted considerable interest to modifications in the treaty .
A number of us , possibly even the majority in the Parliament , would have liked to see a slight revision of article 90.2 , which appeared to make services of general economic interest the only exception to the competitive market place .
We would have wanted to develop this somewhat more .
For other reasons , the Commission was far more reticent about the amendment to article 90 , which it regarded as an essential article .
Finally , the Treaty of Amsterdam gave birth to article 7.2 , which of course does not go very far and is not very revolutionary , but does nevertheless affirm the legitimacy of general economic interests in a manner other than as exceptions to the competitive market .
In that alone , the Treaty of Amsterdam is an important turning point at the legal level , and has been buttressed by a series of decisions from the Court of Justice , the Corbeau decision and the Almelo decision , as well as the decision relating to the monopoly on imports of gas , where the Court of Justice has made an approach which was no longer necessarily the rigid and rather dogmatic approach which it sometimes had , and which , we must say , was the approach of DG IV .
Mr Commissioner , I am not complimenting you because you are my fellow countryman . I must acknowledge that not only have you changed considerably , but you have also worked well to improve the scale and the work of the Commission in the field of general economic interests .
Communication is an element in this .
The Billingham report indicates to you today that it will be necessary to go further , by means of a Green Paper , and a White Paper , that it would be better to define what is to be understood by a mission of general economic interest , in the same way that it will be necessary to specify the notion of general interest services other than from a purely consumerist conception .
We are not only consumers .
Recent debates on the notion of universal services within the Telecommunications Council have been extremely revealing in this respect .
In conclusion , I suggest resolutely supporting the excellent report by our colleague , Mrs Billingham , and in particular to encourage the drafting of a Green and a White Paper to give us a truly adequate conception and good legislation in the field of general economic interest .
Mr President , it required a great deal of perseverance and courage , including efforts within her own party , for our friend Angela Billingham to come up with a text on which there is a wide consensus , although it may not yet be 100 % , as we shall see .
The debate was , in fact , polluted by three elements .
Firstly , there was extraordinary confusion , throughout most of the discussion , between the concepts of general interest services , public services , public sector companies , state owned companies and universal services .
People stirred all this up into some extraordinary stew , and everyone tried to extract the best bits of it to advance the cause they defended .
The second element which interfered with the debate was the use that certain monopolies made of that very confusion , as they saw that their privileged positions were threatened .
And finally , in some countries , and this is the third polluting element , the problem of public services has acquired a theological dimension .
No rational or economic element could be brought into play .
It was the state in all its splendour which should incarnate the general interest , and everything emanating from the market was suspect .
Within this theology a number of extraordinarily adventurous tactics were deployed .
There were public services whose characteristics were both permanent strikes and monstrous deficits .
By so blackmailing companies , these public services created extraordinary advantages , stipends and privileges .
Another point made the debate a difficult one .
For some , it was a question of reducing the power of the Commission .
Our friend Mr Desama has spoken of a cavalry charge .
I say that fortunately - fortunately - this took place in telecommunications but despite the cavalry charge we are still ten years behind , Mr Desama , ten years behind the United States in a series of new telecommunications services .
The only thing I regret is that the charge was only made with horses , because what we needed was tanks .
That is what we really needed to crush the resistance of the conservatives in most countries .
The conservatives are not always the ones you expect , anyway .
Today they have put on progressive masks .
Having said that , I would like to return to the draft itself , as we are in agreement about the basics .
We have put forward amendments on two points only .
We shall be deepening and supporting an amendment from the socialists , Amendment No 4 on paragraph 8 .
That we accept .
We are not raising the demand to go further with the treaty , we have no illusions about that .
We think that before we go further , we need an objective analysis of the factors for and against , on the basis of the figures and on no other basis .
Mr President , I welcome this debate and I welcome very much the Commission 's communication on which it is based .
It was a very useful development of thinking in the area of services of general interest , trying to define some of the territory and to mark out what is appropriate for the European Union .
We had a very difficult debate about this in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , and I congratulate the rapporteur on seeking to establish a consensus , which I believe will carry the report with a great majority here .
She has done some very good work .
The great concern that the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party took to this debate was to ensure that we should be able to protect appropriate diversity .
We have different regional experiences ; we have different needs and capacities ; we have different sectors in terms of technological development and the weight of that development by sector ; and the current report , in terms of what is sets out as a future scenario and development of thinking , allows for a reflection on diversity and building on that diversity .
It is also important that we avoid excessive horizontalism in an approach to this , and I believe that perhaps the first draft that we looked at the outset was excessively so .
However , this time round it touches on some of the very important general issues but leaves open the possibility that case by case , sector by sector , we can carry the analysis forward as appropriate , and we welcome that .
We place a very strong emphasis in the Liberal Group - and I am glad to say the rapporteur will take our only amendment to this report - on recalling the necessity as we develop our thesis about universality of service , quality of service and so on - and these issues are extremely important - of not abandoning our commitment - and , indeed , the treaty requirement - to have regard to competition .
It is very important in terms of the market place we find ourselves in , because the modern consumer for the public service wants quality , choice and reasonable price , and competition is the best means of ensuring that , whatever the form of ownership .
This report leaves that avenue open , and I therefore welcome it .
Mr President , according to Mrs Billingham 's report , public services are economic activities which are considered vital for citizens and society as a whole .
This means their scope should not be limited - and even that would be something - to power and gas distribution services , telecommunications , transport and postal services .
They also include other activities which , because they similarly supply essential needs and contribute to economic and social cohesion , must be provided continuously and equally to all , regardless of any criteria of economic and financial profitability .
They exist to provide a complete range of public services in such a way that their goods and products are accessible to the least favoured populations and regions , and this purpose is also enshrined in the Amsterdam Treaty .
We must remember that in Portugal , for example , the liberalization of telecommunications and the privatization of their principal operator has led to a price increase for those most deprived of public services , in the name of economic profitability and competitiveness for the benefit of those who unjustifiably want to hold long-distance conversations .
Although it is felt that certain services should remain under State control , the deciding factor should not be ownership .
What matters is the service itself .
We do however , question whether private operators should receive state aid to maintain the requirements of a service when they have benefitted from its privatization .
With regard to the protection of consumers ' rights , we also say that workers ' organizations in target sectors for privatization must be consulted .
The framework of these activities must be regulated , and there is good reason here to mention the principle of subsidiarity and its etymological meaning .
It is true that some of those who have built the European Union are trying to change the names of certain activities , and to alter concepts that disturb their ultraliberal presuppositions .
Since the beginning of the process of liberalizing and privatizing public service industries , the terms which have been most in evidence have been expressions such as ' universal services ' and ' services of general interest ' , but the expression and concept of ' public services ' , which the treaty itself came to include , have not been extinguished .
That is why we are emphasizing the definition and strengthening the concept .
Mrs Billingham 's report gives expression to our concerns .
We congratulate her and hope she will accept our amendments , which would help us to vote in favour of her report , as we would like to do - in defence of public services and the service of the public .
Mr President , the casualness with which the Commission 's document and Mrs Billingham 's report state that the European Union must have powers covering services of general interest is questionable .
The inclusion of article 7d in the Treaty of Amsterdam may be received with great acclaim , but when after much effort the description " general services ' still remains extremely vague , the European authority becomes less sure .
How do we get agreement on minimum standards without avoiding a deterioration in the average level of service provision in Europe ?
I am very doubtful that the approach proposed here will lead to better services at lower consumer prices .
According to the subsidiarity principle , the most important powers will have to remain with the Member States .
Only general services with an obvious international dimension require minimum standards at European level .
A charter is too heavy and unsuitable an instrument for this .
The establishment of such a charter will probably require a great deal of time as there is no agreement on a clear definition of services of general economic interest .
No one will deny that these services contribute to social and economic cohesion , but mutual solidarity for the benefit of weaker regions will primarily have to take shape within the Member States of the European Union before an additional contribution from European funds and initiatives is given .
Mr President , first of all I would like to congratulate my colleague , Mrs Billingham .
As many have said , this is a well-balanced , innovative and , dare I say , exciting report where European Union citizens are concerned .
Why ?
Because it actually seeks to address the needs of our people in a very direct way .
For once the European Union is saying " we care about you ' and that general services that reflect community values and answer to the needs of the public are important and that the Union cannot live by sheer commercialism alone .
It is also saying something absolutely critical in a liberal democracy : that general services are part of the infrastructure of citizenship .
As you might imagine , I want to talk about public service broadcasting because it is very much a part of the infrastructure of citizenship .
We lose it at our peril .
It is what we might call a merit good , a very important term often forgotten .
It is not measurable in normal market terms .
Competition rules are not applicable in the normal way .
Here I take issue with some of my colleagues here tonight .
Naked competition in broadcasting has already proved what it will do .
We would end up , quite simply , with a diet of sport , US film and chat shows .
That is where it leads .
Member States recognized this during the negotiations at the intergovernmental conference .
As a result we got something very interesting : a protocol on public service broadcasting attached to the treaties that said public service broadcasting is an invaluable part of democracy .
But what have we seen ?
We have seen recently a Green Paper on the possible convergence between telecommunications and broadcasting where sadly , the Commission - or some elements of the Commission - have failed to recognize this point .
Some commercial television can deliver some public service obligations .
But if I take the example of the BBC - excuse my chauvinism momentarily - it is an example of a particular broadcasting ecology which citizens , I believe , have a right to .
It is television , which puts the public interest first , not advertisers ' or shareholders ' interests .
It is free to air .
It is for every citizen in their majority and their minority interest , provides independent impartial news and information , education and , very importantly , facilitates mutual knowledge and understanding upon which our democracy depends .
Finally , we look forward to a charter which spells out the basic entitlement to public service broadcasting as well as the other services mentioned tonight .
It will do much for the popularity of the European Union when it recognizes that water is not a wristwatch , fax is not a film and a democracy is dependent on documentaries .
Mr President , there is plenty of justification for the initiative we are examining , which demonstrates the importance of the supply of services of general interest and the terms in which it must be monitored .
These services are determined by social and economic considerations , and especially cohesion , because there are cases where the cover and efficiency achieved by mere market forces are not enough .
But the Commission 's document and Mrs Billingham 's report - and I also congratulate her - are perfectly clear .
They emphasize that the general interest does not coincide with as public intervention , lack of concern for efficiency and non-payment by service users .
It is important to make a factual distinction between the ends and the means , because in many cases the public interest is better served by private entities .
In the case of non-profitable services , in remote geographical areas for example , they may be made a compulsory part of the consideration for the franchises granted .
And in cases where competition is possible , consumers without much in the way of means will be the principal beneficiaries , as we have been seeing in the case of telephone services or air transport , for example , with the irreversible abolition of the old companies with their monopoly privileges - we still suffer from them in Portugal - which , it is claimed , serve a useful social function .
There are also general reasons of efficiency and equity which require that , wherever possible , the beneficiaries should pay all , or at least part , of the costs of the services they receive .
Thus we are promoting a more rational use of resources , in everyone 's interest , and this also prevents the intolerable injustice that specially privileged strata of the population are often exempted from paying road tolls - or tips , in my country 's case .
The whole of society benefits from motorways and higher education , but these are semi-public goods with private benefits for people who travel or those who will earn more afterwards as a result of the degrees they gain .
Apart from that , it prevents the allocation elsewhere of sparse resources that are much needed to satisfy collective requirements and provide social support for the poorest people , who really are in fundamental need of our attention .
Mr President , the process of liberalization and of deregulation implemented at Community level imperils public services and has had negative consequences on employment and social conditions , without in any way benefitting users .
Obsessed as it is by the principles of free competition , the Commission has a tendency to consider services rendered by the public service as pure commodities , without taking into account the social needs to which they are a response , and the specific historical features which have in many cases given rise to them .
In response to the ultra free-market offensive , there has over the last few years arisen a movement of resistance , of reflection , of proposals and action in favour of the public services , and in particular the powerful strike of November / December 1995 in France .
This movement , which our group permanently placed before the European Parliament , contributed to obtaining the inclusion of article 7d in the Treaty of Amsterdam .
In spite of its limits , it is a point of support in the defence and promotion of public services .
The report from Mrs Billingham is part of this movement , because it recognizes the place and role of services of general interest , which is positive .
However , the report does not perhaps sufficiently call into question the involvement of competition rules , which is expressed in article 8 .
For this reason , our group has put forward some amendments , which we hope will be adopted to improve this text .
The notion of universal service is advanced by the Commission as if it were some kind of fire-wall , but its content remains ambiguous and even dangerous , because its intent is minimum services , and hence it constantly threatens to level things down , to lead to a two-speed society , and hence to develop more exclusion .
What is at stake through the defence of public services is a whole concept of society .
Either we move towards aggravated social and regional inequalities , within the framework of competition between people and economies , or we act in favour of a society based on more solidarity , combatting social inequality , exclusion and unemployment .
In Europe , public services are part of a fundamental choice between a Europe dominated by economic warfare and financial markets , on the one hand , and a people 's Europe , a Europe of cooperation and social progress .
The promotion of public services is a response to the imperative of national solidarity , of social cohesion , a means of ensuring equality of access and treatment for users , by providing guaranteed continuity , security and quality in services to citizens .
Public service also provides for better management of the environment , and contributes to balanced town and country planning .
We believe that public service must be renovated , and that by democratizing it , that is , by associating staff and users in the management of public services , and releasing those services from the financial pressures of the banks .
Instead of wasteful competition , we believe in and hope to promote cooperation between public services , but also between the private and the public sector , to meet and satisfy requirements .
Synergies between public services and industrial companies can also be developed , so contributing to the implementation of an industrial policy and the development of employment .
Mr President , many thanks to Angela Billingham for this report .
It is particularly significant that it comes from Great Britain .
Under the previous government 's policy even the city water supply was privatized .
What was the competitive value of that ?
Is the colour of the water coming out of the pipes different in the morning from what it is in the evening ?
Water is obviously a public service .
It is the elixir of life , an absolute basic right .
What kind of democracy is it that fails to guarantee water for all ?
A viable public service system is the basis of equality and democracy .
For that reason it is good that the Amsterdam Treaty recognizes public services as immensely important and an essential principle of law in the EU .
I believe that effective public services also inspire confidence in the European Union .
Without them people 's trust in the Union will diminish .
Small-minded privatization must not come before common rights .
The approval of this report is a historic occasion .
While the old monopolies need a good shaking up , they should not be replaced by private monopolies or duopolies .
In my view , the Union should not enlarge unless equality improves .
Now borders between countries are falling away , but gulfs within states are deepening .
Good public services help us to attain the things most essential to us : solidarity , equality , confidence , and the growth of all three .
And that is the basis of democracy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are discussing a proposal by the Commission to make an addition to article 3 of the EC Treaty .
According to it , the activity of the Community should include a contribution to supporting services which are oriented to the common good .
In my assessment , that is dangerous for integration and competition policy , and in my opinion it must be rejected .
Writing it into the treaty would mean that state services of general interest would represent a dimension to which it would no longer be possible to set any limit .
Such an article would also have an effect on the Community 's competition rules and regulations , and also on the subsidy regulations , and in contrast to EU policy , which is based on opening up markets and privatization , this is the establishment of monopolies and preferential treatment of public companies , which cannot be in the interests of Europe .
We should ask ourselves what really belongs in state services of general interest .
I think , as little as possible .
In my opinion , the state must fulfil the following tasks , and it is sometimes good to remember them .
First , it must ensure internal and external security .
Second , it must ensure independent dispensation of justice , and third , it must support the sense of community of society by creating a balance between advantage and disadvantage .
Fourth , it must also fill the gaps in public life which are not filled by private business initiative .
But it does not have to operate a state airline , a state post and telephone company and a state railway company .
Where there is competition , it need not hinder it by introducing customs duties on imports and providing subsidies .
The most objective judge of services is and remains the market and not the state .
It determines the value of a service through competition .
So for a state or society , an urgent task is to organize a market , and not services of general interest .
I hope that we will not decide the opposite tomorrow .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should first of all like to congratulate Angela Billingham very sincerely on the excellent report she has prepared and the Commission on its statement .
The subject is of the greatest importance , because it deals with services of general interest in Europe , for which socialists have fought so hard and which have now been enshrined in the Treaty of Amsterdam .
It is indeed the case that both article 7d and the declaration in the final Minute provide guarantees for all those who consider that services of general interest , or ' public services ' , as our rapporteur systematically and quite rightly refers to them , are economic activities which are vital to citizens and society .
This acknowledgment in the new treaty , inasmuch as it considers such services as one of the common values of Europe and a Community principle , like full respect for the jurisprudence of the Court of Justice , particularly as regards equality of treatment , quality and continuity of services , undoubtedly represents an enormous vote of confidence in a Europe centred not only on companies and competition , but above all on citizens and their rights and the European social model .
Social cohesion can only be achieved if there is a coherent social infrastructure .
Services of general interest are by definition the principal component of that infrastructure .
One of the essential problems affecting public services is competition .
Competition cannot be justified as an end in itself where public services are concerned .
Its value lies in its effect on the standard and quality of the services provided to citizens .
Legally speaking , general services can be owned by the public , local authorities , cooperatives or private entities .
The essential thing is that service suppliers should guarantee quality services , irrespective of the type of ownership or organization , that their workers should be properly specialized , trained , motivated , paid and employed , and that citizens , whichever part of the country they live in , can have the benefit of the services due to them in identical conditions .
This is the general service model I also support for the Europe we are in the process of creating .
Thank you , Mr van Miert .
Mr Desama , the floor is yours .
Mr President , I have asked for the floor on a pointr of personal explanation , because I like a joke , but there are limits .
So thank you , Karel , for alluding to my position as a teacher , and it is precisely the teacher who is going to teach you a little lesson .
The first thing is that before you criticize your teacher , you should first listen to what the teacher said .
I never said that article 7d replaced article 90.2 .
At no time did I ever say that and it would be absurd to say so .
So you should have listened to me more before you gave that reply .
The second lesson relates to the decision concerning monopoly on imports .
I cited that decision because it is important for one thing , Mr Commissioner .
This time , in its decision , the Court of Justice said that it is the Commission 's responsibility to provide the proof that the monopoly is an impediment to free competition .
And it is on that point that the decision of the Court of Justice is clearly an innovation .
Mr President , the important thing about this report is not just the amendments that the Commission will accept , but whether or not the Commissioner would sit down with our rapporteur early in the New Year and explore the ideas in the report to see what can be progressed between the European Commission and the European Parliament .
In spite of the rhetoric that we have all been involved in this evening , there are some very concrete ideas in Mrs Billingham 's report .
What we would like to do is to progress some of those concrete ideas .
If tonight you could give a commitment that you are willing to do that then certainly in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy of the European Parliament we will try and take up those ideas and work with you to develop them .
Obviously we are prepared to do so .
But I think the right way to do it is to discuss the initiatives which the Commission develops in different sectors .
Every sector has its own specifics and in light of the specifics of the sector we need to determine what kind of public service obligation - or whatever you call it - needs to be assured .
This is how we have to work together .
I certainly will be available to anyone - not just to the rapporteur - to make sure that we do not take risks as far as serving people everywhere in the European Union is concerned .
Thank you very much , Commissioner van Miert .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 11.30 a.m. tomorrow .
Denominations in euros
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0386 / 97 ) on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , concerning the common position established by the Council with a view to the adoption of a Council Regulation on denominations and technical specifications of euros coins intended for circulation ( C4-0598 / 97-97 / 0154 ( SYN ) ) ( rapporteur : Mrs Soltwedel-Schäfer ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this will not be anywhere near as lively as Commissioner van Miert was when he gave his presentation .
Allow me to comment that he was today the liveliest speaker of the whole part-session .
On the second reading of my report on denominations and technical specifications of euro coins , I would like to point out again briefly that at first reading the majority of Parliament wanted and voted for essential changes to three points .
First , to reduce the number of coins from eight to six .
Second , to create a relationship between the actual size and the form and shape .
Third , to exclude nickel from all parts of the coin which come into contact with human skin .
I would like to justify this again briefly .
We now have a total of eight coins , and in the whole EU and many nations of the EU there are at the moment six coins on average , sometimes even less .
If we start from the fact that for many sections of the population , such as blind people for instance , it is very difficult to handle a large number of coins , this would be an example of a reason for reducing the total number of coins .
Secondly , if we start from the fact that electronic money is constantly growing , this would be another reason .
The next argument , that the coin should grow with its value to avoid confusion of sizes , was also an important demand .
For instance , the 5 cent coin , at 21.75 mm , is exactly the same size as the 20 cent coin , which makes things extremely difficult for people with disabilities .
The third issue is human health , an especially important aspect .
There was also a majority on this point in Parliament at first reading .
If we say that nickel should not to come into contact with human skin , we are only following other EU directives , which established this rule for other areas of daily need long ago .
The report was accepted in November with a large majority , but rejected by the Council .
On 20 November , the Council adopted a common opinion on the proposed order . The European Parliament had decided by a large majority , but the Council only accepted Amendment Nos 8 and 12 .
I was disappointed that the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy did not take advantage of its political opportunities in the last part-session .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy practically anticipated the Council .
There are now a few amendments , and incidentally I support all of them , but they are a long way from the point we were at during the November meeting .
What could we have done ?
Parliament could again adopt , by an absolute majority of its Members , all or some of the amendments which were rejected by the Council at first reading , as an amendment to the common position .
We have this option according to the procedure under article 189c , and we could have done it .
If the Commission or the Council show in the debate in the House that they are not prepared to accept Parliament 's desired amendments to a sufficient extent , Parliament could again reject the common position , and that is what I want and have proposed .
If the Council does not accept certain amendments , we can also break down the common position , and only accept it under conditions , that is , if the Council does not accept the amendments which Parliament has adopted , the common position is not approved .
Why do I repeat that again ?
I do not think we have not taken advantage of these opportunities in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy .
I would like to point out that the euro we will soon have , and which will certainly go down in European Union history as a successful and unique financial project , has the consequence that people will have the coins in their hands every day .
Problems like confusion about size , like nickel , which is recognized to be a health problem , and many other points in my report will face the population every day , so the euro coin is important and these problems will come back to us as those who are politically responsible .
I would therefore like to plead once again that we should take advantage of the political opportunities we have in Parliament .
Mr President , as you know Sweden has decided to remain outside EMU .
It is also my conviction that Sweden is going to remain outside monetary union for the foreseeable future .
There is therefore no immediate Swedish interest in the design of the euro coin .
However , I would still like to say a few words on the health aspects with regard to nickel in the outer layers of the coin .
10 % of all women and 1-2 % of all men in Western Europe have developed a nickel allergy .
These proportions are increasing , and 20 % of young women in Western Europe have this kind of illness .
Nickel is the most common cause of contact allergies in the industrialized world .
A person who has become allergic to nickel keeps this allergy for the rest of their life .
The allergy appears mainly in the form of eczema on the hands or on that part of the body which comes into contact with nickel .
Cashiers , bank employees , waitresses , and so on , daily handle large numbers of coins , which are often made from nickel alloys .
This coins deposit nickel on contact with the skin .
It can also be shown that nickel is even passed by hand to nickelfree coins and notes .
We have also proved that eczema on the hands of people allergic to nickel is made worse when they handle coins which contain nickel .
Nickel in coins does not cause allergies , but makes the problem worse for people who have already developed this illness .
A decision to introduce coins containing nickel in the outer layers could prove very difficult to change and could cause serious health problems for a growing proportion of Europe 's population , particularly for women , since they are often dominant in the professions where nickel coins are handled .
For this reason at least the outer layer of the coins should be nickel-free .
In this case health reasons should take priority over economic considerations .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , seeing the participation this evening , I can only say that the debate is obviously about small change .
It seems pretty unimportant to all of us , but the scale of this small change is 70 billion coins , and for this reason we in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy have taken it very seriously so far , and we have seriously tried to participate in the discussion about creating the new coins , by proposing amendments among other things .
The mint directors and finance ministers saw it otherwise .
They have prepared texts , proposed strategies .
But the Council did not accept what we discussed here , with quite small exceptions .
My personal opinion is essentially that what we discussed here at first reading was right , and that what we decided was right .
The breakdown of the coins , the increasing sizes , recognition by the blind and visually handicapped , also the old , traditional minting methods - all things which we have discussed and decided here - seem vitally important to me .
Last time we also defended the national side of the coins .
That is now written into the Council 's report , but we are very sad that our opinions were not accepted here .
However , my opinion is that what Mrs Sollwedel-Schäfer demanded here , in other words , the reintroduction of the earlier amendments , does not take us much further .
The scenario is clear .
In my opinion we should concentrate on two amendments , as we did in the economic committee , i.e. first the whole range of demands which have already been mentioned : increasing size , recognition of coins by blind people , recognition of coins by machines , protecting the larger coins from fraud .
We have proposed this and got it through the economic committee .
We should also decide on it in Parliament .
Secondly , we should pursue the matter of gold .
We are not suffering from gold fever .
People might have the idea that just before Christmas we caught gold fever , but we did not .
We want there to be a 100 euro gold coin , which would continue old traditions and at the same time , as we have argued here , reduce Europe 's gold reserves .
I think it is important to state again that protecting coins from forgery is very important to us , particularly as there are approximately 6 million coin-operated machines in Europe .
This involves the choice of alloys and recognition by machines .
In this connection , let it be said that obviously not only the coins must be safe from forgery , but also all the notes .
We have emphasized that many times .
They must meet the highest security standards , so that they are also safe from forgery in future .
Let me plead once again for the amendments proposed by the economic committee and accepted there by a large majority to be accepted here in the House as well .
Mr President , it is not possible for Council to send us its decisions and for Parliament then to do nothing , even if it decided quite differently at first reading ; it had decided to use metals that were not just nordic gold which is a metal primarily produced by certain states which will not be joining the euro .
Moreover , the other choice of metal is just copper , and I wonder why .
There are no plans to use stainless steel , which is a European metal ; 20 % of world currency is made of stainless steel .
This is an unacceptable situation .
I wonder what the final solution will be .
Finally , Council has relied on the fact that time is running out and no other decision can be taken , but that is certainly not true .
The whole thing is still an insult to Parliament , which has expressed certain views and cannot just react to what the Council has decided .
Mr President , what seemed to have become a purely technical report was suddenly given weight by the debate about the nickel in the coins and the national face .
Parliament 's view on how euro coins should look was raised at first reading .
I endorse the opinion of the rapporteur when she says that we should have fewer coins because the retail business will run into difficulties with a larger number of coins than we have now .
Unfortunately , the Council has dismissed the majority of the amendments and as long as the Council remains united it can do that .
The fact that Parliament only has advisory powers in this area plays a part in this .
The coin will become one of the most visible results of European integration , and respect would have been shown for the citizens if we had been able to influence this process through Parliament .
As a group we think nickel is acceptable in relation to combatting fraud .
The Council denied this Parliament the right to submit an amendment on the national face because it was alleged to have nothing to do with technical specifications .
As the Council knows very well , that is complete nonsense .
To enable the Dutch to keep the edge inscription God zij met ons -God be with us - the edge has also been declared part of the national face .
The edge and the national face therefore play a major part in the technical specifications which are needed to make the coins recognizable for the visually impaired , and for vending machines .
Thus we believe that the national face is not just a graphic aspect , as the Council states , but most certainly a technical aspect , and the old Amendment No 28 therefore deserves a full place in the Council Resolution , and not merely in the recitals .
Mr President , I believe that the proposed regulation will send a further strong message that the euro is on the way and all EMU participants are playing their part .
The aim of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy 's first amendment is to establish the principle of a single set of coins which would be designed so as to enable the visually impaired and the elderly , who have the greatest difficulty in distinguishing coins , to accept them more readily .
The second amendment is a proposal to introduce a gold 100 euro coin for collectors .
However the Treaty only provides for the harmonization of coins intended for circulation .
I am pleased that associations representing the visually impaired have been consulted on the euro coins .
Furthermore , Recital 8 of the regulation underlines the importance of the relationship between the diameter and value of the coins , to which reference has been made .
Our group believes that the coins , which will have one national and one common face , can be more easily recognized by those who use them by features such as their weight , shape , colour and diameter .
In the case of most coins in use at the moment , the size of the coins is not directly linked to their face value .
This can prove to be a difficulty for those who are using them .
As regards euro notes , we should not overlook the needs of the visually impaired and older people .
We should ensure that for the visually impaired , in particular , the notes are distinguishable by touch .
Perhaps there might be a response to that .
As regards the production of a 100 euro gold coin which for collectors might seem a very seductive proposition , it would be absolutely essential , if this proposal was taken up , to ensure that the cost of producing a gold coin did not exceed its face value , thereby imposing totally unacceptable costs on the Member States .
On the other hand , could not the revenue from the sale of the 100 euro coins be transferred to the budget ?
Taking account of these comments our group will be supporting this report .
Mr President , the euro , and particularly the coin , is certainly a quintessential component of Europe .
It shows on one side what we have in common , and on the other , individuality , as a symbol of Europe .
I have seen the first designs in Austria , but I was somewhat surprised that " Euro ' is printed above the euro , but " Eurocent ' is printed above the cent .
This could cause confusion .
Also , the size of the coins is different , and for non-experts it will really be quite difficult to distinguish the eight coins , instead of the six which have been normal up to now .
I will not dwell on the fact that many tills are equipped with six divisions , and must now be converted to eight .
The eight coins will also result in enormous production costs , and given that electronic money will soon be introduced , we are faced with a mass of costs which could have been avoided .
I also wonder how the order will be placed .
Will there be an invitation to tender with government orders ?
Will there be a competition ?
We have heard that we need 70 billion coins , so the costs will be enormous - how do these costs appear to citizens ?
Finally , I also believe that the 100 Euro gold coin can be a symbol of confidence in the new currency , even as a commemorative coin , even in a limited edition .
I believe Europe has an important task here , and we must improve the coins a lot .
Parliament made some proposals about this at first reading , but I believe it will be some time before we get the ideal system .
This need for improvement must be flagged up today , and I hope that it will be carried out in the second round .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , at this late hour I shall be brief , but first of all I want to tell you that the Commission is delighted that Parliament has been able to take a decision this evening on the second reading of the report by Mrs Soltwedel-Schäfer on the technical characteristics of coins .
Indeed , this is an important question .
The euro , and I say this often , is Europe in the pockets of our citizens .
Consequently , coins are the way in which Europe takes on a real shape , as our citizens see it .
This is the reason why the euro is not just a matter for the financial markets , it is a matter for the citizens , and it is for this reason that the regulation must be particularly carefully dealt with .
As Mr Hoppenstedt emphasized , there are now 70 billion coins in circulation .
This means several tens of billions of coins to be minted between now and 1 January 2002 .
This will be done , Mr Rübig , by national administrations , in the name of the principle of subsidiarity , according to the procedures of invitations to tender , or of production which apply in each of the member countries .
I know that the formal decision of the Ministers of Finance can only be taken after 2 May , immediately after the decision of the Heads of State and of Government , but for technical and practical reasons which you will understand , in the light of the number of coins , you can appreciate how important it is to get this matter wrapped up at Council level , in terms of principles , in terms of a formal agreement , before the end of this year .
The proposal before you today at second reading is based on in-depth work carried out for many months by the monetary authorities in the Member States and this has provided a guarantee of industrial feasibility , respecting the timetable agreed at Madrid in December 1995 by the Heads of State and of Government .
I would add that this is the result of a long process of consultation , of concertation with all professional sectors concerned , with associations of consumers and with organizations representing the blind and visually impaired .
The proposal made by the Commission is based on criteria of acceptability by public opinion - and we have tested that - on the basis of criteria of technical feasibility - and here we have assurances - and on public health criteria , because of course we do not want to take any risks with public health .
This proposal is therefore a balanced one , and it meets both industrial constraints and the requirements of users .
Some of you , as was the case in the debate at first reading , criticized the number of coins .
I wish to specify that the system is based on the experience acquired from all the Member States , and it ensures consistency with the unit values planned for notes .
The number and series of coins have been defined as a response to the requirements of all consumers , taking into account the diversity of national situations currently existing .
Today , in some Member States , the value of the smallest coin in circulation is around 1 euro cent .
Consensus has been reached on the size and shape of the coins , thanks , I would remind you , to the shape known as the " Latin flower ' , which is not totally round , for the 20 cent piece .
Consensus was also reached by defining three groups of coins , with three different colours , differentiating each coin within each group in terms of thickness and edging .
Consequently , the preoccupations of the visually impaired have been very , very largely , I would say almost entirely , taken into consideration .
The technical specifications also represent high levels of protection against forgery , and this is particularly important for coins of high unit value , and here I am thinking of the 1 and 2 euro pieces .
Finally , the technical specifications meet the concerns expressed in the area of public health , and provide the necessary assurances in that respect .
Here I want to say that the use of nickel in the Commission 's proposal will be substantially reduced in Europe , as it will be limited to the 1 and 2 euro pieces , and that the volume of coins containing nickel will fall to 8 % of the total coins currently in circulation in Europe , that is , contractually by 75 % .
I would add that the Toxicity and Ecotoxicity Committee , the scientific committee we approached on this proposal , supported this .
When the Ecofin Council adopted the common position last month , it took up the five amendments the Commission had accepted in its modified proposal .
These relate , I would remind you , to the need for a reliable system , an effective system , and a system acceptable to all the citizens of the European Union .
Your rapporteur 's recommendation for second reading retables two amendments .
As at first reading , the Commission cannot accept them .
But let me specify the Commission 's position on one of Mrs Randzio-Plath 's amendments , on the introduction of 100 euro gold coins .
We have looked closely at this amendment , and from a legal point of view , the Commission cannot accept it within the framework of article 105a.2 which relates to euro denominations intended for circulation .
Indeed , this proposal is in contradiction both to the introduction of the 100 euro note , which was already decided , and to the opposing view of central bankers , with regard to the circulation of such a coin .
However , in order to support the initiative , the Commission has suggested that all of the monetary authorities of the Member States should consider issuing a gold 100 euro collector 's coin .
This proposal should meet with the approval of the various Member States , and the Commission will keep you informed .
I think that would be heavily symbolic .
With the adoption of the regulation on the coins , the essential core of the arrangements required for moving to a single currency are now in place .
As it is late , I shall not go into the important decisions taken by the European Council at Luxembourg last week relating both to the coordination of economic policy , the euro Council , and the representation and definition of the external position of the euro in international bodies , but today we can say that all of the preparatory technical work relating to the euro is virtually complete .
This evening , on this eve of the New Year , I would like to thank the European Parliament for its support throughout these months , for its work , for our collaboration , and for its commitment to a process leading up to the introduction of the euro , according to the timetable and the conditions laid down by the treaty .
The final technical preparations , which are now just details really , will be completed at the end of May 1998 .
The Commission is now working actively on this , and will naturally keep your Parliament strictly informed and closely associated with its efforts . The Commission will be bringing together - and I make this announcement this evening - a new round table on practical aspects of the euro , with all concerned partners , and of course with your Parliament .
This round table will take place on 26 February in Brussels .
The way is now open for the advent of the euro , and the political decisions will be taken on 2 May .
Thank you very much , Commissioner de Silguy .
The rapporteur , Mrs Soltwedel-Schäfer , has a question .
Mr President , I know it is very late , but I would not be doing my job properly if I did not take up Mr Hoppenstedt 's question .
Perhaps Mr Hoppenstedt will stay here for a moment .
First , I wanted to say to you , Mr de Silguy , that from my and our point of view cooperation and mutual information went very well .
But I cannot understand the Commission and the Council not accepting these logically convincing amendments , which were accepted by a clear majority in Parliament and which really - as my colleague said - correspond to the interests of female citizens .
I really cannot understand that .
But now to my question : Mr Hoppenstedt put a very important question about the minting of coins .
Is there an invitation to tender , or is it like our showers in the Members ' offices , another open door for corruption and dishonest enrichment ?
I would like to take up that question : is there an invitation to tender ?
Yes or no ?
I would like an answer this evening , one way or the other .
Mrs Soltwedel-Schäfer , perhaps I expressed myself badly , but I thought I had replied to Mr Hoppenstedt on that point .
Every country must manufacture the stock of coinage required for its own market .
Each country must also produce the stock of notes required for its own market .
That is the principle adopted .
So once we have the technical regulations , once we have the decision on the Community face of the coin , it will be the responsibility of every member country , in application of the principle of subsidiarity , firstly to define the graphics of the national face of the coin , and I think that a number of countries have already done so , and secondly to make the technical arrangements required for the production of the coins in question .
The same will apply to the manufacture of euro coinage as already occurs in the manufacture of national currency coins in Germany , France , the Netherlands and other countries .
The manufacture will take place in accordance with the regulation applicable in each of the countries .
In some countries these are virtually state-run administrations , in other cases there are private companies and in yet others there are calls for competitive tender .
This is a question which is the responsibility of each of the Member States .
Manufacture will take place in the same conditions of legality and regularity and as currently apply in the production of national coinage .
I only wanted to ask , must these states then issue invitations to tender for eight coins , or would six be enough ?
For eight coins , because the intention is to circulate eight coins in all of the Member States .
Thank you very much , Commissioner de Silguy .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 11.30 a.m. tomorrow .
( The sitting was closed at 12.11 a.m. )
Ladies and gentlemen , as you may notice , the three presidents are all arriving late .
Please forgive us .
The only time we could hold the usual three-way talks was this morning at 8 a.m. It was not easy , and even now we have still not finished , because there were delicate matters to be settled between the three institutions .
European Council in Luxembourg - Six months of the Luxembourg Presidency
The next item is the joint debate on :
the report by the Council and statement by the Commission on the European Council meetings of 21 November and 12-13 December in Luxembourg , and-the statement by the Council on the six months of the Luxembourg Presidency.The President-in-Office of the Council has the floor .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , throughout my long political career I have learnt that it is necessary to be economic with the term " historic ' .
Nevertheless I do not hesitate to use the term with respect to the Luxembourg decision to launch the accession process with ten countries of east and central Europe and Cyprus .
The new Europe which is being drawn up under our very eyes for once and for all erases the old lines of division and the scars of past wars between brothers !
The path is from now on open towards unification of the continent , a unification marked by democracy , liberty and prosperity .
The lunch in Luxembourg , which brought together the Heads of State and of Government of the fifteen member and eleven applicant countries was an emotional moment , and one which personally moved me a great deal .
The representatives of the eleven applicant countries have all experienced an historic occasion .
And I mean all the applicant countries , for the European Council , in line with the approach set out in Agenda 2000 , insisted on the inclusive character of the accession process .
All the States concerned are called on to join us , and all will receive aid and assistance to be able to do this as quickly as possible .
Some , we know , are more advanced than others , and will be able , as of April , to commence concrete negotiations .
For the others , we will speed up the efforts to prepare them for future negotiations .
The President of the European Council , Jean-Claude Juncker , has just described the details of the agreement reached in Luxembourg .
I can therefore be brief . I would not want to fail , however , to pay homage to Jean-Claude Juncker personally - and via him to all of the presidency team - for the way in which they have conducted the work , in Luxembourg and before .
( Loud applause ) Mr President , the euphoria of the moment must not hide the difficulty of the task awaiting us .
The discussions in Luxembourg gave us a prior taste of this difficulty .
We are perhaps experiencing a fairy tale , but all fairy tales have their crises , their tears , their moments of fear .
Enlargement to the east and to the south , for the reasons stated in Agenda 2000 , will be an arduous task .
The distance to be covered by our future Member States is considerable .
As far as the European Union itself is concerned , deep reforms will be necessary : institutional reforms , political reforms and the establishment of a new financial framework .
But , and I will say this from the outset , the issue of unification of the continent obliges us to overcome the difficulties and get down to the task at hand with determination .
The problems , real , serious ones , are perfectly masterable and manageable .
But they are only so if we have clear ideas and if we agree to deal with the problems within the context of the whole .
This is precisely the approach of Agenda 2000 , where the different factors make up a single , dissociable whole .
The Luxembourg European Council confined itself to giving a few broad indications ; the essential thing there was to launch the process of accession .
It was understandable that the Member States did not want to show their hands at the beginning of a difficult negotiation process .
But I believe they have clearly understood that the common agricultural policy will have to be reformed , that structural actions will have to be reviewed , that the future financial framework will have to be strict .
The Commission will present its detailed proposals in the spring .
It will try its best to reconcile ambition and solidarity with realism .
And I am counting on the fact that , whilst defending their individual interests , the Member States will measure up to the issue : the unification of our continent along the lines of a community model that has served us so well up to now .
Mr President , let me say a word about Turkey .
When the emotion has subsided , we will see , I am sure , that the Luxembourg European Council is a crucial step in our relations with this important partner .
Why ?
Firstly because , for the first time in a long while , the European Union has a clear and unified position with regard to this country .
Secondly because this position is consistent and , in my view , perfectly correct .
The offer made to Turkey is concrete and substantial , whatever Ankara 's disappointed reaction .
In fact , the European Union proposes to open a path for Turkey 's future membership , to launch a European strategy for Turkey which will enable that country to prepare itself for accession - this strategy includes both the European Conference and a substantial strengthening of bilateral relations - and finally , to revive the elements of cooperation already in place , including the financial protocol .
What are we asking in exchange ?
Respect for the principles of good neighbourliness , recourse to the International Court of the Hague in case of territorial disagreements , support for the resolution of the Cyprus problem and support for the latter 's accession to the European Union . Ladies and gentlemen , is it really so exorbitant to ask this of a partner who wants to join us ?
I think not .
Mr President , I would say that the second important issue for the Luxembourg Council was , once again , the single currency .
Everything is now in place for a decision , another historic one , on 2 and 3 May , regarding the participants in the third phase of economic and monetary union .
The Heads of State and of Government have resolved the problems that were raised .
There was some agitation , irritation even , but the result is there , and the main thing is that this result seems to me to be completely appropriate with regard to the coordination of economic policies .
The Ecofin Council is , and will remain , the main authority for coordination and decision making , but this will not prevent informal discussions from being held between ministers of countries participating in the euro , regarding questions linked to the common management of the euro .
The discussions will take place - and this is a further guarantee - in the presence of the Commission .
Mr President , the Luxembourg presidency is ending with a historic success .
This success must not hide the progress achieved in many other areas , thanks to the constant effort of a presidency oriented completely towards the common good and towards service to the European Union , thanks also to excellent cooperation with the European Parliament and the Commission .
It has been an excellent six months for Europe .
A few examples are sufficient to illustrate this .
The special summit in November on employment opened up a new stage in employment strategy with the adoption of guidelines for national policies in this area .
The taxation agreement achieved brings movement into an area which has , for a long time , been blocked .
The liberalization of the gas market , added to that already achieved for electricity , places a new stone in the building of the internal market .
In terms of foreign policy , the European Union has just shown - on two occasions - to what point it wishes to play a role on the international scene by presenting a unique and strong position .
At Kyoto , the result achieved regarding climatic protection - without being ideal , far from it - was considerable and that is thanks to the action of the European Union .
In Geneva the European Union has once more played a pivotal role in the negotiations with the World Trade Organization , this time regarding financial services .
The agreement achieved surpassed our expectations and will greatly benefit European companies .
And I await with impatience the day when the European Union will be able to show the same spirit of cohesion and determination in the area of foreign policy and common security .
Much other progress has been achieved over these last six months , but I will stop here .
I am very pleased with the progress noted , and with the extremely positive response that our proposals have received .
I sincerely congratulate the Luxembourg Presidency which has trodden a faultless path , under the leadership of Jean-Claude Juncker .
( Loud applause )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , a European Council which for the first time has concentrated exclusively on the core question of the last decade of this century , the common fight against unemployment in the Member States of the Union ; a European Council which has fired the starting gun for the solution of the core question of Europe in the first decade of the next century , bringing the people of the whole continent together in a union of freedom , democracy and economic development ; a budget in which , together with Parliament , they have put through the principles of thrift , solidarity and the ability of the Union to act .
An exemplary and successful effort of the Presidency for sensible cooperation between the Council and Parliament in all areas of Union policy ; that , Mr President of the European Council , was the great Presidency of a small country !
My party supports the decisions of the European Council of 12 and 13 December on the start of the process of expanding the Union .
They correspond to the baseline which my party supported in the discussion procedure in our Chamber .
First , to start the accession procedure with all applicant countries simultaneously .
Second , to start the accession negotiations first with five plus one , and third , by intensive introductory discussions and strengthened assistance , to contribute to making the start of concrete negotiations with each of the remaining five possible , as soon as possible .
I welcome what President Juncker said about Turkey .
My party thought the offer the European Council made to Turkey was already very generous .
Some thought even too generous .
We say now that Turkey should think about its interests and use the chance the offer provides , instead of withdrawing into a sulk !
Also , the most important result of the summit is not Turkey 's reaction but the fact that the summit gave the green light for the start and the method of accession of the people of Eastern Europe to the European Union .
We look towards the future , and I say that the decision to start the accession process is as nothing compared to the decisions the European Union will have to make in the next few years if enlargement is to be successful .
We shall have to prepare ourselves for long and difficult negotiations , because if it actually happens in the next five , six , or seven years , the strength of the willingness and enthusiasm for accession of the people of Eastern Europe will sometimes be tested .
But the test which our Union will have to pass is even more difficult .
The reform of agricultural policy , the structural funds , and the financing of the enlargement , will all show one thing very quickly : that the enlargement does not come at zero cost .
It will demand willingness to reform , concessions , readiness to compromise and sacrifice from all , I underline all , Member States of the Union .
And the Union will not only be tested for perseverance , but also for courage and farsightedness .
That applies particularly to reform of the institutions .
My party regrets that the Luxembourg European Council said nothing more about that than to confirm Amsterdam .
We insist that the Union needs substantial reform before the first accession by a new Member State .
( Applause ) The start of the enlargement process must also be the start of a great discussion by all the social forces in the European Union , a discussion about the future of the Union itself and thus of Europe .
This discussion , ladies and gentlemen , must also take place here in our Chamber , with greater vigour .
The introduction of the euro and enlargement present us all with the question of the future constitution of our Union .
They present us with the question of the future boundaries of the Union .
The enlargement must have and will have boundaries .
There must be more things in Europe than between heaven and earth , to quote Shakespeare , more than just in or out of the European Union .
We must discuss them !
Ladies and gentlemen , in the 1950s our fathers had the courage and far-sightedness to abolish the thousand-year old antagonism between France and Germany in a European Community .
For the first time for a thousand years , our generation of politicians has the opportunity to unite the whole of Europe on the basis of the free will of its peoples .
Let us show that we have the same courage and the same farsightedness as our fathers .
( Applause )
Mr President , Presidents of the European Council and Commission , ladies and gentlemen , in the event that the negotiations with the ten countries from central and eastern Europe and with Cyprus are concluded positively , Europe transcending east and west becomes a fact .
That is why the European summit in Luxembourg is an historic milestone in the history of European unification .
The brave vision of the founders , of the fathers of a communal Europe prevails once more .
Europe unites in peace and freedom because it has accepted a revolutionary principle in international relations , namely that of Community integration .
The European Parliament wanted to avoid a new division , which would have left some countries at the side of the road , despite their enormous efforts to breathe new life into their democracies and market economies .
The European summit sided with this policy .
It offers all candidates the opportunity to negotiate with the Union as from the spring of 1998 , even if the speed of these negotiations may vary according to the degree of preparation in each country .
The shadow hanging over the success of Luxembourg comes from Turkey .
Europe had expected this country to accord actively with the principles of democracy and the state of law that apply in the European Union .
To us it is evident that the rift in the political dialogue with Ankara must not continue , but it is equally clear to us that no solution for Cyprus is possible without a climate of trust and dialogue , where there are no threats or blackmail .
Ladies and gentlemen , I want to pay tribute to the Luxembourg Presidency , which has done exceptional work in perfect dialogue with the European Parliament .
I congratulate Jean-Claude Juncker on his personal achievement , in his strategic role as President-in-Office of the European Council , but also as President of Ecofin and the Employment Council .
I congratulate the Minister for Foreign Affairs and his entire team .
The summit on employment placed this new dimension , which had previously been missing and which is a big issue for our citizens , on the European agenda once and for all .
At the same time you have achieved an important breakthrough in the tax system .
The Council has approved a package with a code of conduct laid down by the Member States for a tax system covering companies and savings balances .
Our appreciation is increased by the progress in the field of Justice and Home Affairs , spurred on by our former colleague Marc Fischbach , in the fight against international crime .
But we are also worried .
May I request confirmation from the President of the Council of the positive interpretation of point 3 of the conclusions , in particular the point that institutional reform will precede enlargement ?
We also find a paradox , as do you , between an increasingly coherent and structured core around the Euro Council and an eventual enlargement of the European Union to 25 Member States .
We would see no paradox if we had resigned ourselves to a multi-speed Europe .
But we do not accept that , and our ambition remains to create a widened and cohesive Union , which is why we support the declaration of the three countries who wish to make a new enlargement dependent on preparatory institutional reform .
That reform is badly needed to reconcile the consequences of the two dynamics , namely the dynamic of the euro and the dynamic of the enlargement .
Another worry of course concerns the financial prospects .
Our fellow citizens undoubtedly value vigilant management of financial resources .
But they also realize that no price can be put on every day of peace ; that in the short term the enlargement will imply a cost that we will have to carry together , but in the long term it will be an asset for the entire continent .
We therefore hope that the coming months will not be poisoned by prosaic discussions on the appropriate return , and that the financial debate will not gain the upper hand over our political ambitions .
The family portrait , with 26 Heads of State and of Government , meant a great deal more than the traditional picture of an international forum .
The 110 million citizens who are called to cooperate with us , will have to make enormous efforts to integrate their economies into the European Union .
But they also have a compass .
They have a horizon which is approaching .
Over the coming months and years let us exercise our immense responsibility during the bridging period up to their accession into the Union in a dignified way .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mr Juncker , President of the European Council , in particular , along with the Luxembourg Presidency , for the remarkable energy they have shown to ensure that the two successive Luxembourg summits led to concrete results and to a balance sheet of decisions that are of a very high quality .
The decision taken in Luxembourg , on 12 December 1997 , by the Heads of State and of Government of the fifteen governments , to commence accession negotiations with the ten countries of east and central Europe and with Cyprus as from the beginning of next year , is an historic event of major importance .
The effect of this decision will be to put an end once and for all to the division of Europe , one of the most dreadful consequences of the Second World War .
In order to avoid this decision remaining a virtual reality and to ensure that it is lasting , a great deal remains to be done ; I am tempted to say the hardest remains to be done .
The train has been placed on the tracks but , for the moment , it is going through a tunnel and its passengers are unaware of the countryside they are going to discover at the end of the tunnel .
In the circumstances their anxiety is understandable .
According to well-worn tradition , the issues likely to upset institutional reform - the adaptation of the common agricultural policy to the new challenges of an enlarged Europe and the rural exodus , the financing of common policies and the financing of enlargement - have been postponed until later .
But one day we will have to reply to the existential questions which the citizens of Europe are raising , and the sooner the better .
What are the geographical limits of Europe ?
Whose vocation is it to be a member of the European Union ?
What sort of partnership should be proposed to the countries who , although their land is not European , have a European history and strong cultural and economic links with Europe , such as Turkey or Russia ?
Regarding Turkey , the ambiguity of the proposed solutions has led to a rupture which it must be hoped is only a temporary one , for if not this would be tragic .
What will happen to our future relations with Russia , if the European Union opens up its borders to the east without first defining a global political architecture of the great Europe which encompasses Russia ?
What political content do we wish to give to an enlarged European Union in the area of defence policy , security and the project of a shared society ?
If the accession negotiations are limited to searching only for the conditions by which the " acquis communautaire ' can be extended to future Member States and put into practice by them - and this risk exists - will we not be losing sight of the most important thing , which is to set up a European political grouping capable of taking up the challenge of globalization and of avoiding cultural levelling , which would destroy the values of our civilization ?
What unity in the area of internal and external security , or of growth shared equitably do we want to establish between Europeans in order to obtain their membership of a common project ?
You cannot lead people towards their destiny blindfold .
So these questions must be answered as quickly as possible for our European citizens , and the Amsterdam and Luxembourg summits have left them unanswered so far .
Of course , the work continues and it is not all bad , but it is still a step in the dark and future presidencies of the European Union will have their work cut out .
I wish them lots of luck !
Mr President , as the second half of 1997 comes to an end , one might be tempted to think that the maintenance of statutory equality within the European Union prevails over all other considerations .
Mr Juncker will understand what I mean , I am sure .
Indeed , the quality of a European Council does not vary according to the number of nationals of a Member State who take on the position of President-in-Office of the Council , nor does it vary according to the number of questions of detail that are settled .
What is primarily important is its capacity to formulate true political directions .
The European Council of 20 and 21 November last , which marked the starting point of a coordinated policy on the part of Member States with regard to the fight against unemployment , responded to that expectation .
Still more recently , the Council of 12 and 13 December marked the official kick-off of a long process of reconciliation within Europe itself .
The path to enlargement is now mapped out .
Of course , important questions remain unanswered , in particular those relating to the financing of Agenda 2000 .
But let us not be under any illusions .
For the foreseeable future , there will not be , or there will no longer be , cause to resort to easy solutions , either in the area of policy or in the area of financing current European Union policies or those directly related to enlargement .
This in no way undermines the historic nature of the European Council 's decision to encompass ten countries of central Europe and Cyprus .
The most important thing in this decision is also , to a certain extent , and to use a well known phrase , the issue of what will remain when everything else has been forgotten .
This means the number of essential points of reference on which the step towards a stronger and larger Europe must be based : I am thinking of human rights , respect for minorities , of a state of law worthy of that name .
These have become obvious in our Member States and have been rediscovered by the applicant states of eastern and central Europe .
The reference points or political criteria I am referring to are enshrined in the European Convention on Human Rights .
Our Member States have signed it .
So have the applicant countries .
The same applies to the Turkish Government , which signed the convention long before the CEECs .
We are therefore not asking the impossible of Turkey when we remind the Turkish Government to respect the principles they themselves have signed up to , the texts they themselves have signed and ratified .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Mr Minister of Foreign Affairs , your presidency , which will soon come to an end , and for which I once again unreservedly congratulate you both personally and on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , will have enabled decisive progress to be made in essential areas .
Essential institutional reform , the defining of budgetary parameters , the laborious modifications both within the European Union and the applicant countries all indicate that the road is still a long one in order to achieve a European Union based on values which are ever more closely knit , ever more closely united ; in short , this new order of peace , justice , liberty , law and prosperity that we want with all our hearts .
The credit for having made a good start unquestionably goes to you .
Mr President , Presidents of the Council and the Commission , I too congratulate the Luxembourg Presidency on its excellent work .
We have seen how a country which is small in demographic terms can become great in political terms .
And with that philosophy , our medium-sized group wishes to make some important comments , which are critical , but stem from our huge commitment to the building of Europe .
First , I want to consider the employment summit .
We think it is a positive step that for the first time , at the request of the French Government , there has been a summit on employment , which is the biggest problem faced by European society and the societies of our individual countries .
It is true that employment policy is still a matter for the Member States . However , the Member States have now solemnly and publicly committed themselves to solving the problem of unemployment and providing vocational training for the long term and young unemployed , within specified timescales .
I am also going to mention the obvious negative aspects : the fact that we continue to bow to the ideas contained in the stability pact , and the fact that there is no control over the autonomous power of the European central bank ( although we must admit that the creation of the Euro Council shows a willingness to have a political government overseeing the European economy ) .
We are not making the most of the synergy between the French and Italian proposals to reduce the working day to 35 hours , although we had the chance to extend this debate to the whole of Europe .
As for the European Council of 12 and 13 December , we basically agree with the great objective of enlargement , but there are still two major problems outstanding .
The first is that the necessary institutional reforms have not been carried out , and we run the risk of converting Europe into a huge free trade zone .
Therefore , we give our most wholehearted support to the idea that this institutional reform should take place before a single new member joins the European Union .
Furthermore , in many countries there is a belief that the cost of enlargement will be paid by the less well-off Member States , with solidarity policies being reduced , and the common agricultural policy weakened .
We need to increase the financial perspectives .
We are also opposed to any discrimination in accepting new members . For that reason , we think it is a good idea to offer them all a range of possibilities .
We think the European Union is taking a clear stance on Turkey for the first time .
This is not a club for Christians .
Turkey is a real candidate , but it has to fulfil the conditions .
I do not want to repeat here the votes and circumstances of the customs union , but I do want to mention a very important related problem , because there have been declarations made by European institutions about the Republic of Cyprus , which I believe were inappropriate .
We cannot renounce our acceptance of a single , legitimate government for Cyprus because of Turkey 's view , or its threats .
The people of Cyprus need to know that although there are two communities which have to work together , there is a single legitimate government .
Lastly , I want to say that we very much approve of the Council 's declaration on the peace process in the Middle East .
We bid farewell to the Luxembourg Presidency with affection and gratitude . We also want to thank President Santer , who has been working steadily , together with the Commission , supporting the work of the various Council presidencies .
We often criticize him , but it is important also to support and encourage him in his tasks - if we do not want to neglect the Commission .
Mr President , Presidents of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , we are on the final approach to the end of 1997 ; the festive sounds and colours are even making an appearance in Parliament .
The theme of the discussions in the European political institutions during the past year was Agenda 2000 , the pressing question being how the gulf which divided Europe into two blocks after World War II might be bridged in a concrete manner , and how the old continent could once again become one Europe .
The decisions of the Council on 12 and 13 December show that , although 12 countries were called , few were chosen , namely five plus one .
The Greens regret that the Council opted for a two-tier model on the main issue .
The choice made by the majority of this Parliament a few weeks ago was a different one .
I do not think it we need to hide that ; it does not help the countries concerned and it does not help our credibility .
The choice we made in this Parliament was to start both the accession and negotiation procedures with all countries which meet all the Copenhagen criteria .
What has remained of that is a group photo with eleven candidates taken on the 30 March .
The true , realistic , bilateral negotiations have started with five plus one , and the other countries will be crammed to prepare for negotiations much , much later on .
To them it is therefore only a formal accession procedure , not a negotiation procedure .
Those who were able to pick up the reactions from the numerous Eastern European journalists immediately sensed the enormous disappointment of those kept waiting , and the enormous joy for those admitted to immediate negotiations .
What 's more , it sticks out like a sore thumb that Slovakia , despite its serious political problems , is getting exactly the same treatment as the other four countries .
This Parliament did want to support Slovakia with a clear accession offer , but did not want to start negotiations .
As a result of the effectual cancellation of the start of the negotiations with the other four , Slovakia now enjoys exactly the same conditions .
This in contrast to Turkey , which is receiving incomparably different treatment .
Already a few weeks ago , the European Parliament stated quite rightly that Amsterdam was insufficient to implement the fundamental institutional reforms .
On that point the Council remains extremely ambiguous .
But here , ladies and gentlemen , we have a key in our hands ; no country can join without our agreement .
That is why I would like to call on this Parliament to draw up a parliamentary strategy with the parliaments of the Member States and those of the candidate countries , that will lead to a reform of the Union which will make it enlargeable ; and which will start a process that bridges the social and cultural gap between western and eastern Europe and develop authentic partnerships with all candidate countries , irrespective of their different ethnic and religious traditions .
That way we will be able to support democratic and humanitarian strengths in all candidate countries , and that is our mission .
Mr President , like many of the speakers before , I would like to congratulate the Presidentin-Office of the Council and the Prime Minister for the efforts deployed by their Presidency .
They have confirmed that a country which is not one of the largest can clearly demonstrate an extraordinary amount of energy in comparison to the size of its population .
But it is now a matter of evaluating the European Councils , that is , the decisions taken by the fifteen Heads of State and of Government .
The balance sheet seems rather uneven to us .
Above all , I will talk about the second summit , that of 12 and 13 December , since we have already debated the very important employment summit .
December 's summit clearly has positive aspects .
I am thinking primarily of the confirmation of the desire of the Union to see the accession , in the near future , of the ten applicant countries of eastern and central Europe , plus Cyprus .
It is a very important point and I understand the emotion the President of the Commission mentioned .
In addition , Mr President-in-Office , you have managed to put all of the applicant countries of central Europe in the same family photo , thus trying your best to reduce the establishment of the two distinct categories desired by the Commission .
I congratulate you on this .
I am happy to note that the negotiations will be speeded up for all the applicant countries as long as they achieve sufficient progress .
In addition , you promise to strengthen substantially the aid which will enable them to accomplish this progress .
Let us take note of these promises .
I also consider the confirmation of measures for the establishment of the euro and the recognition that euro zone ministers can meet together amongst the positive points of this summit .
In this regard I am very happy with the stress which has been placed on the necessary coordination of economic policies .
The fact remains that many points , if not negative , are at least imprecise or vague .
That applies to the enlargement .
I will make four comments .
The reduction in the distinction between the two categories of applicant countries does not mean that this distinction no longer exists .
We will have to remain vigilant to avoid the negotiations ending up in a strengthening of the divisions , even a rivalry between applicant countries .
I would also like to express grave concerns regarding the necessary reform of the Union institutions , prior to enlargement .
The European Council spoke of this , but with no precise commitment and without showing a clear and distinct political will .
In this , too , we will have to be vigilant .
There is the same imprecision and the same timidity regarding the future financial framework .
The European Council remained vague on this and it is still not clear how we can realistically provide aid to the countries of eastern and central Europe , at the same time as aiding our own disadvantaged regions , preserving our common policies and promoting the creation of jobs .
From this point of view , the European Council has , in a way , rushed headlong into this .
I am not satisfied about Turkey .
In spite of what has been said this morning in this Chamber and to which I have listened attentively , I do not believe that the Union has a clear strategy towards Turkey .
This lack of strategy is not new , I admit . It dates back to the 1960s .
But was it really appropriate to devote such long paragraphs to this country in the final document of the Luxembourg summit ?
Paragraphs much longer and stricter than for any of the other applicant countries , running the risk of causing an explosion of national pride in Turkey and , even more serious , the risk of appearing ahead of ourselves with ulterior motives .
It is through impartiality , objectivity and frankness that solutions will be found to this extremely complex issue , avoiding the regrettable blunders committed here and there .
I am thinking , for example , of the references to religion when tracing the borders of Europe .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , you have done a good job , and you are not responsible for the hesitations of the fourteen other governments .
Unquestionably , you leave the Union in a better state than it was six months ago .
The morale of the troops , if you will permit me this rather trivial expression , the morale of the troops has improved .
But you know as well as I that the Union is progressing slowly .
On numerous issues we are still at the stage of intentions .
A great deal of effort is still required to turn these into achievements .
Mr President , the establishment of the process of access to the European Union of the countries of eastern and central Europe has been presented by the President of the Commission in Brussels as a wonderful present to ourselves , to the applicants and to the whole world .
This propaganda is in contrast to the reality .
With regard to the European Union , it is clear that the process fundamentally challenges the common agricultural policy of the Treaty of Rome , which will be replaced by a free trade area favouring productivity to the detriment of employment and the environment .
Thus the long term objective of the Commission will have been achieved , which consists of aligning European prices in the agricultural sector with world prices and of allocating the financial resources still available to a number of sectoral aids , as they exist or have existed , for textiles and shipbuilding .
Without doubling or tripling the European budget , that is , increasing taxes considerably , the benefits of the structural funds will have but a limited effect on the economic development of the countries applying for accession , which are at a pre-capitalist stage and must first of all reconstitute a national economy before being able to face up to outside competition .
Furthermore , is it really in the interests of these countries , having just recovered their freedom , to see their independence disappear into a European grouping which regulates all areas of political and civic life and , with a few percent of the vote , be unable to defend their own interests ?
For France , it goes without saying that this Europe 's decisions are not permanent ones .
Our battle is only just beginning .
Perhaps , indeed , the creation of the single currency will bring about the appearance of objective conditions which will enable the revolutionary forces of the left and right to take power .
So all the supranational Europe activists will regret having forgotten that what is not based on the confidence of the people is illegitimate and condemned by history to disappear .
Mr President , the conclusions reached by the Presidency of the Luxembourg summit begin by stating that the European Council of 12 and 13 December constitutes a milestone for the future of the Union and the whole of Europe and that the commencement of the process of enlargement inaugurates a new era , ending the divisions of the past .
We very much hope so , even if we do not share the emphasis placed on " new ' ; Mr de la Palisse would call it new - there is no doubt about it , everything that comes later is new . However , we are concerned about what the new leaves behind : a divided , weak , threatened Europe , torn to pieces by ideological or racial hatred , a poor or destroyed Europe ?
No , Mr President ; the Europe of today , not divided , not threatened and weak , not torn to pieces by racial hatred , not destroyed and hurt by poverty , is a collection of states of peoples which have freely chosen to live together and which , by the method of integration , have managed to overcome the hurdles of the past and become an economic and commercial power , a guarantee of stability and peace .
It is the integration process that has enabled us to reach levels of wellbeing never before reached for such a large number of citizens .
It is the integration process that has enabled countries , torn by three wars in the space of a few decades , to build a peaceful and prosperous Community together . Integration , not mere intergovernmental cooperation ; common policies , not mere commercial agreements in specific production sectors ; integration , not a declaration of good will ; integration , regulations , common laws .
This term has been the reason for success and it is because of the instrumental use of this term in the Presidency 's conclusions that we should not agree with what has been said ; that the extension of the European integration model on a continental scale is a guarantee of stability and prosperity for the future .
No , Mr President , the European integration model after Maastricht and , above all , after Amsterdam , has become a Community acquisition ; we are leaving behind the Community method of integration to adopt the intergovernmental method , the new method very dear to those who have obstructed the construction of the European Communities right from the outset or those who have disputed them or been afraid of their commencement and successes .
My party supported the efforts made by the founding fathers and voted for the Treaties of Rome .
It voted critically on Maastricht because it feared the risk that the single currency would become the master of any choice , excluding policy and the functions of mediation and synthesis .
For this reason , we do not share the emphasis on this new era , on this future that will no longer be Community but intergovernmental , at the mercy of the changeable government majorities , of this or that country , whose parties in power today , in almost all countries of the Union , voted against the Treaties of Rome or , in the best case , abstained .
However , if the new era means a Europe expanded to 21 and then to 27 , the change will certainly refer to the geographical aspects , not to the quality of the Union or to its depth .
Because that is what this is all about : without depth , without political union , enlargement will remain a territorial and statistical extension .
We do not mean to blame the Luxembourg Government , but there is no doubt that , apart from the decision on enlargement , in the perspective we have indicated , all the other important unresolved problems studding the Union 's activity , have been forgotten or put on the agenda but not dealt with . We are thinking of unemployment , justice , majority decision-making - the symbol of greater democracy within the Union , the question of the European Parliament taking part in the European Conference on enlargement - full recognition of representation of the wishes of the electorate .
Mr President , once again Parliament has been excluded from the decisions and the future of Europe , and this is unfair and undemocratic .
Madam President , I should like to begin by congratulating the Luxembourg Presidency on its stewardship over the past six months .
The presidency has been a model of openness and good practice and I particularly welcome the way in which it has anticipated some of the democratic provisions of the Amsterdam Treaty , in particular with regard to its relationship with the European Parliament and the justice and home affairs pillar .
For many of us one of the high points of the presidency was the special employment summit , a positive summit by any yardstick and one which saw agreement on a wide range of measures and principles .
It was a summit which stressed the need for competitiveness , training , lifelong learning , greater employability , for using the European Investment Bank to the best possible effect , for giving better support for our small and medium-sized enterprises and for greater macro-economic coordination amongst our Member States .
All of these were positive measures .
But if the employment summit was a success , last weekend 's summit was a truly historic event .
We are delighted that a satisfactory and sensible agreement has been reached on the so-called Euro-X .
Informal discussions will , of course , take place amongst those Member States who join economic and monetary union in the first wave .
But Ecofin is the body which is empowered to make economic decisions and I am glad that has been recognized .
The Luxembourg summit was also a success because clear agreement was reached on the process of enlarging the European Union .
A European conference will be convened for all the aspiring countries and formal negotiations will begin in the spring of next year with Hungary , Poland , the Czech Republic , Estonia , Slovenia and Cyprus .
This is surely the way forward .
As we all know , there has been some controversy over the past few days because of Turkey 's reaction to the summit 's decision .
I have to say that Turkey 's reaction is very unfortunate .
The door has not been closed to Turkey - in fact , quite the opposite .
A clear strategy has been mapped out for Turkey to move progressively closer to the European Union .
I sincerely hope Ankara will consider its response .
As we all know , for enlargement to be successful , the European Union too has to change and we have to have policies in place to meet the new challenges of the years ahead .
That is why Agenda 2000 is central to all our futures .
We should therefore be pleased that the European Council saw the Commission 's communication as a firm basis for agreement on a new financial perspective , and also as a basis for going forward on a wide range of policies .
In particular , we all recognize that the structural funds have to change in the near future and that the common agricultural policy must be reformed in a quite fundamental way .
The Luxembourg presidency has been an undoubted success .
Next we have the British presidency , and I believe that many of the initiatives which have been taken during the past six months will be taken forward by the British presidency .
They will be taken forward , extended and reinforced .
Because of what has happened over the last six months - the hard work , the conscientiousness , the diligence of the Luxembourg presidency - Europe is now more confident .
It is now more coherent and much stronger as a result .
The President-in-Office has done a fine job and his example must be taken forward and replicated .
I congratulate him in the warmest possible way .
I have received seven motions for a resolution , pursuant to Rule 37 , paragraph 2 of the Rules of Procedure .
Madam President , Presidents , allow me first of all to thank the many colleagues who have praised the Luxembourg Presidency .
It is true that , as in the past , Luxembourg has demonstrated that small countries can achieve great presidencies .
This is no accident , but is explained by the fact that small nations , not having their own interests to defend , can commit themselves fully to the common good and thus work for the progress of Europe .
What are the salient features of these last six months ?
In my opinion , the Luxembourg Presidency has achieved a double challenge : taking fundamental , even historic , decisions , and proposing a method by which these decisions may be achieved in a balanced and timely way .
After decades during which European action was above all dominated by economic interests , the social side has finally gained its rightful place , through the employment summit .
In the future , economic decisions will have their social consequences ; in the future , man , the citizen , will be once more the centre of European policy ; in the future , thanks to the methods organized in Luxembourg , political decisions taken , both at European and national level , will play an important role .
In the area of social issues , after Luxembourg , nothing will be the same again , and this is just as well .
The second historic decision concerns the launching of the process of enlargement which finally puts an end to the divisions of the past and reconciles the European continent with itself .
The way to achieve this has been decided .
Now it is for the applicant countries to prepare themselves economically for accession and for the member countries to review their institutions and policies , in order to be able to cope with the arrival of the new members .
This will often be difficult , sometimes painful , but the issue is worth it .
For the process to succeed , it is of course necessary to establish a real Marshall Plan for those countries which , for decades , suffered the oppression of communism . Neither must public opinion be neglected , as the people , too , must be prepared for enlargement .
If the Luxembourg Presidency has been a success , it is due , of course , to the excellent work of Jean-Claude Juncker and his team of ministers , but also to the hundreds of people who have been mobilised during these long months so that their little country could serve the great Europe .
To each and every one , a big thank you .
Madam President , Mr President of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , the European Council of 12 and 13 December certainly constituted a milestone for the future of the European Union and the whole of Europe .
With the decision to expand to the East , the Twentieth Century is ending with a chapter of history that , only ten years ago , when the division of Europe and its people still remained a sad reality , no-one could imagine .
We are pleased that the political wish of our Parliament not to exclude any applicant country has been accepted and we are also encouraged by the establishment of the European Conference and a negotiation procedure for accession which lays down a strategy reinforced by pre-accession , with partnerships and assistance during the preaccession period , providing a differentiated approach without excluding any applicant country .
This is important because if the European Union , given its existing responsibilities , also wishes to be a politically responsible Union , it has the duty to provide assistance as a priority to the democracies ruling on shaky ground and looking to us for assistance and encouragement .
In this context , I hope that the problem of the accession of the Turkish Republic is dealt with , both by the European Union and by the national diplomacies , with the necessary care and sensitivity .
Although we all see the enlargement as an historic development and a political event of extreme importance , I wonder how it has been possible for the European Parliament , through its highest representative , to be excluded , and the only one excluded , from the annual Conference .
The process of enlargement , in fact , is a process of integration of peoples .
This House , which answers directly to the citizens for its actions , has the duty and the right to take an active part in that process .
With regard to the decisions taken on monetary union , we are pleased with the progress so far made , which ensures a closer coordination of the economic policies in the third stage of monetary union .
Coordination should enable the consistency of national economic policies to be checked ; in the Luxembourg conclusions , we read that not only the risky budget situations but also the other developments which , if they remained , would risk calling into question the stability , competitiveness and future of the creation of jobs should be duly indicated .
The fact is , Madam President , that some countries have already far exceeded these situations with very risky budgetary policies , which will create a particularly serious situation for monetary union .
Madam President , we keenly hope that all the countries applying to join monetary union can do so and we are in no doubt that this can take place , but we are most concerned that certain economic and budgetary policies of certain countries are not being properly criticized .
Madam President , I will confine myself to the issue of enlargement .
We are assessing the historic turning point represented by the prospect of a Union uniting the countries of eastern and western Europe .
Many of the citizens of our countries , like those of the applicant countries , hope this will mean the start of the lasting establishment of stable and peaceful relations , relations of mutual development , on this continent .
This is the great project for the coming century .
All steps which can be taken immediately in this direction are welcome in our eyes and will have our support .
From this point of view , where are we after the last European Council of Luxembourg ?
I will mention two strong criticisms and one potentially positive point .
The first criticism concerns the way in which the negotiations anticipated in the spring of next year are being undertaken , because it runs the risk of creating serious competition between populations and countries : competition between applicant countries , due to the different treatment being given to them - digging such gulfs goes against the declared ambition of unifying the continent ; and competition between Member States and future Member States , due to the threats posed by the Union , under the pretext of enlargement , to the current beneficiaries of the CAP and the structural funds .
Competition , lastly , within the fifteen members themselves , with the demand of a state like the Federal Republic of Germany to focus a part of its current contribution to the Union budget on other countries in the future .
The other serious criticism regarding the type of negotiations announced is the fact that they are about a relationship of subordination .
The Commission is imposing draconian constraints of an ultra liberal inspiration on applicant countries with no regard for the achievements , the identity , the specific choices of each people concerned .
This is not the way to treat sovereign partners whom we are proposing should join us .
All this goes back to the heavy logic currently at work in the Union , which to my mind is calling for a deep reorientation of European construction .
In this context , the decision to organize a European Conference between the fifteen members and all the applicant countries seems to be a sort of corrective , albeit partial , which opens up interesting possibilities .
However , this is on condition that its jurisdiction is enlarged to economic and social questions and that it is opened up in one way or another to national and European parliaments as well as to representatives of civil society .
In any case , a great building site has been initiated , and we will be there with one sole objective : to succeed .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , gentlemen from Luxembourg , the Luxembourg summit demanded honesty , credibility and responsible politics .
The dealings with Turkey were governed by ambiguity and deviousness , one-sidedness and exclusion .
Enlargement raises the question of how an active democratization process can be encouraged through the framework of the European Union .
Such a dynamic would be a service to the people in Turkey who fight for democracy , human rights and the political solution of the Kurdish question .
But the result of Luxembourg is a disservice , not a service , and will encourage precisely those forces in Turkey which are anti-European , anti-democratic and fundamentalist .
After Luxembourg , Turkey is faced with the fact that there is no prospect of accession .
That should have been said clearly .
Everything else is diplomatic eyewash .
And this is the way history goes on , the history of broken promises and treaties .
Since 1963 , it has always been the European Union which has broken parts of the Ankara Agreement .
Turkey has been waiting for 34 years .
In Luxembourg , it was shunted into a siding .
Mr Juncker says that he will not sit down to negotiate with torturers .
That is a laudably consistent attitude for an EU President .
Consistent ?
Then for God 's sake why do not you immediately block the customs union with Turkey , which the Council and Commission forced through come hell or high water ?
Why is NATO membership not suspended ?
Why do EU Member States , above all the Federal Republic of Germany , supply weapons to Turkey ?
Why are refugees sent back to Turkey , if torture is going on there ?
The fact is that the true interest in Turkey is a geostrategic , political and above all economic self-interest .
The question of human rights is forgotten until it suits the European Union politically .
The role of Turkey is that of auxiliary policeman and aircraft-carrier , and Mr Clinton 's raised index finger means nothing else .
I would really like to ask you , Mr Juncker , to explain to me the difference between Slovakia and Turkey as far as democracy and human rights are concerned .
What is the difference ?
Is not the true background to the exclusion of Turkey the question of the identity the European Union claims ?
The issue of the Christian Occident versus the Islamic orient ; religion as the new element which builds entirely new walls .
Is that not in turn the background for an almost paranoid , racist idea of 60 million Turks sitting on packed suitcases .
Above all , the implications of Luxembourg affect 3 million people of Turkish origin among us , and in the Year against Racism they must be feeling like third-class people .
That is a wrong and irresponsible signal .
In spite of all that , Madam President , and not just because of Christmas , thanks for a very committed and very unpretentious Council presidency !
Madam President , I followed the Luxembourg employment summit with great interest and it was only one week before the summit that I heard Jean-Claude Juncker declare that it was necessary to reduce fiscal costs on labour and increase taxes on energy and emissions .
Consequently , if it wants to create jobs , the European Union must put in place an ecological tax reform including , in particular , taxation of emissions and of energy consumption .
It is an idea which has been close to my heart since the beginning of my career and I am glad that it is now becoming a majority view .
I dare to hope that the action plans which the Member States are going to submit will take this need into consideration .
I have myself worked within presidency teams , in particular when negotiating the agreement on fighting desertification - the Intergovernmental Forum on Forests - in New York .
Colleagues from other countries ' delegations regularly thanked us for our efficiency and our work .
The people of Luxembourg have thus demonstrated that a small country is perfectly capable of handling the important tasks which fall to the Presidency of the Union .
I am particularly glad that the criticisms regarding the size of our country , heard at the time of the election of our dear friend Jacques Santer to the Presidency of the Commission , have been stifled .
I will conclude by congratulating the Luxembourg government for the efficiency of its work and by saying simply : " Small is beautiful ' .
Madam President , it is slippery outside today , and I fell over and hit my head and so it may be a bit difficult to hear what I have to say .
Things are also slippery for eastern and central Europe on the way to the European Union .
How can we make sure that these countries will not fall over ?
We can do that by opening our market here and now to all their viable products so they notice the competition in our market instead of those companies failing on their home markets when we arrive .
We can go through the " acquis ' .
Can it really be correct for them to have to approve 26 , 000 documents of 80 , 000 pages ?
I would suggest that we prepare ourselves by examining all the legislation and throwing out all the laws which were not confirmed by , say , three years ago .
The Commission could then resubmit the proposals which it would like to see retained . The Council of Ministers could adopt them , most of them by qualified majority , and Parliament can always throw them out in the cases where there are conciliation procedures .
In this way , there might be a chance that the volume of laws would be clearer and so easier for the applicant countries to accept .
It would also be to our own advantage .
We would then make the EU more flexible , allow some of the provisions to be voluntary instead of mandatory , allow some provisions to be decided at a lower level by decentralising and dropping the demand that Eastern and Central Europe be involved in everything .
Should they also join EMU and Schengen in abolishing their borders ?
In that case , we might perhaps get the Czech Republic , Hungary and Slovenia in the year 2004 .
The summit in Luxembourg would therefore be the start of dividing Europe rather than uniting it .
I think it is important that there should also be room for the small countries such as Luxembourg which is represented here in this chamber by the President of the Commission and the President of the Council .
I would like to end by thanking Luxembourg for an impartial presidency , and so let us not implement institutional changes demanding more power for the larger countries , which might , for example , make it impossible to have two Luxembourgers in leading positions as is the case today .
Mr President , I can fully understand the furious reaction of the Turks now that it appears that their country , for the time being , and I personally hope indefinitely , does not qualify for membership of the European Union .
Europe , after all , has never had the courage to speak plainly to Turkey .
Europe has never really expressed its concern as far as the Turkish occupation of part of Cyprus is concerned , quite the reverse , in fact .
In particular , Europe has never gone so far as to say , or never wanted to say , that Turkey cannot qualify for membership of the European Union because it is simply not a European country .
Culturally , Turkey is not a European country , historically and anthropologically , it is not a European country , and strictly geographically , it is not a European country .
So all the justified reservations about human rights violations are not exactly insignificant in this context , but they are secondary .
For the past 30 years nobody has had the courage or the will to speak plainly to Turkey , quite the reverse .
We have lost the opportunity thereby to build the very best relations and the very best cooperation agreements with Turkey not as a candidate state , but as a neighbour to Europe .
This ambiguous European attitude is at the crux of the problem .
Is Europe a confederation of free European nations and cultures working together very closely , or is it no more than a free market governed by the dogma of free trade , which does not take into consideration the geographic , cultural and historical meanings of the term Europe itself .
The fact that no one has dared to speak plainly to Turkey leads me to fear that the second possibility is the case , and at any rate has made me a eurosceptic .
Ladies and gentlemen , at this stage in our debate , the Presidents-in-Office wish to take the floor once more in order to reply to the different speakers .
I will therefore willingly give them more speaking time . As you know , we will be voting at 11.30 a.m. and the debate will be continued this afternoon .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Poos , you have the floor .
Madam President , I am also speaking on behalf of the Prime Minister , the President of the European Council and on behalf of the whole Council , when I thank the representative and non-representative speakers who have so far taken the floor in this debate and who have , for the most part , been full of praise for the Luxembourg Presidency .
They have said that the Presidency has first of all tackled the crucial problems , and , indeed , this is its primary duty .
The most important problem we raised during the presentation of the Luxembourg programme was unemployment in Europe .
With regard to this , we have found a method which , if it is followed effectively on the ground , will enable us to combat unemployment in Europe in a more efficient way than ever before .
The second problem was the enlargement of Europe .
There , too , it was necessary to find a way of commencing negotiations under the right conditions , acceptable both to the fifteen and to the applicant countries . With regard to this too , we have , after long discussions and negotiations and many contacts and trips , found an adequate formula .
I also noted that many speakers have stated that the most difficult task still lies ahead of us , and they are quite right .
Our own internal reforms , the reform of our institutions and the financing of an enlarged Europe are problems which have hardly been touched upon during the last few months .
The greatest reforms are yet to come .
Similarly , the applicant countries will have to make an enormous effort to satisfy the criteria and for each one to adopt the " acquis communautaire ' .
A word about Turkey before I finish , Madam President , and a word on the Middle East .
Along with the many speakers who have mentioned Turkey , and along with President Santer , I would like to underline the fact that the European Union 's offer to Turkey has been a substantial one .
We regret the deliberately negative presentation of this offer which has been made by the Turkish media and by the Turkish government .
But in spite of this negativity , our offer remains valid , the door remains open and the ball is in the Turkish government 's court .
We will fully maintain our offer , as stated in the conclusions of the Luxembourg European Council .
One of the curious things about your debate , Madam President , was the reaction from Mrs Roth of the Green Group , who picked up the Turkish issue again , without much discernment . It was rather surprising for me to hear criticism with regard to this from a group which I thought cared about human rights and international law .
With regard to the Middle East , the declaration contained in the Luxembourg conclusions in a way represents a strengthened strategy on the part of the European Union with regard to the Middle East peace process .
The Middle East has been a constant source of worry over the last six months and I am sure that it will remain one of the main political priorities of Europe during the weeks to come .
The position formulated by the Luxembourg Council has been somewhat criticized but I think it benefits from clarity and it avoids double meanings .
What we need are short term measures of confidence to relaunch the peace process , and long term measures based on the principles of international law , the most important of which we have stated : the principle of the exchange of land for peace .
Ladies and gentlemen , this applause is indicative of the feeling of this House , and we will now move on to our voting time .
The debate will continu at 3 p.m.
Votes
I voted for this amendment of the regulation since it concerns the control body .
I would like to state , however , that I am against subsidies for olive oil growing as such .
If the subsidy were removed , this control apparatus would be unnecessary .
Quisthoudt-Rowohl Report ( A4-0395 / 97 )
We support those parts of the fifth framework programme for Euratom which are aimed at developing renewable sources of energy and at supporting the phasing out of nuclear power in central and eastern Europe .
We think the Euratom Treaty should be fundamentally changed in this direction because we are very critical of the fact that we continue to give public aid at the European level for the growth and development of the nuclear power industry .
Research into and development of the sustainable sources of energy of the future could create jobs opportunities and should be the way in which European society prepares to enter the 21st Century . '
In Sweden we have recently taken the decision to create the conditions for a rapid phasing-out of our nuclear power industry .
We regard that as a big step in the right direction , but unfortunately it is in stark contrast to the Euratom Treaty .
Parliament 's amendments improve the Commission 's proposal to an extent , but since the fundamental direction remains , we are voting against the Quisthoudt-Rowohl report in the final vote .
It is important to maintain a high level of research expertise .
Research into energy should take place in the areas where sustainable sources of energy can be developed .
Research into more nuclear power , such as into nuclear fission and fusion power , cannot be justified .
Following a referendum , Sweden has decided to phase out nuclear power .
In several EU countries nuclear power is controversial .
I have therefore voted no to research into nuclear power and fusion energy , but yes to the four main programmes as in the final vote .
I would like to state that I do not share the negative attitude to nuclear power of the Group of the Party of European Socialists .
Soltwedel-Schäfer recommendation ( A4-0386 / 97 )
Mr President , at the time of our first debate on the technical specifications of the future euro coins , the European Parliament ended up admitting , after a great deal of controversy , that one side of the coin would be set aside for national symbols , and voted an article along these lines .
Curiously , the Council does not seem to want to refer to this article .
Let us hope that this does not mean a change in position on its part and that it remains clearly understood that the future coins will have one national side .
With regard to this , the curious situation in which we are going to find ourselves should be noted since , unlike the coins , the notes will have two European sides , identical in all countries and with no national symbol , in compliance with the position adopted by the Council of the European Monetary Institute on 3 December 1996 .
Furthermore , you may wonder why we should accept a decision from this institute as final , when there has been no democratic debate on it .
Certainly , article 109f.3 of the treaty anticipates that the EMI will supervise the technical preparation of the future notes , but the existence or not of a national side to the notes is not a purely technical decision since it comes down to the choice of a completely uniform and thus rigid monetary union rather than a union that is sensitive to certain differences , with flexibility in case of serious crisis .
Similarly , article 105a of the treaty authorizes the European central bank to authorize the issuing of notes , but this relates to a basic knowledge of monetary policy and not to the right to decide on the principles of the single currency .
I last night put an oral question to the Commission on this subject .
It replied that this choice was certainly the responsibility of the EMI and the ECB since the treaty did not apparently anticipate any other arrangement .
This is wrong .
Within the treaty is article 109f.4 , which enables the Council to take all other necessary measures for the introduction of the single currency .
Why is this not used ?
Are they afraid to hear the views of the different countries on this subject ?
We would like to thank the rapporteur for the report .
With this explanation of vote we would like to underline our fundamental position on the question , which is due to the fact that we think the coins should be designed so that the risk of allergies is eliminated , that attention should be paid to the needs of the visually impaired and that consideration should be given to the need for a firmly established identity for the coins .
For these reasons we think that the euro coins should be nickel-free , that the denominations should be of different sizes and that the coins should have room for national designs on one side of the coin .
The Danish Social Democrats have today voted in favour of the Soltwedel-Schäfer report , which deals with the technical specifications of the future euro coins .
The rapporteur emphasized in particular that the coins should be easily recognizable .
This is particularly important when the coins are used by the blind and old people .
In his report , the rapporteur proposes that the diameters of individual coins should increase with their stated value .
The Danish Social Democrats support this idea and see this proposal in particular as something which could make the coins more recognizable and so benefit the blind and elderly .
The Danish Social Democrats supported the amendment that , in making the euro coins , alloys should be used which release very little nickel if nickel cannot be avoided completely .
In approving the Soltwedel-Schäfer report , the Danish Social Democrats would like to point out that Denmark will not be taking part in the third phase of economic and monetary union .
It is pleasing that the Council has accepted the design of a European and a national side to the new euro coins , which is an expression of the symbolic meaning and essential for popular acceptance .
But it must be noted with regret that the Council has not met Parliament 's demand to avoid nickel in the new euro coins altogether .
However , I see the acceptance of the euro coins as a major step as part of the third phase of EMU , so I am voting in favour of the report , even though I am against the use of nickel in the coins .
Sindal Report ( A4-377 / 97 )
We would like to thank the rapporteur for a thorough report .
With this explanation of vote we would like to emphasize that we are sceptical towards subsidies for the shipyard industry .
A competitive shipyard industry , which can be effective in a functioning international market cannot be kept going by subsidies .
Despite the increased competition from further afield , shipbuilding remains an important European industry .
Areas in the UK which have a shipbuilding tradition are very proud of their local shipyards and what they have achieved over the years .
Harland & Wolff , for example , was virtually synonymous with the rise of Belfast as a powerful industrial city and has enjoyed the respect of Northern Ireland people for its determination to develop its business throughout the period of changing economic circumstances .
People in cities throughout Europe have much the same attitude towards their shipyards and believe , as I believe , that the European Union should try to help them face down unfair competition as much as it possibly can .
I support the extension of the seventh directive for as long as the United States of America refuses to honour its obligation to contribute towards a level playing field in the shipbuilding industry .
That is what we want most for our shipbuilders - that they can operate with the minimum of state support because they are operating in a fair competitive environment .
We must continue to put pressure on the United States to play fair .
Within Europe , of course , we must also have a level playing field .
Whereas I support the principle that individual Member States should determine their own employment and social policies , it should be noted that we , in the UK , continue to feel that our shipbuilding firms operate at a serious disadvantage compared to those in other parts of the Union .
It would be easier to put pressure on the USA to contribute to fairer competition if that fair competition genuinely existed in the EU .
Parliament has noted once again that the Untied States , and other countries with a high naval construction capacity at world level , are continuing their repeated refusal to ratify the 1994 ( ! ) OECD Agreement , which was ostensibly intended to ' normalize ' conditions for competition in the sector .
In the circumstances , we are left with no alternative but to approve an extension of the term of the provisions contained in the Seventh Council Directive allowing national public subsidies for European naval construction to continue and remain in force until 31 December 1998 .
We are nevertheless taking the opportunity to reiterate once more that we were right when we voted against that directive in 1994 , because it is being more and more clearly proved that it meant we were going ahead with legislation and limiting subsidies when others were not and still are not doing so ; the directive sought to standardize and limit national subsidies from Member States , leaving the door open for aid to regional government , and thus contributed decisively to reducing the size of the industry in countries where it was of strategic importance ( such as Portugal ) , promoting concentration on certain more developed countries , for the benefit of large private groups .
A vote in favour of the extension under discussion today is a matter of the most elementary justice , but it must not allow us to forget the essential issues , nor the economic and social damage caused by the seventh directive .
In view of industry and jobs in Europe , there is no doubt that the Council 's seventh directive on aid to the shipbuilding industry should be prolonged until the US ratifies the treaty on normal competitive conditions within the shipbuilding and ship repair industry .
We should compete on equal terms , so the rapporteur is absolutely right in emphasizing that this aid treaty should be dropped when or insofar as international trade treaties fall into place .
I therefore give the report my full support .
This help for shipbuilding has a complicated history , from which in our assessment an escape route which is truly right for the future can only be found through a concerted worldwide effort to renew the world shipping fleet to the highest standard of safety , navigation and environmental protection technology which is possible today .
All attempts to dodge a solution of this central problem by restrictive measures or deregulation strategies will only prolong the endless loop of the world shipbuilding negotiations yet again .
It is pointless to identify and accuse the culprit directly responsible in each case !
Postal services
I support the concern of several MEPs who spoke against negative consequences of uncontrolled liberalization of postal services during the part-session in Strasbourg .
In an oral question , they asked the EU Commission to act against such dangerous developments .
In various countries , the postal service demands special charges for incoming letters because the foreign stamps do not cover the distribution costs .
In fact , the foreign postal service pays a specified percentage of the stamp charge to the distributing postal service in the destination country , to meet the costs of distribution .
But this compensation payment is often below the cost of distribution .
The new charges were introduced by some countries to make up for this difference .
This method is a direct consequence of uncontrolled liberalization , because the traditional postal companies , in competition with private companies , cannot afford to take on these systematic overheads .
These charges indicate the important difference between the absolutely free market economy and healthy competition as it is wanted in the EU .
The EU wants to open up the internal market for postal services , but not at any price .
Liberalization is desired , and is intended to bring advantages for consumers , as far as the range and quality of services are concerned .
However , the prices of these services must always cover the overheads , because otherwise the door is open for wild and unrestricted competition , which will then have negative consequences for the job market .
It remains to be hoped that the Commission has actually recognized the problem , and will very quickly take steps to put it right .
Towards Christmas a few miracles occurred in this Parliament .
The debate about this question for which my group also submitted a resolution has been moved from the Friday to the Monday , without anyone informing me of this .
Nonetheless , not only did Commissioner Bangemann refer to me in the debate as having second sight , but the official press report of our services presented me as speaker , even though I was absent for valid reasons .
What is more , I was presented as one of the signatories of the joint compromise resolution , despite the fact that I had not seen the text , let alone wanted to sign it : it contains nothing , or if you like , nonsense .
What is it about ? The Universal Postal Union - UPU - has a convention .
This contains a provision that the terminal dues are calculated by the kilo .
This unit of weight can comprise one item of 500 letters of 20 gram .
It is obvious that the delivery costs can therefore vary considerably .
In a word , this regulation is not satisfactory .
The IPC , a club of 20 operators , including all Member States , wanted to change this situation .
The result was Reims-I , in which it was agreed that the end costs would be calculated on the basis of delivery costs of the destination country , varying between 50-80 % , depending on the quality .
The Bundespost did not think this was enough , and has thought up a new system with La Poste Française on the payment of 85 % without the quality criterium ; in other words , sponsoring inefficiency .
In my opinion it would have been obvious in a free internal market to give all universal service providers a free hand to arrive to at an agreement between themselves , on the basis of real costs and quality .
As long as this is not expressly stated in the resolution , my group is not able to agree , and will therefore abstain .
It is up to the Commission to guarantee the free market and I call on it to do so !
Progress in the area of justice and home affairs
European cooperation in the area of security seems to us absolutely essential - at least in its intergovernmental form .
Unfortunately , up until now , it has been marked by a weakness in the democratic control exercised by national parliaments .
The Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations has often proposed filling this gap by creating an interparliamentary body to follow up the actions undertaken in the area of the third pillar .
Thus it must be clearly noted that the Treaty of Amsterdam , which is going to be submitted to Member States for ratification , takes precisely the opposite path .
By transferring these areas from the intergovernmental area of the treaty to the Community area , it leads national parliaments to lose virtually all the powers they previously had , without replacing them with abilities of equivalent strength and quality at the level of the European Parliament .
In effect , the " communitarizing ' of areas relating to visas , asylum , immigration and the international circulation of people will deprive national parliaments of many powers : 1 ) loss of the right of decision ( which will be transferred to the Council or if need be the European Parliament , under supervision of the Court of Justice ) ; 2 ) loss of the right of legislative initiative ( which will become the prerogative of the Commission after five years ) ; 3 ) loss of the power of prevention ( removal of the unanimous decision procedure of the Council , in accordance with new article 67 of the EC Treaty ) ; 4 ) weakening of the powers of control , which will become indirect , etc .
This eradication of national parliaments ' powers is not compensated for by an increase in the power of the European Parliament , for two reasons .
On the one hand , the European Parliament does not gain exactly the same legal rights as those lost by the national parliaments : in some areas the national parliaments lose decision making rights , whilst the European Parliament has conferred on it only the right to be consulted .
On the other hand , as it is conceived , the exercise of these powers will distance the European Parliament from the concerns of its citizens , even though the areas covered by the third pillar are extremely sensitive , because they are closely linked to national sovereignty and to the security of goods and people .
This distancing may cause fatal consequences , in particular concerning decisions taken on immigration questions , an area where the lax philosophy of the European institutions is well known .
In reality , the Treaty of Amsterdam proposes an increase in the lack of democracy in Europe . This is why we reject it .
Organized crime is a sophisticated international business that recognizes no borders .
The European Union response is piecemeal , uncoordinated to a significant degree and primarily fought within national boundaries .
Why is it that we can remove the obstacles and borders to ensure the effective functioning of the single market yet we cannot apply the same principles and practices in the war against organized crime ?
It would be correct to say that some progress has been made in the area of justice and home affairs under the Irish , Dutch and Luxembourg presidencies .
However it must also be acknowledged that it is lamentably slow and much more needs to be done .
Interior ministers seem to be more interested in protecting their little empires than winning the battle against criminals .
It is also extremely disappointing to note that only five Member States have ratified Europol which has a critical role to play in the area of cooperation across frontiers .
This fact is symptomatic of the problem .
Let us hope when we discuss this issue next year we will be able to report that real progress has been made .
Billingham Report ( A4-0357 / 97 )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the question of services of general interest is one of the themes for discussion within the context of the Intergovernmental Conference .
By introducing a new article , article 7 , the Treaty of Amsterdam ranks this notion of general interest service amongst the common values of Europe .
We can but congratulate them for this .
But what a path has been trodden since this demand by the European Parliament !
We can quote the great areas of liberalization : electricity , gas , postal sector , air sector .
At each stage of liberalization , the notion of market value gained the upper hand over the notion of public service .
And the citizens of Europe could not accept this .
Now , this notion of public service must be continued through the establishment of a charter stating its great principles .
At the beginning of the century , the French School of Public Service was able to set out the great laws developed by Léon Duguit .
It is now Europe 's turn to take over on behalf of its 350 million inhabitants .
It will pay dividends for European integration !
The Billingham report is a positive , sensible response to the Commission 's Communication on services of general interest in Europe , an issue which has been neglected at the Community level for far too long .
For Europe 's goals of economic and social cohesion to become a reality , for Europe to be a citizen 's Europe , the EU needs to intervene in the sphere of public services , which are fundamental to each and every European citizen .
All European citizens rely on the provision of basic services such as electricity and water , transport and postal services .
And only EU-wide action can solve the problems of poor cross-border postal services or over-priced airline tickets .
But although Europe aspires to running a frontier-free market , the EU cannot regulate these transfrontier vital services .
European citizens are therefore being shortchanged , for the rhetoric of the single market and a Europe for the people sounds empty if they cannot expect equal access to essential goods and services .
The EU 's track record on this is poor and needs to be improved .
It needs to define , specify and regulate the services of general interest so that European citizens can be sure that they are receiving a consistent and fair service , wherever they live in the EU .
The inclusion of the new article 7d in the Amsterdam Treaty is therefore to be welcomed .
This recognizes the notion of services of general interest as one of the common values of Europe and as a principle of Community law .
But positive action now needs to be taken with the establishment of a European Charter for Public Services , European Parliament scrutiny of proceedings , and special responsibility for public services to be designated to a Commissioner and Directorate-General .
If we want the single market to work we have to have Europe 's citizens on board , and we can gain this by providing good quality services and so help increase social well-being .
It is good that the EU recognizes services of general interest and that deregulation has limits .
The citizens must be ensured access to services of general interest , such as post , telecommunications and transport , on equal terms and at reasonable prices .
At the same time attention must be paid to the effects on the environment , social security and employment .
Under the principle of subsidiarity , the Member States should decide how and by whom services shall be carried out , define levels and quality and the way rules operate .
We have therefore voted no to the report , since we are opposed to the proposal for EU legislation in the area .
No such new competence is given under article 7d of the Amsterdam Treaty .
The Commission defines utility services as services which are of general interest and which are provided by public authorities .
These services are often provided on a commercial basis , so as far as the free market is concerned , as the committee is correct in pointing out , there should be a uniform set of rules for the Union as a whole .
As the committee emphasizes , these services should mainly cover important network services , such as provision of water , electricity , gas , railways , radio , TV , telecommunications and postal services .
It is therefore pleasing to see that the Commission and European Parliament are united on this point and it is therefore with great pleasure that I can support the committee 's report .
In connection with the debate on efficiency with regard to services of general interest , I would like to point out that economic efficiency does not take into account quality and the protection of human values .
The number of teachers per child in school is certainly a measure of efficiency which is in fact used .
However , at the same time ( and inversely proportional to the measure of efficiency ) it is a measure of the quality of teaching .
It is inappropriate to use ideas of economic efficiency when the activity concerns core activities in public services , such as nursing , caring and education .
( The sitting was suspended at 12.45 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )
European Council in Luxembourg - Six months of the Luxembourg Presidency ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the debate on the Council statement on the six months of the Luxembourg Presidency .
I would like to welcome the presence among us of the President of the European Council and the Prime Minister of Luxembourg , Mr Jean-Claude Juncker .
The President of the Council has given an example to us all by following the entire debate that is being held on the review of the Luxembourg Presidency . I would like to stress this and I would like this example to find imitators .
Although it is not customary for such comments to be made from the Chair , I would like to say that I think I echo the feelings of all our colleagues when I express my appreciation for the Luxembourg Presidency , which is coming to an end in a few days ' time .
It has been an example to us in many things and I think that the Prime Minister , Mr Juncker and the Foreign Minister , Mr Poos , who had to leave , deserve the congratulations of the European Parliament for their willingness to work with us and for the excellent way in which they are bringing to an end the presidency of a small country , which demonstrates once again how successful the Luxembourg Presidencies have been and how much the presidencies of the smaller countries have helped to promote the concerns of the European Union .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , a sense of modesty prevents me from crowing with nationalistic delight about the Luxembourg Presidency , but I all the same I would like to say that this Presidency has , once more , proved its know-how and commitment to Member States , when its size does not predestine it , in a traditional national perspective , to play an international role .
It has become apparent over the months , that the Luxembourg Presidency has spared no efforts , and with success .
Everyone has recognized that this morning .
I would first like to return briefly to the employment summit , a poisoned present if ever there was one .
It has been a success , considering all the reticency and unspoken words .
This success is largely due to the enthusiasm of the presidency .
It has in fact worked on the squaring of the circle , for it was necessary to respect national jurisdiction in the area of employment , not to increase budgetary expenditure and , however , to define precise measures and above all to commit credits which we were able to clear in the European Union budget thanks to the collaboration of the European Parliament .
I think that the Council is finally going to agree , indeed has agreed , to give a legal basis to a truly European policy on employment .
As far as last week 's summit is concerned , it clarified the approach and methods of the European Union for the years to come .
There too , we succeeded , in Luxembourg , in not dividing Europe , in giving the countries of Europe a true perspective of accession .
Quite a lot has been said this morning on the problems which remain in the path to be followed .
At the same time as finding a solution to these problems we must , I think , move reflection further on regarding the limits and future configuration of an integrated European area .
This space cannot stretch into infinity and I therefore think that , whilst opening up new perspectives through this summit , we must also open up a new reflection on the future shape of Europe .
Allow me to say a word more on the work of the presidency in other essential areas .
The presidency 's initiatives in the area of foreign policy were fruitful and useful in many ways .
I would , above all , like to underline the attitude of dialogue and permanent openness of the Luxembourg Presidency with regard to the European Parliament .
Members who participated in conciliation meetings noted this .
This attitude marks a turning point all the more important - and I insist on this - since the reforms of the Treaty of Amsterdam regarding codecision will make interaction between the Council and Parliament frequent and necessary in order to get results .
Finally , I would like to note that , in the path towards the euro , the European Parliament is finding its place , thanks to a good understanding with the Council , in particular during the long weekend of the 1 and 2 May .
Furthermore , it was noted that , in the context of the third pillar , the Luxembourg Presidency has opened up a new means of collaboration with the European Parliament , in an area which is largely intergovernmental .
Mr President , there are many individual issues on which the Luxembourg Presidency has accomplished important work and has managed to reach agreements .
I am thinking in particular of taxation , an area in which the presidency has truly achieved a breakthrough .
Mr President , the Luxembourg Presidency has shown that for the country who assumes the presidency , the best way of helping oneself is clearly not to focus cautiously on your own interests , but to serve others by adopting an offensive and positive attitude in the face of the European task .
I think that this is a message which Luxembourg and European opinion should know .
Let us not forget this historic lesson .
I would like to thank Mr Fayot .
What he said is very true and I admit I allowed him to run over his allotted speaking time considerably in recognition of his very consistent work in this House .
Mr President , I hope that if I point to my work I might perhaps gain a second or two ?
It was less than nine years ago , yet worlds away .
On 1 August 1989 , on the Austrian-Hungarian border , a first breach in what was then still the Iron Curtain was made .
The opening of the Brandenburg Gate a few months later began the collapse of the Eastern bloc , and simultaneously resulted in the creation of free , sovereign and democratic states , which have now rightly reminded us of their position as candidates for membership of the Union .
The Union is facing this historic challenge .
The enlargement to the East actually promises enormous political and economic gains for us all .
Gains in security , and as far as external security is concerned I believe that I do not have to justify that .
We must work on the gains in internal security .
New economic opportunities are linked to this enlargement to the east , and one would expect to find agreement and even enthusiasm in Europe .
There is none to be found , or very little .
They are outweighed by scepticism and fear .
Even in Austria , my country , which is returning for the first time for many years from the periphery to the centre , many people are afraid that uncontrolled cheap labour and cheap agricultural products will rush in .
In other parts of the Union , people are nervous about the money from the structural and cohesion funds .
In this situation , we must ensure that we make clear to all those who are affected that there is nothing to fear .
At least , not if we use all the opportunities of the enlargement , and not if , to the extent that it is necessary and justified , we ensure that no-one is left behind , by careful negotiation results with appropriate transition rules , and if necessary also with individual , targeted support actions .
A final word of congratulation to the Luxembourgers .
They have shown - as has been said several times today - that a small country can contribute a great deal to Europe .
I hope that Austria , which will take over the presidency in autumn next year as the next of the small and medium-sized Member States , will carry out this task as well as Luxembourg has .
( Applause )
Mr President , like the previous speaker , I will wait until I have finished my contribution before giving my plaudits , but I acknowledge the fact that they are going to come .
If I do nothing else in the time available to me , I want to say a very sincere word of thanks and congratulations to the Luxembourg presidency .
Well done , we are proud of you !
Not just as Luxembourg , but we are proud of you as a small nation , and you are certainly showing the others who have been there before you and those who are coming immediately after you , how to do a good job .
Your pursued the agenda that you laid before this Parliament with skill and determination , with diplomacy , and at times with strength when necessary to ensure that you achieved your objectives .
Well done , we are proud of you , and may others learn from you .
The summit represented a significant step forward in the ongoing evolution of the European Union .
That is particularly so in the context of the next wave of enlargement , an event which will transform the Union significantly , ensuring that the EU of the next century will be very different in configuration from that of the 1990s and is also of great symbolic importance given that it involves many of the countries in the former eastern bloc .
The decision to open negotiations with Poland , Estonia , the Czech republic , Hungary and Slovenia is genuinely a historic one .
This , more than anything else , marks the end of the cold war and the bridging of the divisions that have existed in Europe for much of this century , and for this reason alone the summit gives cause for great satisfaction and is the culmination of years of work .
Ireland has much to offer the new applicant states as a model for what can be achieved with the help of EU transfers and policies , and I personally look forward to the forging of new and deeper relations between the applicant states and Ireland , particularly in the areas of trade and tourism .
Enlargement is also vital to the long-term development of the EU itself .
However , this enlargement must take place in a structured fashion and at a steady pace in the interests of both the Union and the applicant countries .
There are clear implications for the EU 's decision-making process and the shape and size of the budget ; and regarding the budget I am satisfied with the decision of the summit not to pre-empt the detailed negotiations that have yet to take place on the budget for the period 2000-2006 .
But I am not altogether convinced that the budget ceiling on spending as currently constituted is wholly practical .
If we are to meet on the one hand the demands of enlargement , and the need for transitional financial arrangements for existing Member States on the other , then a greater degree of budgetary flexibility may be required .
Thank you , President-in-Office and thanks to Luxembourg ; and let us hope that everything goes well with the new presidency that is about to begin .
Ladies and gentlemen , you have all been trying to take advantage of the same favour I extended to Mr Fayot .
I cannot really refuse you as you probably more than deserve them .
Mr Juncker , you are right .
The most important decision of the summit was to decide on no postponement of the euro .
But that has consequences .
Even intelligence , prudence and tireless commitment must be measured against the requirements which are set by the introduction of the euro .
We need as a counterweight an effective , jointly coordinated policy against mass unemployment .
You might say that in Essen there was a pursing of the lips . In Luxembourg there was a trial whistle .
A first test run may be useful , but not enough to get a grip on the problem .
The aims have too many loopholes , and you know that .
Second : regarding the setting up of the European central bank and Euro-X , really the softest possible form has been found : informal , vague task description , unclear definition of the opt-outs .
Third : regarding tax harmonization , to a large extent it has remained as intended .
Even the code of conduct has as many explanations of exceptions as a Swiss cheese has holes , so considerable work remains to be done there .
We should not fool ourselves .
Gramsci said that optimism of the will is needed to do anything .
But pessimism of the intellect is also needed .
Very much remains to be done , too much .
At least the starting line and course are sketched out , and the Luxembourg Presidency must surely be thanked for that .
When we in Germany manage to make a political change of course , we in Europe can probably learn to go actually together in a correct - more productive and with more effect on employment - direction .
Mr President , we have heard a lot about the future of the Union in the coming months and what Luxembourg has done to prepare it for that future .
However , the last six months have been tragic for the people I represent .
The farming community in Northern Ireland , which forms the basis of the economy of the country , is on the verge of total and absolute collapse .
As Mr Hume , one of my colleagues , said recently in a speech on Northern Ireland : ' We are facing days that can only be compared to the Irish famine . ' That is how serious it is .
This has come about because in the last six months farmers and the ancillary agro-industries of Northern Ireland have been discriminated against .
They have beef health standards and traceability standards not matched anywhere else in Europe , and yet Europe has closed the market to their produce .
I have to say with great regret that if in the last six months we had had far more determination from both the Commission and the Council this calamity could have been averted .
I trust that something in the last days of the Luxembourg presidency will help to redeem this .
Mr President , Mr President of the Council , Mr Commissioner , I would like to join the ranks of those who have congratulated the past Presidency on its successful activity in many areas .
In the area of employment policy , it must be measured against what happened before .
I would like to concentrate on some points of external policy : the questions of Turkey , the Near East and - if there is still time - Yugoslavia or former Yugoslavia .
The President of the Council made intensive efforts to come to an agreement with Turkey about how this important process of rapprochement between the European Union and Turkey can happen .
The President of the Council found some public words which can be called undiplomatic or honest , depending on how one sees things .
I am not so critical or sceptical about it , because I believe that we have entered a phase in which we must talk openly and honestly to Turkey .
If there are reservations - reservations with good reasons - they should be expressed openly .
I have spoken critically , even in this Chamber , against a decision or recommendation of Christian Democratic parties about the relationship with Turkey , because of the differences of religion .
But as far as the differences in questions of human rights are concerned , or differences in questions of how one relates to one 's neighbours and starts conflicts or not , there are serious differences which must be identified beyond the political forces in this Chamber , but at the same time the firm will to enter discussions with Turkey .
I would like to say clearly once again , even to Turkey , that what happened in Luxembourg is not closing the door but opening it .
But even to friends , one must be critical where critical comments are appropriate .
What matters now is to see whether something can be achieved with specific agreements .
As far as the Near East is concerned , you were also very active .
I had the opportunity to be in Israel , Palestine , Jordan , Syria almost in the footsteps of the Council Presidency .
I saw that very good approaches were disseminated here .
We see that the Arab world demands much more from Europe than we can give at this time .
Thank God , no longer against the USA , but altogether in cooperation , always as a strong - sometimes quite independent - partner , but a great deal happened here too .
That also applies to Yugoslavia .
I hope that we can make more progress under the British Presidency , based on your preparation . We must make it clear that we stand by Dayton , that we insist that war crimes must be punished , that there must be true peace and cooperation .
Finally , my congratulations again on the Luxembourg Presidency .
As has already been mentioned , Austria will likewise have the Presidency in the second half of 1998 .
We are a small country like Luxembourg .
But one thing is exemplary , first in Luxembourg , second in Austria : low unemployment .
I hope that the European Union will soon reach the average of the Luxembourg and Austrian unemployment levels .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , under the energetic and imaginative leadership of Luxembourg , good , noteworthy progress has been achieved in the field of internal and legal policy , in many particular fields , from organized crime to delivery of documents in civil and commercial court cases .
What matters now is to combine these individual steps into a total concept .
We must make the European legal area co-extensive with the European economic area .
We have become used to being able to claim the whole internal market for commerce .
The legal instruments which protect commerce are still blocked by national internal borders .
Now we must therefore ensure that , wherever trade throughout the Union is possible , we also provide legal protection throughout the Union .
For this purpose we need a convincing total concept , which does not consist of transferring national legal systems to the Community , but which ensures that there are legal instruments with Community effect where Community trade is possible .
That must be at the centre of the work in the legal and internal fields in future .
If you will allow me a comment on the side , Mr President of the Council : If it is true that secret data from the Schengen computer has been sold to organized crime , as the Neue Zürcher Zeitung has reported , that would be an unprecedented scandal and would have to have consequences both in the security system and for the responsible individuals , and I believe that it would be altogether advisable if the President of the Council would look into it , even though the Union has not been responsible for Schengen up to now .
Mr President , I would like to stay with the issue of enlargement and Turkey , and to stress that we have all been impressed by the Luxembourg presidency and by the personal intervention of Prime Minister Juncker in combining honesty and dignity with a political spirit of conciliation and political vision .
The big question for me is : after the Luxembourg session comes to an end what will happen and how will our achievements be maintained ?
I think that the first precondition for continuity is for the British Presidency to stick to the decisions of the Luxembourg session , which were not due to any veto and which have so far been the most unifying decisions that we have had with regard to Turkey .
The second thing is that the European Union must reserve the right to draw up policies that relate to itself and not yield to the demands of the United States , which is what we saw yesterday at the political session of NATO foreign ministers , with the attempt of Mrs Albright to present a European Union which would be a Banana Republic of the United States .
Thirdly , the European Union must resist - which is very easy to do - the ridiculous threats of Turkey , which is brandishing the 2.5 billion dollars for the purchase of aeroplanes until the year 2000 , or the 3 to 4 billion dollars for the privatization of its energy industry or , even more so , the 150 billion dollars over a period of twenty years for the purchase of weapons .
I think that the European Union must maintain a cool-headed , unequivocal and unshakeable position , especially when it is faced with provocative actions such as those of Minister Tselembi when he says that they will boycott European businesses , with the exception however of the United Kingdom , which will hold the presidency , France and Italy .
With these preconditions and with progress in the Cyprus issue , I think that Turkey sooner or later will take advantage of this opening of the door offered to her by the European Union by taking of course the necessary steps to solve the Cyprus problem , through respect of international law and human rights and through the peaceful solution of the Kurdish problem .
Mr President , as ever when judging the results of the Commission it is a case of pluses and minuses .
I think the result is best summarised by a colleague of mine who said : it is less than we hope for , but more than we expected .
That rather expresses my feeling .
I find the fact that the mechanism which also leads to the coordination or the disciplining , if you like , of the EMU , now also includes employment very positive .
I have a strong impression that a very large number of representatives of Member States do not quite understand what this means and must mean in the future .
There are some positive issues , but it will not surprise the Prime Minister that I in any case am disappointed about what has happened in the sphere of taxes .
I do not reproach him for this .
I know there is resistance , but to shift taxation either to investigations on national level - while we know that , in a kind of prisoner 's dilemma , we do not dare move because a competing colleague Member State will carry off the prize - or by passing the mandate on to Ecofin , where ultimately there must be unanimity in decision-making , does not exactly fill me with enthusiasm for the future , especially as I know that if there was one negative factor in the preparations of the summit , it was Ecofin .
I will return to this topic .
The most important issue seems to me the much welcomed presidency and the result they have delivered in looking forwards to the follow up .
What does this mean for the future ?
In my opinion , extremely important new opportunities have been created for the coming years , but then we must , and I mean at the level of the Council , the Commission and this Parliament , sink our teeth into this hard-won result .
Because though we might see the result as a step forward , there are government leaders who left the summit , went back their own country and said : we can simply carry on as before .
Look , if this is the attitude amongst representatives of the Member States , then there is still an awful lot to do .
I think we have to be exceptionally alert and active in this .
I am obviously disappointed that social VAT , as I will call it for convenience sake , was not accepted .
Not because it is a pet issue in the Netherlands , but because I actually think it is ridiculous that Member States do not allow other Member States to start experiments in this field .
I really do not understand what it is in the Council that it makes it want to block this possibility .
I would like to ask the Prime Minister if I may interpret the text to mean that the Netherlands is allowed to see where the ground lies , in other words is be able to start the experiments .
The subject of economic coordination strikes me as equally important for the future .
Will the balance which was incorporated in the employment chapter , in the results of Luxembourg , also be put into practice ?
I can see people thinking this is coordination , this balance has to be introduced via Ecofin .
It think that is simply ridiculous .
Up till now this has not been the obvious institution to accomplish a balance with employment .
I am also concerned for the sake of the future presidency , because the many contacts that I have had I notice that an enormous amount of missionary work has to be done , that there is an impression that Ecofin is better suited to coordination .
I would find that incredibly unfortunate , and absolutely not in line with the Treaty of Amsterdam .
Briefly and to the point , the Luxembourg summit was a start , a very important start .
The results are extremely important .
But it was a merely a start .
A great deal of undercoating still needs to be applied , a great deal needs to be done finally to wrap the term flexibility in genuine certainty .
A great deal needs to be done in the field of taxation , etc .
But I would like to conclude with expressing my appreciation just once more - it risks becoming boring - towards the presidency , because I am convinced that if it had not been launched so toughly and firmly by Jean-Claude Juncker , we would have been discussing a very different result .
As far as that is concerned , my thanks .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , 21 November 1997 is a noteworthy date .
The Heads of State and of Government finally made up their minds to avoid big words at a summit , and agreed on concrete decisions .
Subsidiarity was ensured .
President of the Council Juncker said rightly that we all have the same disease , but do not necessarily need the same medicine .
In Luxembourg , the content of the approaches to the common employment strategy on which the Essen summit decided was filled in .
The main concern of the citizens of Europe is now also the main subject of those who are responsible for government , that is the fight against unemployment .
The most important findings from our debates in the European Parliament with a highly committed President of the Council were put into effect .
Retraining and further education , training and jobs will be made possible for young people under 25 within six months , and for the long-term unemployed within one year .
Small and medium-sized companies are actively supported by the European Investment Bank .
Budget resources are restructured , and our Parliament played a leading role in this .
Luxembourg is also a rejection of the Utopians who thought that additional programmes at European level and costing billions could solve the problem .
Anyone who says that this can be financed is fooling the citizens .
It is also a slap in the face for those in Germany who claimed in advertisements that the German Federal Chancellor would block it .
On the contrary , here one of them has used his great influence to achieve unanimity for results which can be put into effect .
Our colleague Mr Wolf will therefore also be wrong with his hope for a change of government in our country .
Mr Wolf has often been mistaken , but not usually the German Federal Chancellor !
Back to Luxembourg .
Jean-Claude Juncker made it clear that 2 + 2 = 5 .
The reason is that there is a European added value , through coordination , model projects and ever more intensive exchange of experience .
The future annual balance sheet of the national campaigns based on European guidelines has every chance of becoming a success in relation to group dynamics .
The employment summit shows that the European medal has not just one side , the economic , but equally the other side , the social .
Congratulations , Jean-Claude Juncker !
Mr President , Mr President of the Council , even the fact that a snail 's pace continues to be declared in European integration changes nothing of the positive image of the Luxembourg Presidency .
Because , as a German author says , progress is a snail , but it moves , and it moves forward . It can therefore be said that in the field of tax cooperation , in the field of employment policy , there have really been the first steps towards letting citizens feel that they are better understood in what goes on here at the European decision level .
I think that in this Luxembourg Presidency it has become very clear that taking responsibility and leadership quality are just what a presidency needs .
That should also be emphasized in relation to economic and monetary union .
It is certainly right to emphasize , again and again , the date of the start of monetary union , 1 January 1999 .
But at the same time the house tasks must be done .
Here I would like to say to the Council Presidency that this European Parliament has certainly always done the house tasks very quickly .
But it would be good if all Heads of State and of Government , and above all EU finance ministers , would use clear language about political responsibility in their testimonies , promises and messages .
Here I regret very much that the Luxembourg Presidency could not finish with two further positive results .
I mean here a positive decision about the presidency of the European central bank .
I think that the way in which the staffing discussion has been conducted is not good for the future credibility of the independence of the European central bank , and I hope that before the end of the year a solution may still be given in this area , so to speak as a Christmas present for monetary peace .
But I also think that it would be important , precisely in the field of monetary union , not just to find temporary solutions for the Euro-X Council , but also to make a clear statement of who has what responsibility for macro-economic interrelated decisions .
Here we can give not only the European finance ministers , the national central banks and the European central bank responsibility , but I would also emphasize very clearly from Parliament 's point of view that there must be a triad between the Council , the European Parliament and the Commission , as far as responsibility for both economic and employment policy guidelines is concerned .
We really need concentration here .
We do not need different orientations , so that the Member States , which obviously remain responsible here for economic and employment policy , create added value , and anyway no coordination .
I therefore insist that the demand of this European Parliament for inter-institutional agreements in relation to the development of economic policy guidelines for the European Union and its Member States remains a current demand even for the next Council presidency .
Mr President of the Council , if you could contribute , even after the end of the Council presidency , to ensuring that the Economic and Finance Committee of the European Union does not argue only from monetary and financial points of view , but by its composition can also consider the economic policy arguments , that would certainly be an improvement which would be valued positively .
Mr President , may I begin by congratulating the Luxembourg presidency on their efficiency and effectiveness .
I only wish the European Parliament could show some of the same qualities .
That way we could organize this debate as a coherent whole instead of in little bits .
This morning Mr Poos gave an extensive report on the activities of the Luxembourg presidency .
I would like to underline just one point : the importance of the EU policy towards the Ukraine .
There is a very serious situation developing in the Ukraine and EU support has been of tremendous importance .
But we have to say to the Ukrainian authorities that ultimately their fate lies in their own hands , so they must push forward their economic reform which will allow private investment to come in to galvanize their economy .
On the main issue of enlargement , it was very important that the summit came to the conclusion that this should be an inclusive process within a single framework , but that at the same time we should recognize that each country should be judged on its merits .
For that reason I support the conclusion that we should proceed at all possible speed with enlargement negotiations with the six countries named .
We must not allow countries that have been very forward in their reform process - that have gone through a very painful process - to be held back by countries that have been more half-hearted in their approach to this process .
We must also make it very clear to these countries that the fact that they have joined the negotiations does not guarantee accession to the European Union .
In view of the report in the Financial Times today , we should perhaps address that particularly to Poland .
Equally , we have to be clear that any country that makes the right sort of progress should be entitled to join in the enlargement negotiations as soon as possible .
I particularly welcome the resolution which establishes the European Conference and sets out its content .
The European Conference potentially could be a powerful engine for deepening and widening the political dialogue and cooperation throughout the European continent .
That will be very important while the enlargement negotiations are going on in parallel .
On Sunday night I was rung up by the BBC World Service who wanted me to give a quote on the position taken by the Turkish Government .
So extreme were the quotes from the Turkish Government as a result of the summit , I was really concerned that something had gone seriously wrong in the summit .
But when I read the conclusions , it is very clear that we have actually been very positive toward Turkey .
I cannot therefore understand the statements from the Turkish Government .
Perhaps it is because the Americans have given them ideas beyond what the European Union can deliver - because Americans constantly believe we can take Turkey into membership - or perhaps it could be because of their domestic situation .
Either way , we have heard a lot from the Turkish Government about their rights recently , but nothing about their obligations .
EU membership brings rights and obligations .
We should reinforce that message to the Turkish Government ; but equally we should say we will be delighted for them to join in this process because we recognize their position within Europe .
This is an important process .
Let us not forget that at the end of the day it needs the assent of the people of the European Union and the applicant states .
Therefore the solutions that we seek to the problems have to be realistic and acceptable to the people of Europe .
Mr President , following the truly historic Council of Luxembourg , in which we all recognize with admiration the constructive role of Mr Juncker , two hopes have been raised .
The first hope is that Turkey , despite its negative behaviour all these years and its peevish reaction to yesterday 's decisions of the 15 Member States , will realise that nobody is denying its position in Europe and that it is its own activities and oversights that , since 1963 , have prevented the upgrading of its relations .
The second hope , allied to the first , is that the whole of Cyprus will not only accede with the greatest possible speed , as of right - and President Santer underlined this fact - to the European Union , but that it will cease to be the hostage of the country that invaded it .
Now Turkey has a wonderful opportunity to demonstrate its Europeanness instead of running off in indignation to the Americans or the Russians .
It now has the opportunity to take advantage of what Europe is offering and above all to reinstate , for the sake of its people , the rule of law .
Mr President , I believe that at the start of each six-monthly term of office for the Council 's presidency , there are two major dangers which have to be avoided .
One is the danger of thinking it possible , in such a short time , to resolve each and every one of the problems facing the European Union .
The second danger is that imbalances should arise in that constant dynamic between defending legitimate national interests , on the one hand , and the common interest on the other - which is the dynamic which drives the evolution of the European Union and makes it work .
I believe the job of the Presidency-in-Office of the Council is to unite wills , forge agreements and make sure , in short , that the European Union moves forward .
Well , as Mrs Lulling said , both the important employment summit at the end of November , and the European Council last weekend - when a decision was made on the start of membership negotiations - the current Presidency of the Council has demonstrated that some of the large Member States of the European Union are small as regards their European ambitions , whereas some small Member States are large , in terms not just of their ambitions for Europe , but also of the results they achieve .
Mr President , I will be brief .
I will first of all join in the praise which has been given to the Luxembourg presidency for the excellent work which it has carried out .
A key role in an historic summit in Luxembourg , a fine employment summit ; good work has simply been done by Luxembourg , and I think this ought to be mentioned .
I have three small points .
Firstly , Turkey .
The impression has been created in the outside world that Turkey was rejected on the basis of the fact that it is largely a muslim country .
Worse still , the impression has been created that the Christian Democratic parties were largely responsible for this .
I find this curious .
We all know that Turkey has been deterred for the sake of human rights , because of its dubious democratic character and because of the way border disputes and minority problems are solved , namely through military force .
I assume nonetheless that once these problems are solved in Turkey , it will be more than welcome .
I would like to hear it again from the President-in-Office of the Council .
Then there is the issue of the European central bank .
I hope that we will be able to depend on the fact that the choice for President of the European Central will not be a political one , but one based on the basis of personal qualities .
I think it is very dangerous that all manner of discussions are held to satisfy various countries with shared presidencies : for four years it will be one , the next four another .
I have a feeling that we are entering deep water .
May I hear from the President-in-Office of the Council what he thinks of this .
National contributions to the European Union .
In my country an unpleasant debate is being conducted about the Netherlands ' high contribution , and about the report by the European Commission which is alleged to prove the contrary , and the response to this from the European Commission .
I would find it helpful if the European Commission would clarify on this as soon as possible , as it is bad for the image Europe in my own country .
I have asked a question about this in writing , but if Commissioner Oreja was able to say something about it now , it might also give some comfort in the Netherlands .
I am now going to give the floor to Mr Bourlanges , but first of all I would like to protest once more because the Group of the European People 's Party is giving its distinguished members speaking time of one minute , and this puts the Chair in an impossible position .
I cannot interrupt colleagues who have a speaking time of one minute . This puts me in an impossible situation .
I understand the groups ' problem .
Naturally , there are many requests to speak , I know that very well , but all the same , I would like to request that the political groups give colleagues a speaking time of at least two minutes so that they are able to make their points .
Mr President , your request touches the modest backbencher that I am .
This Parliament has an obsession : not to enlarge itself , but to succeed at enlargement .
How far has Luxembourg contributed to achieving this success ?
Amsterdam was disappointing on the level of institutional reform .
We decided , then , to commence negotiations without undertaking reforms .
The European summit of Luxembourg introduced an essential notion , that of the need for reform to precede enlargement .
We are very grateful to you , Mr President .
Does this mean we are satisfied ?
Certainly not , for we consider that there are many things which still need to be clarified .
I will quote three of them : the timetable , the nature of reforms , the procedure for reform .
Regarding the timetable , it seems to me that you remain set on the idea of a two stage reform : a small reform before admitting the sixteenth member on the one hand , and a large reform before that of the twenty first on the other .
We want , we wish a global reform , perfectly compatible furthermore with the Amsterdam provisions , and on the principle that if you can do something complicated , you can do something simple .
On the nature of reforms , we consider that reform of the Commission and of the weighting of votes is good , but that it is the whole of the balance , political , institutional and administrative , that must be revised within the perspective of a substantial enlargement .
On the problem of procedure , finally : the method of the Intergovernmental Conference has shown its limitations .
We want a reform which will enable coherence and more democratic deliberation to be ensured .
You have laid your stone of the building .
It is not enough , but you have done your duty .
You leave it to your successors to continue and for the moment , dear friends in the Luxembourg presidency , some of whom I see exhausted by such efforts , I will say thank you and above all have a good holiday , take a rest , you deserve it !
Mr President , The Luxembourg European Council may be considered , in the main , to have been successful .
The decision on initiating draft negotiations and negotiations for membership with Cyprus and the main eastern European countries is very important .
It was good that , in deciding the scope of the next EU budget , we went into extra time .
Now we can give proper attention to what resources and means we can have recourse to in the fight against unemployment .
We must ensure that resources targeted at unemployment and social inequality are not reduced , and that they be used more efficiently in the future , especially in the creation of new jobs .
The hardest decision concerns how we democratically monitor the EU monetary union .
It was good that the status of the Ecofin council was properly defined and that member states were given the opportunity to hold policy talks on decisions regarding monetary union , but the basic problem remains .
There is still little opportunity for ordinary citizens to supervise the work of the central bank and have a say in monetary policy .
Tradition has it that European democracy reflects common , public opinion in all political decisions .
But its powers of influence are tenuous when it comes to the work of the European central bank .
The European Parliament will work towards democracy being an intrinsic part of monetary union .
It was a race against time getting here , but , anyway , thank you for allowing me to take part in the talks .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , at the end of this debate I would very rapidly like to say a few words , I would not go as far as to say to close the debate , but as a provisional conclusion .
I would very briefly like to reply to those who have continued to question the presidency during this afternoon 's session .
I would first of all like to say to Mr van Velzen that it is not my impression that the European Council on employment simply forgot to mention the idea of introducing a so-called social VAT in the countries who wish it .
In the guidelines there is a very direct reference to the reduction of VAT rates in particularly labour intensive sectors .
The Member States who want to embark on this path will be able to do so , as long as they have been authorized to do so via a directive that the Council will have to adopt , following a proposal for a directive from the Commission .
We have left it until the last minute in order to avoid following those of our Member States who wanted to make sure that no reference was made to this idea of a social VAT .
It must be said that , in fact , only four or five Member States agreed with this idea being mentioned .
We have therefore been able to pick up this idea again , which I know is so dear to Mr van Velzen 's heart , in an optional manner .
For the rest , with regard to the employment summit , I am grateful to all those who have noted that the presidency has taken up all of Parliament 's suggestions since , on re-reading Parliament 's report on the employment summit , I can find no guideline which has not been taken up in the guidelines proposed by the presidency and taken up by the European Council , apart from a few literary elements that we were unable to take up but which we have replaced with other similar elements .
On the subject of the presidency of the European central bank , we would have liked to give an answer to this question , which has not taken shape following intervention on the part of the Luxembourg government , but on the part of a Member State not far from Luxembourg and of which I am using the official and working language at this very moment .
In fact , I believe that the conditions are right for us to be able to resolve this problem before it becomes substantial , which could run the risk of threatening the credibility of the monetary initiative in Europe .
At this precise moment , we have two candidates . It will be necessary to have reduced this to one by the end of the year or the first weeks of next year .
Indeed , if we continue to cultivate this double candidature , it could very quickly come to be perceived that each candidate is representing a different policy .
There is competition between men and we must make sure that there is not soon to be competition between policies .
I believe that we must be in a position to bring the discussion to a close .
Initiatives will be taken before the end of the year to try to bring this problem to a conclusion .
I could make numerous comments about national budgetary contributions , but I do not wish to do so today .
The Commission has , furthermore , presented a report , in which it has noted , if in a general way , that the current division more or less appropriately reflects the real situation in different member countries .
Those who have read it have applauded it , if the conclusions seemed to them to be going in the right direction .
Those who have different opinions or those who have not read the report , have said that it lacks content and ambition .
Furthermore , all of the reports that the Commission presents in this respect are , very often , of an exemplary mediocrity .
We have often said that we cannot reduce membership of the European Union , and the virtues of this membership , to a purely budgetary ebb and flow .
It is a simplified and reduced idea of Europe , which gives no reason to all those who , because of considerations which go far beyond simple budgetary considerations , continually praise the virtues of the European Union .
To reduce Europe , and thus peace , to a few budget lines , really stems from a mediocrity that never fails to exasperate me .
It is a false debate for which there are no grounds . It must be objectified .
The Commission will apply itself to this , as will others .
The Commission will make a new proposal on own resources , it has been invited by the European Council to present this in October 1998 .
This will be the time for a detailed and in-depth discussion on all the problems relating to this matter .
With regard to Turkey , I would like to say and repeat that the European Union - for the first time fifteen of us , which we often do not note - has been able to formulate an offer aimed at this country , an offer which I would say shows that all the doors of Europe are open to Turkey on condition that - and this is the same for all countries wanting to join - she is able to fulfil a certain number of demands which we impose upon ourselves and which we must be in a position to impose on all those who wish to join the European Union .
It must be said and repeated , explained and re-explained to those who are watching us sympathetically in Turkey - and this is the majority of this dignified , proud and noble people - that Europe has not said no to Turkey .
Europe , which is not a club of Christians which would want to remain a club of Christians , must explain that it is a club which has certain rules regarding tolerance , that it has within it a basis of common rights , demands , duties and obligations and that anyone who wishes to join the club , which is in fact a community and a union , must answer these demands .
The modest backbencher who has just left us for reasons which escape me , when he knew that I was going to provide a reply likely to satisfy him , questioned us on the significance of the preliminary issue concerning the need for the European Union to put in place a weighty institutional reform .
I would have liked to have said to Mr Bourlanges , but I am sure you will report back my comments to this modest backbencher , as he called himself before raising the question , that amongst the Member States there are two sensibilities .
There are those who would like to see a fundamental reform take place before we proceed to the first enlargement and there are those who would like to see more modest reforms at the same time as preparing for the first enlargement .
I would like you to know , at the end of this presidency and when I can again begin to express my personal views once more without having to submit myself to the heavy constraint of having to comment on behalf of fifteen prime ministers , which is a difficult thing when they are always changing their minds , I would like to say personally and on behalf of my government , that we will support the efforts of all those who want the institutional reforms to be coherent , substantial , deep and with an eye to the future , whenever we can .
We would like to be in a position to carry out serious work from the start , on condition , however , that we do not find ourselves once again on the margins of the debate . The poor comments of some political forces , in some of the larger Member States , have resulted in the smaller states turning against them , rebelling , and not being able to reflect with the desired calm , tranquillity and serenity , on these questions .
If certain large Member States stopped playing this little game , for which there has never been any justification , and which consists of explaining to the smaller countries that they are a group which is preventing the big ones from progressing ; if certain politicians in certain large Member States could bring to an end these kinds of comments , which have had no empirical justification throughout the last thirty years , and admitted that where there are substantial and lasting blockages it is because of disagreements between the big countries , then the small ones would be more easily inclined to envisage a relative weakening of their position .
I believe that if we want to reform our institutions we will have to make sure that we all have the impression of having learnt once again how to respect ourselves better .
If we no longer like Europe , institutional reforms will not get us very far .
I would like to wish you personally , Mr President , and all of your colleagues who have willingly listened to me , and indeed all of the members of the European Parliament , happy end of year holidays .
I wish you a happy new year , a good British and Austrian year , and I hope , a good European year .
Mr President-in-Office of the European Council , I do not know the extent of the modesty of our colleague to whom you are referring , but in my own country we always say that you should take what people say on face value , thus if he considers himself modest , modest he must be .
I do not want to excuse him , but I must at least explain to you that he has had to attend another meeting which started at 3.30 p.m.
He left twenty minutes late and he was very sorry not to have been here to hear your reply .
Unfortunately , as you know , when we are here we have parallel meetings of which there are not dozens , but hundreds , and so it is always a little difficult to be everywhere at the same time .
As for me , I would simply like to thank you once again for your presence here , and for your parliamentary spirit .
You wanted to reply in person at the end of a day of debate .
I am not sure that we have given you the best proof of your talent , due to the organization of this debate , which has been interrupted two or three times .
The European Parliament is a little strange , and we apologize all the same for this .
We are coming to the end of an extremely enriching debate and we would like to thank you for your presence right to the very end and to congratulate you once again for the great presidency which a country , not one of the largest , has been able to take on for the third time .
Ah , the modest parliamentarian has just arrived .
I would like to thank you once again and congratulate you , Mr Prime Minister .
Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year !
The debate is closed .
The vote on the resolution on the Luxembourg Presidency will take place tomorrow at 9.30 a.m.
Commission work programme for 1998 ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the debate on the Commission work programme for 1998 .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I do not want my speech today to be a routine detailed listing of each and every one of the proposals set out in the legislative programme .
I would prefer this debate to be relevant to the way the European Parliament exercises its powers of control , and the Commission explains and gives an account of itself , as befits a democratic system such as our own .
I also think this is the time to take stock and draw conclusions for the future .
This year - 1997 - has been an important year for the European Union because of the great number of questions addressed , and because of the important political events which have taken place : the Intergovernmental Conference ; the employment summit ; technical decisions about the implementation of economic and monetary union ; and the extremely important decisions about enlargement made at the European Council in Luxembourg last weekend .
I think 1998 is also going to be an important year , because that is when membership negotiations will begin , decisions will be taken about which countries will participate in the third phase of economic and monetary union , and substantial progress must be made in the difficult matter of the financial perspectives and the reform of Community policies .
I can assure you that the Commission will continue to fulfil its role as the driving force behind Community initiatives and defender of the general interest , as it has done so far .
Before I present the work programme , please allow me to address three very topical questions .
Firstly , are there too many consultation documents ?
Did we produce too many consultation documents during 1997 ?
Have we been a bit slow , and not keen enough on bringing out new legislative initiatives ?
In fact , with more than half these documents , we are fulfilling formal demands of the treaty , or obligations arising from an act of derived law , or from petitions from Parliament or the Council .
Allow me to quote a few figures to put the problem into perspective : in 1997 , the Commission presented 13 White or Green Papers , 103 communications - some of them virtually compulsory , while others were consultation documents - and 116 reports , all of which were requested of us . Furthermore , I believe there are three important reasons for producing consultation documents .
Firstly , in accordance with the Subsidiarity Protocol , the Commission has to carry out consultations prior to each legislative proposal . Secondly , we need to take account of the views of all the varied organizations and associations which are so active in Europe , since they make a major contribution to the quality and feasibility of the initiatives .
And finally , the Commissioners need to have a firm idea of what is needed , and what will work .
You may ask me - I may ask myself - whether we have misused this method . Have we produced consultation documents when we should have produced initiatives , because it was the easy option ?
I do not think so .
But I can assure you , the Commission will work hard to ensure that it can never be accused of legislative laziness .
The second matter I want to mention is codification and consolidation .
Because of what the Treaty of Amsterdam says about transparency , consolidation and codification have become one of the Commission 's political priorities .
Obviously , transparency cannot be achieved by this means alone , since the treaty also demands a specific legislative initiative .
But there has to be constant codification to improve public access to Community legislation .
It is true that not many codifications have been carried out , but the relevant departments of the three institutions are working on the set of codifications which have been announced .
It is also true that codification is often delayed because of changes in legislation .
Obviously , we cannot hold back basic decisions just for the sake of codification , and you would be the first to criticize us if we did .
Text revision , which will probably be the method used in future , does not present this problem .
As far as consolidation is concerned , work is progressing fairly well .
In two years there have been 310 consolidations , based on 2 , 500 documents .
I should like to request this House to look favourably on the setting up of the necessary appropriations to allow this work to be done properly .
The third matter is the success of codecision .
Despite having experienced problems , and a proliferation of statements in the proceedings , the fact is that we have worked together well .
This is best illustrated by the result - the Treaty of Amsterdam - which simplifies the procedure and allows codecision to be applied more widely .
Mr President , I now propose to talk about the implementation of our 1997 work programme , and in particular , how what we actually did compares with what we said we were going to do .
I am well aware that there have been delays , and I realize that we need to be stricter in future .
However , in several cases the delay was caused by our having to consult on certain political or technical points , which takes time to do properly , in order to achieve an effective and consistent proposal .
That is a very important aspect of the way the Commission exercises its initiative .
Thanks to that power of initiative , we can for example request to Council that proposals should be put to the vote , as happened during the last few weeks with the Robert Schuman action and tobacco advertising .
That is something Parliament has always requested .
I think the way forward has been opened up , and that is the route we should continue to take .
The same can be said - as I think should be recognized - of the requests you have made applying article 138b . In every case , the Commission has given an immediate response , although such a response does not necessarily have to involve presenting a proposal .
Presenting proposals is the Commission 's responsibility .
Nevertheless , Parliament can request such a proposal because of article 138b .
For example , in the case of public liability insurance , the Commission has presented the proposal you requested .
We have prepared a White Paper on the prevention of damage to the environment .
As regards forestry strategy , we are preparing initiatives in accordance with the proposals in Agenda 2000 .
In two cases - hotel safety and the European health document - we have encountered problems ( mainly of a legal nature ) which need to be resolved before we can present a useful proposal .
However , we hope to find solutions to meet your demands for a European health document .
And as for safety measures against hotel fires , the Commission has already informed Parliament of the obstacles which are preventing us from presenting the requested proposal .

Ladies and gentlemen , I should like to repeat something I said at the beginning : it is absolutely not true that the Commission has been idle .
I must remind you that we have had priorities of great political importance , which have taken up all our attention .


Let me mention just a few of them : firstly , preparing initiatives to combat unemployment ( which contributed greatly to the success of the extraordinary European Council in Luxembourg on 20 and 21 November ) ; secondly , actively participating in the intense work and hard negotiations of the Intergovernmental Conference , the result of which - the Treaty of Amsterdam - will have to be ratified during 1998 ; thirdly , the communication on Agenda 2000 , which is a keystone of enlargement and Community policy reform ( especially the structural funds , the common agricultural policy and the future financial perspectives ) ; fourthly , the whole set of technical proposals in connection with the implementation of the single currency ; fifthly , preparing the Kyoto agreements on environmental matters ; sixthly , negotiation on the liberalization of the financial services of the World Trade Organization , successfully concluded in Geneva a few days ago ; and lastly - one of our highest priorities - the launch and initiation of a plan of action for the single market , which was adopted in April and presented at the European Council in Amsterdam , and includes specific proposals to make the internal market more effective .
The work and political effort which these activities demanded of us probably meant that some legislative initiatives had to be delayed , as well as certain consultation documents which some Members of Parliament are quite rightly calling for .
Is this delay justified ?
Probably not in every case .
But I want to emphasize that the Commission has concentrated on those areas which it judged to be the most important , and has worked hard to sketch out a strategy for Europe for the next ten years .
I hope you will recognize the efforts the Commission has made .
Allow me to pass on quickly to our priorities for 1998 .
President Santer has already described them , and I do not think any of them can be neglected .
In particular , I am thinking of the following : firstly , to continue our employment strategy at European level ; secondly , enlargement , which was set in motion at the weekend and is going to require us to make an exceptional effort , both political and technical , to develop and prepare the negotiations , the reform of the funds and the common agricultural policy , and the introduction of the euro ; and lastly , actions for the benefit of the people of Europe - especially the conclusions of Amsterdam and the Kyoto Conference .
We must also remember our external policy , which demands far-reaching action , as regards both the World Trade Organization and the strengthening of our presence in the politics of diplomacy and security .
Furthermore , the institutions must progress quickly in this sphere , just as with Schengen 's " communitarization ' , to be able to apply the Amsterdam decisions .
As regards freedom of movement and immigration , penal justice , and justice within the third pillar , the Commission is starting to get ready for the new treaty being applied . There are proposals already on the table , and others in preparation .
We will also present an action programme for justice and internal affairs , as soon as we can .
In preparing the programme for next year , there are two major institutional commitments which need a mention : to prepare an amendment to the 1987 decision on comitology , which we have promised to present to Parliament and the Council by June ; and to prepare a document on future institutional reforms , which was requested by Parliament for the European Council in December 1998 .
As you know , the Commission has committed itself to that politically , as I confirmed in this House in connection with our Agenda 2000 communication .
To conclude , I should like to mention the relations between our two institutions .
We have presented a list of proposals which we hope to tackle in the coming year .
Our work programme and our list of legislative proposals are the result of our having used our right of initiative , and we do not want them to be seen as excessively unilateral on the part of the Commission .
Parliament must be involved in next year 's programme , and its development .
It is true that the European Union 's parliamentary system is not based on the dialectics between a majority and an opposition , but the Commission cannot be founded solely on the legitimacy conferred on a single occasion , at the investiture vote .
We need a permanent political reference , democratically elected , to confirm that legitimacy , and I think the example of the mad cow affair has a particular significance .
I think Parliament has constructively fulfilled its true function of control .
However , it has also been clearly shown that we will never build a healthy Union based on a lack of transparency or a feeling of mistrust between the public and the institutions , nor of refusal on the part of people in power to bow to democratic control .
I am about to finish .
The Commission has committed itself to helping to consolidate the building of Europe , and to endorsing the Union 's highly positive initiatives designed to combat unemployment , reach the environmental targets set in Kyoto , make sure the euro is brought in on time , complete the single market , and undergo enlargement .
I think Parliament and the Member States share that commitment . In short , I think our future depends on effective cooperation between the institutions .
Therefore , we do not want this to be a routine exercise . We are not preparing a simple , bureaucratic series of lists , of varying degrees of controversy .
We are embarking on a real political programme .
On that basis , I beg Parliament to work with us to accomplish it , and thereby renew its confidence in this Commission .
Mr President , I would really like to repeat what I said last year .
I looked at the text on my hard disk again this morning , and I could really use it again , verbatim .
Mr President , we are having a debate today which is a gauge in relations between the Commission and the European Parliament .
We are having a debate today in which we can see each other about how the Commission and the European Parliament might help each other to bring Europe closer .
We started in 1995 with Commission Santer taking office .
The first year was for reflection , in the second year , 1996 , the theme was do less to do more , in 1997 much has been done .
You yourself have already mentioned it , Mr Oreja .
We have had the IGC with the Treaty of Amsterdam , Agenda 2000 with all the attendant work , the employment summit , completion of the internal market , the entire fiscal case , and in addition , a whole host of achievements .
You will not hear me say that the Commission has not done anything .
What we are saying , is that what was announced on paper for the 1995 , for the year 1996 and for the year 1997 has not reached us yet ; what together should we be doing now ?
Mr President , I would like to repeat again , that we are also each other 's partners .
I would therefore like to ask the Commission : can we not find a method , a procedure for adjustment to check , say , every three months , whether all the activities which we have planned still fit the priorities we have set together ?
That was one point .
Secondly , I wonder if you could tell me why at certain times you do not get through to the Council .
Why are you not able to clear things much more quickly , or in any case tell Parliament about it ?
Mr President , I would like us to take an example from the way Commissioner Fischler and Commissioner Bonino handled the BSE case , the way in which Parliament was involved in this .
I think that such a method allows us , Parliament , to work much better , as regards speed and intensity , as well as concerning the Commission .
I said a short while ago that if there are unpleasant words in the resolution , Mr Oreja , you should not take it personally .
You have been entrusted with this responsibility for coordination .
But I have a feeling that all those distinguished Commissioners hand you a list via the computer , that this list is stapled together , and subsequently submitted to Parliament .
I think - and maybe my view is a little too simplistic - that this must be what happens .
I have a feeling that on that point , with regular consultation and with the major example of the BSE inquiry , possibly via the Conference of Presidents , we will be much better able to give shape to the friendship we feel for each other .
Mr President , I do not accept the argument Commissioner Oreja uses , either : namely that this Parliament asks so many questions .
May I give an example which just came to mind , from my own experience ?
Remote selling - financial services - had an chance .
The Commission proposed it .
The Commission removed it after the first reading .
And then we needed statements , memorandums and a new directive to reinstate what was taken out .
Mr President , the trouble it is not only Parliament , but also the Commission .
The only demand , and it has also been incorporated in the resolution , islet us find a way to arrive at better harmony .
If there is a word in the resolution that disturbs you , then we can talk about it .
Mr President , at the risk of again being mistranslated , because the last time I spoke Swedish the word travestera , travesty , became transvestite in translation , I am using Swedish again .
I can agree with what the previous speakers said , that the work programme debate is quite meaningless .
I am surprised at the explanations which the Commissioner gave regarding the challenges which , according to him , are the reason why the legislative programme has not been realized .
They were known when we adopted and debated the programme last time .
On the other hand , I do not think the proposal from the large Groups , the majority , for a joint resolution is serious , with 50 different points which we should consider during the coming year .
None of the institutions would manage that .
Firstly , I believe that we in Parliament must also be informed about the new programme document which the Commission is about to start using .
At the same time we have to agree that agenda work and preparing ourselves for the turn of the Millennium are the most important things .
We must also make sure that we help the Commission to use its existing powers as much as possible .
As far as the whole work programme is concerned , we now know after the debate in Luxembourg that there are other priorities which have risen above those in the work programme .
I am thinking , for example , of the issue of food safety .
Are the legislative proposals which were sought by the European Council going to come during next year or not ?
The same applies to the northern dimension , which was mentioned in the Council 's resolution .
I believe this is one of the problems of the work on the legislative and work programme for the Commission during next year .
Mr President , in the legislative programme submitted by the Commission , the new regulations on the reform of the common agricultural policy take up a fundamental space , and we hope that the time is right ! 1998 should be a year of reform , because time runs on mercilessly and the common agricultural policy cannot only be the object of theoretical debate .
Reform has been announced for the common agricultural policy for too long .
It was in 1995 in Madrid that Commissioner Fischler adopted the famous strategy paper on European agriculture , in which it was said that the status quo would not have prevailed for long .
Finally , in 1997 , almost two years later , the first proposals arrived with the Agenda 2000 .
However , if we take into account the uncertainties and doubts in the Agenda 2000 and the time that is slipping away , we fear that the option of the status quo that was hunted from the door may come back in through the window .
According to our group , however , there is an urgent need for changes in the common agricultural policy , and the 1996 Court of Auditors report sets out several problems including that of cohesion .
On 13 and 14 November , we , as a socialist group , held a conference on the future of the CAP , seeking to state our own , tracing the lines of thought and stating that the agricultural policy needs a new legitimation , because popular consent risks becoming weaker .
We may lose the common agricultural policy , with its task of solidarity , along the road , for , when some Ministers for Economic Affairs and Finance take stock of the debit and credit sides of the Community budget , they often mention the common agricultural policy .
The only way to recover this consent , this relationship with society , for the common agricultural policy , is to face the challenges both within and outside the CAP , the European and international challenges , with far-sightedness and without any fear of calling the present inertia into discussion .
We do not think the Commission is seeking to demolish the CAP with Agenda 2000 .
However , we feel that , on decisive matters such as the ceiling for aid , modulation and eco-compatibility , the call to subsidiarity is made a little too comfortably , leaving the ball in the court of the Member States .
We have therefore confirmed a quality policy , a rural policy , new attention to Mediterranean products and simplification , and we anxiously await the draft regulations in the early months of 1998 .
Mr Commissioner , our group will not adopt any unnecessary delaying tactics or , worse still , exploitation of difficulties , but we will want to contribute towards giving the common agricultural policy a future , so that it becomes a better means of accompanying the effort made by companies wishing to be competitive and face the ever more complex and global market on their feet .
Mr President , I would like to draw the attention of the Commissioner to certain areas that have to do with the external relations of the Union , which , in fact , are mentioned in the Commission programme , as this has been put before us .
The first area is the new transatlantic agenda .
This is a very important area and needs a great deal of preparation , which has already been demonstrated by what we have seen up till now in Europe 's relations with the United States .
The second area is the preparation of Europe for its participation in the fresh round of negotiations for the new GATT , which begins in 1999 .
This is a matter which , if we wish Europe to remain a strong producer , as it has been up till now , needs very careful preparation , especially at a legislative and institutional level .
The third issue concerns Russia and the Ukraine .
The relations between Europe and Russia and the Ukraine and the fact that very soon both Russia and the Ukraine will be knocking once again on Europe 's door , and for much more than hitherto , is something that we must consider .
Fourthly , the Middle East .
This is an area which is of great significance to Europe and to which Europe is already paying a great deal of money , without however this being offset by political presence .
Very specific proposals are needed here which will help to revive the peace process .
And finally , the Balkans .
European policy in the Balkans cannot and must not be restricted to the enormous effort that is being made for reconstruction . There must also be many imaginative proposals as to how the Balkan states can come closer to us .
Mr Commissioner , I refer first to the written form of the working programme of the Commission , where you quite rightly identify Agenda 2000 and the preconditions for enlargement again and again as one of the most important projects , and in your speech itself you identified that as a cornerstone .
I was all the more disappointed that you did not mention institutional reform in the written version of the plans .
I am therefore very glad that now in your speech you identify the task of the European Parliament , to present the essential contents of institutional reform by the end of the coming year , as a task of the Commission .
I consider that to be quite essential , because we know that there will be enough political resistance against enlargement , which some people would like to postpone while pointing at the absence of institutional reform .
I am really afraid that institutional reform or the demand for it will be misused to prevent the enlargement of the European Union .
We must fight against that together , on the one hand the European Commission as the motor of agreement in our institutional structure , and on the other hand you will find in the European Parliament , or at least large parts of this Parliament , massive support for sensible and far-reaching institutional reform .
I therefore ask you , in accordance with the decision of this Parliament , to accept institutional reform as one of the most important cornerstones of the tasks of the Commission in the coming year .
Three minutes , Mr Oreja , what can I say in three minutes about this working programme ?
A difficult question .
Normally I have no problem with it , but this time I have .
For instance , I could ask you whether your submissions are a kind of cover-up , and with that I am saying rather more clearly what Mr Fayot wrapped up much more elegantly and politely in his speech .
The Commission - and I know that it is wrong to chastise you yourself for it , and therefore I apologize to you personally , but you are here so to speak responsible for your colleagues - the Commission has submitted several documents : a document about new legislative initiatives , with a Commission number ; a document about political priorities , with a Commission number ; a document about what you have done in 1997 - unfortunately not about what you have not done - with a Commission number .
What interests me most , that is the indicative list of what you intend for this year , without a Commission number , is incidentally the thickest document with the most proposals .
That means that we can rely on something perhaps coming or perhaps not .
Then I will say something about what everyone here expects from me .
We have voted in the last month on a decision about whether the Commission deserves to be sent home , whether the Commission deserves - indirectly of course - a declaration of no confidence .
We said no .
I made a speech here which was full of praise for the Commission .
In the last year , as chairperson of the BSE Monitoring Committee , I have often praised the Commission , including you , when you were in my committee .
But I now have no more reason at all to praise you !
Not you personally , Mr Oreja , not Mr Bangemann and not many others .
Where is the legislation in the follow-up to BSE , where is what we want ?
Yes , there is a Green Paper about food law .
But where is the proper legislation about it ?
Where is the framework directive about food , food control , hygiene and other aspects ?
I have a slight feeling , Mr Oreja , that the Commission is returning to the doze in which it has been lying for the last ten years .
I am not prepared to accept that .
We shall look very carefully at what comes in the next few months .
None of the documents which I mentioned to you include anything about what specifically you are going to do .
You the Commission , again not you personally .
I have nothing at all against Mr Santer saying that they must reflect more .
I always think reflection is excellent .
I would just very much like to see a result of the reflection , and I do not want another Green Paper , I do not want another White Paper , I want crisp legislative initiatives .
I want nutrient identification , I want food hygiene , food control , I want the framework legislation about it !
Please go home and say to Mr Bangemann that he should finally fall on his feet and start to become active .
I know that Mr Bangemann would willingly discuss this with me directly , and I would also willingly discuss it here with Mr Bangemann .
What is in these many documents , even this semi-official document which does not even have a Commission number , is in no way enough for me to say in the next year that this Commission is doing what it must .
In no way , Mr Oreja !
I am sorry if that upsets you , please pass it on to your colleagues !
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , from the point of view of the Committee on Transport and Tourism I can continue seamlessly from what the previous speaker said .
We in the Committee on Transport and Tourism also fear that in 1998 we will receive more statements and White Papers than specific legislative proposals .
We regret that , and I hope , Commissioner , that you will talk again to your colleagues and persuade them to rethink .
I will just take an example from the transport field .
There we are supposed to receive a statement about the environment and air transport .
No , Commissioner , we want a quite specific proposal on improving the environmental compatibility of air transport .
We want to talk to you about that , but not in a general debate about the environment and air transport !
I won 't say that that is another cover-up , but it is the lack of courage of the Commission to submit something specific .
But perhaps the Commission is just afraid of the Council , because the Council always pushes unpleasant stories in front of it .
Road use charges have been pushed backwards and forwards for six months , and they still are .
But , Commissioner , it is better that we , the Commission and Parliament tell the Council , " here is the proposed law , confess your inactivity ' than that the Commission , prematurely obedient , makes no proposals at all , but sends another statement as food for thought .
But I will take up a second subject which a previous speaker has already mentioned , and cover it in the transport field .
We need specific legislative proposals about how , four years after the completion of the internal market , traffic should be regulated from the social point of view .
We have always said that harmonization and liberalization must go together .
We have driven liberalization forward very well to a large extent , but harmonization of social , technical and tax conditions for transport is still outstanding .
I only say that many railway strikes in France , many lorry strikes in other Member States are linked to the fact that people have the feeling that the Commission owes us proposals for the promised harmonization of conditions , particularly in the social field .
A third field about which I would like to remind you : We have asked the Commission twice in the last year to submit to us within a year - to that extent you still have time , Mr Oreja , but only until February - a quite specific proposal for the calculation of external costs of transport .
We said as Parliament with an overwhelming majority : Yes , we want to internalize external costs , but we need calculation methods for all types of transport , not just for lorries , because even a nice railway produces dirt and noise , and so do many aeroplanes .
We therefore asked the Commission to submit to us the external costs of all types of transport on a demonstrably scientific basis , so that we can then internalize the external costs of all types of transport simultaneously .
But as I know the Commission - here I take up what the previous speaker said - the Commission knew that , but there is not a word about it in the legislative programme .
And if we are not careful , the Commission will say at the end of 1998 that unfortunately it has had no time .
The last field : I would like to ask the Commission , although it is clearly not guilty here , and although the Council has again refused to support tourism , to consider in the next year how it can carry out a subsidiary , accompanying support for tourism on the basis of existing policies and programmes , because tourism ensures and creates more jobs and economic growth in the Community than the whole of agriculture .
Therefore , small and medium-sized companies in particular deserve support for tourism , and we ask for your support on this point .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the third German joins the criticism of the two previous speakers .
The Commission - I will not put it as drastically as my colleague Mrs Roth-Behrendt , but I want to do it with a bit more refinement , Mr Oreja - the Commission could be more active .
I will narrow it down to the field of internal policy in the European Union .
If the Commission does not become more active , it contributes by its passivity to strengthening more and more a dangerous development which has begun in the European Union , that is the immense remoteness from democracy which is gaining ground in this Union .
I do not become tired of showing this Chamber that the Council - and particularly certain Member States - block things . We heard yesterday from Mrs Gradin that some initiatives of the Commission failed because of the veto of states which were not named yesterday , but we know which Member States they are .
The Council is accustomed to a policy which goes like this .
More and more matters , particularly those which are awkward from the point of view of internal politics at national level , are slowly but surely transferred to Europe , so that the domestic political front can be told that that has gone to Brussels , that is no longer anything to do with us !
But when they arrive in Brussels , these things remain in the inter-governmental area and are not passed to the European Parliament , even in accordance with the construction of the Treaty of Amsterdam , not as the legislative Chamber and very often not even for consultation .
They are thus practically removed from the democratic control of the national parliaments , and not transferred to that of the European Parliament .
This democratic deficit becomes quite difficult when institutions which acquire rights to intervene in basic civil liberties are created .
I do not need to repeat the Europol debate .
For instance , if , as we have read in the last few days , data from the Schengen information system is sold to organized crime , I ask who is really controlling responsibility ?
Who controls these organizations ?
Neither the national parliaments nor us !
Commissioner Gradin yesterday impressively presented to us how weakly she is staffed in this area of the Commission .
This shows that the Commission has only taken responsibility for this subject insufficiently .
But just because , unlike us , it has the right of initiative , and could take initiatives to implement freedom of movement within the European Union for instance , it should do so more strongly .
The Monti initiatives no longer appear in the legislative programme .
Those were the last initiatives which the Commission took to put into effect the freedom of movement of citizens which was provided in the Treaty of Amsterdam and the Single Act , but which was not put into effect within the strategy of the Council .
The Commission took initiatives .
As I said , these no longer appear in its working programme .
Have more courage , then Parliament will support you at all levels !
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I have two points of view .
I shall begin with the positive and would like to warmly welcome the cooperation with the USA which has inspired a new strategy with regard to synthetic drugs through , for example , the early warning system against new substances and tougher legislation against producing and dealing in narcotic substances .
And so to the points which I am less positive about and where I want to know more .
This concerns organized crime and freedom of movement .
The Commission itself has said in this House that it has a task to fulfil in 20 paragraphs in the Council 's plan of action against organized crime .
But the work programme for 1998 does not contain anything about this .
Measures are required with regard to money laundering and the confiscation of criminally obtained assets .
In addition I would like to stress that there are several paragraphs in the Dublin convention which require implementation .
The other point concerns freedom of movement .
We have the Weil report which clearly shows the problems which exist .
Here the Commission must be more active as a problem solver and attack obstructing countries .
I can quite an example from my home city of Stockholm .
More than 3 , 000 people do not get their rightful pension in time because the authorities are unable to calculate pensions when people have worked in other countries .
If it is the case that normal , decent citizens find they have their pension indirectly confiscated , at least temporarily , while criminal assets are not confiscated , the Union will of course risk losing credibility and even democratic support .
The Commission must have the ability to act as an effective guardian of the treaty , so that we in the Union can deliver both safety and freedom of movement .
In these areas the citizens have expectations of the Commission .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should first like to thank you for all the speeches we have heard here this afternoon .
Starting with Mr Fayot 's speech , which was the first , I fully agree that this is a crucial year .
And all the more so once Parliament 's powers are increased by the Treaty of Amsterdam .
The treaty will shortly come into effect .
As far as possible , we should try to put many of the treaty 's provisions into practice before it comes into effect , just as was done so successfully at the European Council in Luxembourg with regard to employment .
Mr Fayot said the Commission must be subject to Parliament 's control , and I fully agree with him , naturally .
Of course the Commission is not immovable .
That was Mr Fayot 's question , and the answer is categorical : of course the Commission is subject to Parliament 's control , as we made very clear in relation to the mad cow affair .
I believe that is exactly where the basis of the Commission 's legitimacy lies .
What legitimacy would the Commission have if it were not subject to control ?
I have been a member of two Commissions - this one and the previous one - and I can assure you , I feel my legitimacy has increased since appearing before the European Parliament on 4 January 1995 .
As I left the hearing on that day , I felt I had become more of a Commissioner than I had been before .
So I fully agree about what it means to exercise that power .
I also want to say - and I hope this will go some way towards answering Mrs Oomen-Ruijten 's comments - that one of the difficulties between Parliament and the Commission probably stems from something I think is particularly important : the system of legal bases .
I think it is important for us to make progress in establishing the legal bases for the proposals which are made .
Obviously , that is a matter for the Commission itself , but I think that by giving clues about the legal basis and the type of action which is wanted , relations between the Commission and Parliament can be made easier .
This is where Mr Fayot 's proposal comes in , which was referred to by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , and which I wholeheartedly support .
I think we should make sure we follow his suggestion - and not just once a year , but periodically .
Mr Fayot , you suggest a three-monthly meeting .
There is no reason why we should not do that .
Greatly increased transparency is exactly what the Commission wants .
Let us meet every three months , in whatever way you prefer .
It could take place at the committee chairmen 's meeting , or wherever you wish .
At this moment , I cannot give you a response to all the matters which have been raised here .
Some are legislative matters and others are not .
But our work should be serious , responsible and punctual , and if we are unable to make progress on a specific matter at a certain time , we should explain why that is , or why we think we have to resort to a Green Paper .
Mr Fayot , you referred to the concentration of resources , and pluralism . That is not a matter for which I am directly responsible as Commissioner , but as a member of the College , it is my concern .
You are absolutely right .
The previous Commission raised this matter and issued a Green Paper , which produced a series of responses .
And I can tell you , the responses were extremely mixed .
At that time we were unable to judge them .
The Delors Commission was about to end .
We did not know what to do .
A new Commission was formed and Mr Monti arrived .
He produced a new Green Paper , to which the responses were again not clear .
Although the responses from the sector and the social groups were insufficiently clear , Mr Monti nevertheless put a proposal to the College of Commissioners .
We held a very long debate to discuss the matter , but at the end of the debate the College 's position was not clear .
Mr Monti decided it needed more thought , and I think he was right .
You believe we have been thinking about it for too long .
Well , I think a delay of a few more months does not matter if we get it right in the end .
As you know , the matter you have raised is extremely difficult , and affects many sectors .
One thing at stake is what the concentration of resources means , and what the consequences may be for the people of Europe .
There is also the question of what it means to operate a true market economy , and what difficulties there are in acquiring the actions which may perhaps allow that agreement finally to be reached , and how to safeguard interests .
It is a very serious problem .
Well , that is one of the issues , and I am sure that we will soon have a debate in the Commission , reach a solution , and put that solution to Parliament .
I cannot tell you exactly when that will happen , but I am sure it will not take long because I have seen how deeply Mr Monti is studying the matter .
I want you to know that we get extremely involved in these matters , and I think a greater degree of transparency can be achieved by changing the method .
I think that where we have made mistakes has been with the method , and therefore we must improve the method we use in the future .
I also want to address another of the issues raised here : the question of proposals being blocked .
My comment is this .
Firstly , it is true that there are a lot of matters with the Council , but not everything with the Council is being blocked .
It is likely that we may be able to withdraw some of the matters which are currently with the Council . That is the Commission 's right ; the right to withdraw is one of the consequences of our right of initiative .
The reason for withdrawing these matters is that they are obsolete .
Other matters are currently in an information phase , and yet others are soon to be voted on in Council .
In any case , I want to assure you that we are going to keep a special watch on these matters .
I realize that Parliament is particularly concerned about this , and therefore I will give you a reply at the appropriate time , and I hope we will soon be able to hold a meeting to examine the list of matters still to be dealt with .
I do not propose to say much more , but there is something I want to say to Mrs Roth-Behrendt .
Mrs Roth-Behrendt , I understand your particular concern about that subject .
As you know , I have already spent a lot of time with your committee , when you asked me many questions about institutional matters , for which I was responsible at the time .
It was not easy , but I came out of it pretty well .
However , as regards the matter you have raised - which is very important - we are awaiting the results of the conference organized by the European Parliament and the Commission on 3 and 4 November last year - at the moment we are analysing the consequences of that meeting .
So you think we should have done it already ?
Well , sometimes we are a bit slow , but we are reliable .
Therefore , you can rest assured that we are going to study it in depth .
We also wanted to know the conclusions of the BSE investigation , and we now have that .
In a way , we also wanted to know what was happening with the European Council in Luxembourg .
So I have made a note of your concern .
Next time , I think you will be entitled to get angry , but please do not lose your temper this time . Please wait , because next time I will be able to give you more categorical answers .
There were a lot of other speeches .
I want to mention one or two , for example Mr Dimitrakopoulos ' speech .
I agree that we need to prepare properly for our actions in the area of foreign policy .
I believe what is currently being prepared should be put into operation immediately .
We will see how the planning cell works .
It is one of the results of Amsterdam .
The new Treaty of Amsterdam has not yet come into force , but the planning cell could nevertheless be put into operation before that happens .
As for Mr Fantuzzi 's speech , I agree with his interesting comments on agricultural policy and the role of subsidiarity .
Mr Frischenschlager 's comment about institutional reform and the extent to which the institutions can affect enlargement is a question about which I am particularly concerned .
There is a very important point in the resolution approved by this House on 19 November - I think it is point No 20 - concerning Parliament 's demand that the Commission should present proposals and report to the European Council to be held in Vienna in 1998 .
I think this is a really important and significant matter .
If you will allow me to use a very Spanish expression , what we must not do is let the bull catch us , as has happened to date - in Maastricht and Amsterdam . In other words , we must not allow events to overtake us in such a way that , in the end , we do not have enough time left .
We cannot always wait until the last minute , run out of time , and put it off .
We cannot allow the Community 's method to be one of postponement ; it has to be a decisive method .
Let us not wait until the day before a new state is due to join - much less until there is to be a twentieth , twenty-first or twenty-second state .
No , let us do it now .
First , let us wait for the treaty to be ratified , which is the important thing .
As you well know , nothing can be taken for granted - neither bad things nor good .
So let us wait now for the treaty to be ratified , and as soon as that has been done , we will set to work .
If you have charged the Commission with doing something , the Commission will do it .
And we are going to try to reach an agreement between the Commission and Parliament - and involve the Council too - and try to resolve once and for all this institutional question to which you have drawn attention , without being pressured into it by a new state 's final negotiations for membership of the Community .
Well , those are some of the things I wanted to say to you .
I also want to say , on the subject of Mr Schulz 's speech , that the Commission 's commitment to democracy is very clear .
I think everything that has been done goes to prove that commitment , especially the Intergovernmental Conference , and the Commission 's proposals on citizenship , which is not often spoken about - but should be .
Citizenship was one of the subjects to benefit most from the Intergovernmental Conference , along with codecision .
Let us attempt to go further .
We are going to try to do so .
Turning now to Mr Böge , I want to assure him that I have taken note of his proposals .
I do not think this is the right time to reopen the debate on some of the matters which have been raised in relation to the third pillar .
However , I do believe that the Treaty of Amsterdam has given us a margin there , and we must see how we can stimulate it .
The most important thing - or one of the most important - is the free movement of persons .
We know we must perfect that , and we have a procedure by which to do it . The result of Amsterdam is not what I would have liked to have seen ; I would have preferred the step to be taken in three years rather than five , and I would prefer it to be by majority rather than unanimity .
But that is what the Community is like , and has always been like .
It is never completely satisfactory .
However , I think we have been shown a way forward , and we are going to try to do it .
I hope that together , Parliament and the Commission will be able to continue to make progress , once and for all , towards building a Europe truly based on justice and solidarity .
I have received seven motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 9.30 a.m ..
Investment firms and credit institutions
The next item is the report ( A4-0380 / 97 ) by Mr Cassidy , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive amending Council Directive 93 / 6 / EEC on the capital adequacy of investment firms and credit institutions ( COM ( 97 ) 0071 - C4-0304 / 97-97 / 0124 ( COD ) )
Mr President , this proposal on the capital adequacy directive is a revision of a 1993 directive and that directive in turn was made necessary in order that the European Community , as it then was , should be able to take advantage of the universal rules which were agreed by the Committee on Banking Supervision in Basle .
When this House considered the 1993 directive , we were aware that other elements would be required in due course to keep up to date with technical progress , but I do not think we anticipated that technical progress would be quite as rapid as it has been .
Indeed , the rapid change in the financial services industry has required an updating of the capital adequacy rules to enable financial institutions to calculate something called value at risk , using computer models .
Under the 1993 directive , computer models are not allowed to be used .
Under the amendments to the Basle rules and under the amendment to the 1993 directive which we are considering today , they will be .
However , there was a further obligation imposed on the Commission and Parliament back in 1993 , which was to draw up rules to deal with commodities and derivatives , and those have required some substantial changes to the 1993 directive .
We have all been working under conditions of some difficulty because the new Basle rules come into force on 1 January next year , in other words in two weeks ' time .
One of our principal objectives in the Commission , Parliament and , indeed , the Council is to try to ensure that our amendment to the 1993 directive can be brought into force as quickly as possible in order not to place European Union financial institutions at a disadvantage compared with their competitors in Japan , the United States , Switzerland , Korea , Indonesia etc. assuming that there are still banks in places like Japan , Korea , etc. which are in a fit state to do anything at all .
Nonetheless , we have to safeguard the position of our own financial institutions .
Turning to the question of derivatives and commodities , when the Commission proposal was originally brought forward , a problem presented itself in that the Commission 's original proposal required commodities firms to modernize their systems so as to be able to use computer models by 31 December 1999 - a significant date because it is the date of the millennium , but also because it is the date by which some countries are trying to get themselves organized for the single currency .
It has become apparent that there is going to be a desperate shortage of suitably qualified IT personnel , not only in the European Union but in other parts of the world .
As rapporteur , my original thought was to suggest an extension of that deadline to 31 December 2002 .
However , I have discovered that the Council has been prepared to be rather more generous than that , and Amendment No 19 , which will be voted on tomorrow in the name of the PPE and other political groups , and its accompanying Amendment No 20 , will help to adjust the positions of commodities and derivatives firms .
I , as rapporteur , am but the humble servant of the committee and I have to leave decisions on Amendments Nos 15 , 16 , 17 , 18 , 19 and 20 to the wisdom of the House .
But if I might presume to guide the House , I have to say that I hope it will see its way to supporting Amendments Nos 19 , 20 and 16 .
Some of the others may possibly have been withdrawn .
Having said all that , we do not have a great deal of time to spare on this .
I am hopeful that when we come to vote on this report tomorrow , it will go through , if not unanimously , at least with a significant majority in favour , so that Commission and Council can then move as quickly as possible to a common position , thus enabling us to give it a second reading and putting European Union financial institutions on a par with their competitors elsewhere in the world .
I am very sorry about this but we are going to have to stop the debate at this point and resume it at 9 o 'clock this evening .
It is not in my hands .
The Vice-President who is taking Question Time wants to start Question Time at 5.30 p.m.
We have the honour of having the President-in-Office with us , so it is only appropriate we should start on time .
Mr Wijsenbeek wishes to speak on a point of order .
Mr President , this really is a point of order .
I think this is a highly unsatisfactory way of doing things here in this Parliament .
This is the second time today that a debate has been interrupted somewhere in the middle , with full appreciation for the Luxembourg Presidency which worked so incredibly hard during the past six months .
But you cannot let the rapporteur begin , send for the Commissioner , make sure all speakers are present and then after the introduction say that the debate is now suspended and will resume tonight at 9 p.m.
Could you please delete my name from the list ; I think this is an unsatisfactory way of doing things , and I hold the Bureau responsible , which , as so often , simply does what it feels like .

Thank you , Mr Wijsenbeek , but I must remind you that we have approved an agenda - all of us - and in that agenda it says that Question Time to the Council begins at 5.30 p.m. today .
Therefore , Mr Wijsenbeek , I am making sure that we keep precisely to what was approved by this House .
Furthermore , Mr Wijsenbeek , you are a well-known member of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities - as I know for a fact - and you are aware that there is a section of that committee which also determines how this Parliament operates as regards Question Time .
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is questions to the Council ( B4-1002 / 97 ) .
First of all , allow me to welcome the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Juncker , and thank him for being here today .
We greatly appreciate his presence here , but I should also like to mention how valuable it has been to have the Secretary of State , Mr Wohlfart , with us .
I should have liked to have wished him a Happy Christmas and New Year .
Mr Juncker , please be kind enough to pass that message on to him , and also thank him for having attended Question Time during the Luxembourg Presidency .
Question No 1 by Paul Rübig ( H-0832 / 97 )
Subject : Dismissal of a secondary school teacher in Slovakia for encouraging use of the minority Hungarian language
The efforts being made by Slovakia in the economic sphere in order to become a member country of the European Union are to be welcomed .
However , the worsening conflict between the Slovakian Government and the Hungarian minority , which is now spreading to education , is all the more disturbing .
Teachers and head teachers are being dismissed for what are clearly political reasons . This situation mainly concerns Hungarian schools in the bilingual region .
Mr Alexander Tóth , for example , a Hungarian secondary school teacher , was dismissed on 30 June 1997 . The headmasters of two Hungarian schools , Mr Gyula Popélyy and Mr Peter Kovács , were dismissed in October 1997 .
All three had issued their pupils with two-language reports .
Can the Council of Ministers representative say whether the Council is aware of these incidents and how it intends to respond ?
Mr President , I am told that this is the first time that a Prime Minister has taken part in this exercise of questions and answers .
I am doing it firstly because I like the European Parliament a lot , but above all because Mr Wohlfart is not here .
Mr Wohlfart , my Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs who , I am told , normally represents the Presidency brilliantly , cannot be with us because he has been involved in a car accident .
It is not a serious one , but my government members still do not know how to keep to the road when there is black ice .
Consequently , Mr Wohlfart has become a victim of the carelessness which characterises the conduct of affairs in Luxembourg .
I would now like to give the awaited reply following Mr Rübig 's question , to say that the Council deplores the incidents described in the question he has put .
I would like to remind you all of the importance the Council gives to respect for the political criteria of Copenhagen on the part of all countries with a European vocation .
It is with this in mind that the Council acknowledges the Slovakian Parliament 's declaration of 10 October 1997 and the joint declaration of the Slovakian President and Prime Minister on 17 October 1997 , declarations which it considers to be a first constructive step towards a solution of the open questions regarding Slovakia .
It is equally a question , in this case , of the beginnings of a reply to the recommendations drawn up by the joint parliamentary committee between the European Union and Slovakia .
Regarding treatment of the Hungarian minority in particular , the Council has noted the Slovakian government 's memorandum on the use of minority languages , whilst hoping that this initiative will be shortly followed by a specific law governing the different aspects of this question in its entirety .
The Council has similarly noted with satisfaction the recommendations directed at the Slovakian government by the joint parliamentary committee 's session of 25th and 26 November 1997 , inviting it to prepare , in cooperation with European Union experts , the relevant legislation in order to find a solution to the problem of minority languages within national territory .
The European Union is resolved to help all associated countries to satisfy the criteria drawn up in Copenhagen .
In this context , it has not ceased to encourage the Slovakian Republic to put to good use the time lapse in order to remove the remaining obstacles which stand in its path to full membership of the European Union , whilst hoping that it may be possible to reach , by the same time , a just solution to the problems of the minority in question .
Mr President , first I would like to thank Prime Minister Juncker very much .
I think that it is exemplary that you are available to Parliament here in person for questions .
I believe - and I would like to emphasize this explicitly to this audience , because we were very glad about it - the Council has followed Parliament 's line and not mentioned the word Slovakia explicitly .
Nevertheless we should do everything so that the criteria which are very important for us are fulfilled there .
The first problem is the minority question .
The second is the question of Mr Gaulider , the member of parliament , and I believe that we on the European side cannot emphasize too much that the Gaulider question must be solved .
We know that that is related to President Kovác and with the elections in the autumn , and my question is : Do you believe that the European Union has an opportunity to solve this Gaulider case before the elections in Slovakia ?
Mr Rübig , on the question of Mr Gaulider and all the other related questions which you have raised , I would like to tell you that I have discussed the questions which you have raised and related questions very intensively with the Slovakian Prime Minister , Mr Meciar .
This happened at the end of August , on the occasion of a half-day working visit to Slovakia which I made because , precisely at the time when Slovakia was actually excluded from the enlargement process by everyone , I wanted to show through this visit that this does not mean that we are now giving Slovakia the cold shoulder .
I then discussed this question with Mr Meciar , the president of the republic , the opposition parties in the Slovakian parliament and some other Slovakian friends and colleagues .
I also took this opportunity to invite both the president and the prime minister to make a common declaration about the accession of Slovakia to the European Union , and I made it clear that we wanted some answers to questions which we brought from outside to be given in Slovakia itself .
By chance that was precisely the day on which voting on the so-called Gaulider case was due in the Slovakian parliament .
The vote was then postponed .
In all discussions with all contacts in Slovakia , I have made it clear that we place the highest value on improved functioning of the democratic institutions in Slovakia , and I also made it clear , in a further conversation with Mr Meciar last Saturday in Luxembourg , that the fact that the European Council has nevertheless explicitly included Slovakia in the enlargement process should not be interpreted as meaning that we are now satisfied with the quality of the democratic processes which have been achieved in Slovakia , but that we assume that further efforts must be made .
There is Slovakia , there is the Slovakian government , there are also five million Slovak men and women , whose place is in the centre of Europe .
We should please not forget that , however angry we are about what Mr Meciar does , does not do or fails to do .
There is not only Mr Meciar , but also five million Slovaks , who are worth our support .
Mr President , first I would like to thank you very much for being here , and also ask you to pass on our best wishes to your colleague for his recovery as soon as possible , because he has really done outstanding work here .
I only wanted to put one question about your previous answer : One of Meciar 's main arguments is always , in all his speeches , that he recognizes only individual rights and not collective rights .
Do you intend to emphasize as much as possible that precisely minority questions depend above all on collective rights , and not individual rights ?
That is always the way in which Mr Meciar tries to avoid a definite answer .
Mr von Habsburg , minority rights cannot be individualized .
Minority rights are rights of a particular population group .
In our conversations in Slovakia , and subsequent conversations with Slovakia , we always pointed to Hungary , Romania , but particularly Hungary , to make clear how we think that minority problems should be handled , or rather minority questions - I much prefer the term minority questions to minority problems , because minorities are not problems , they just raise questions .
We have always pointed to the Hungarian example to show how we think minority questions should be handled , and I believe that the Slovakian leadership is very aware of this .
Question No 2 by Jens-Peter Bonde ( H-0856 / 97 )
Subject : Registration of individuals in the Schengen Information System
Can the Member States and / or the Council of Ministers say how many individuals with Danish residence or nationality are registered in the Schengen Information System for the various main categories under which individuals , objects etc. are registered and will the Member States respect the Danish ban on registering lawful political activity in their own files and in those they hold in common ?
I will say to Mr Bonde that the Schengen Agreement and the convention regarding the implementation of the Schengen Agreement were concluded at an intergovernmental level between certain members of the European Union .
These agreements do not therefore for the moment come under the jurisdiction of the Council properly speaking , and the honourable gentleman 's question should rather be put to the authorities of the Schengen Agreement .
Mr President , this morning , I thanked the Presidency of the Council for having been so impartial for half a year , and today I would like to thank the Minister of State for coming here and answering questions at question time in person .
And I would also like to thank him for having given me an answer .
But I obviously cannot , as it will be given by the Schengen information system .
So I would like to ask instead whether the Chairman of the Council has considered how we can balance certainty in law against political effectiveness in the records in Schengen and the AIS system which will replace the Schengen system under Europol .
My suggestion to the Chairman of the Council would be that a rule be introduced whereby , if suspicions no longer exist , the person suspected is sent the information recorded or that , if this cannot be done because of investigations , that information should be given to an independent control authority so that there is always certainty that having suspicions about someone is taken very seriously .
To reply to Mr Bonde 's question , I will simply say that he must be aware that this relates to highly confidential matters ; I am talking of the questions to which he is directly referring .
It is clear that integration of the points to which he has referred into the Schengen information system takes place only by demand of a judicial authority .
As his question relates directly to the treatment of Danish nationals and residents , I suggest that he puts this question to the Danish Parliament , where all the replies could be provided for him .
Amongst my youth 's ambitions was that of one day being able to speak in front of the Danish Parliament .
If the Danish Government was in agreement to authorize me to reply to this very question that you will formulate for the Danish Parliament , I would be extremely pleased and honoured to be able to reply to you on behalf of the Danish Government .
But I do not know if , speaking on behalf of the Danish Government , I would be able to give you a satisfactory response .
I would like to say that I think this is a very important debate , because the Schengen material will probably become EC law in the near future .
People often talk of the advantages of the Schengen Agreement , but people must also be able to discuss how it works in practice .
In the Schengen Information System there is at least a possibility of asking to see your personal information in the SIS database .
What concerns me most is the confusion about SIRENE , that is the database which lies behind the Schengen Information System , where there is authority to provide much more sensitive personal information than is allowed to be done from the SIS database .
Does the Council of Ministers think we are going to need to tighten the supervision of the SIRENE database and the information which is provided there so that we shall have a control authority , as in the SIS database , if it is integrated into EC law .
Thank you , Mr Sjöstedt .
Mr Juncker , I do not know whether , in your youth , you ever dreamed you were a Member of the Swedish Parliament , but even if you did , I invite you to reply to Mr Sjöstedt 's question .
My childhood dreams concerned only the Danish Parliament .
It was not my ambition to one day be able to address any more than one Scandinavian parliament .
As for the rest , personally , I will say that I understand perfectly the fears which can arise from the problems we are now mentioning .
For my part I would not exclude the fact that it would be wise to search for a suitable ways and means to organize things in order to achieve a real mastery of these problems .
I see no problem in continuing our common reflection in this regard .
I perfectly understand the worries that underlie the questions being put to us , but you will understand that I cannot give a ready made reply from the Council .
A dream may well become a nightmare , and I can say that people in Scandinavia regard joining Schengen as containing a number of potential nightmares .
The Chairman of the Council is correct in saying that the development which Jonas Sjöstedt touched on in his question has not happened yet , but it is a question of time if Schengen law becomes EU law , i.e. is integrated in the European legal system .
And , given that there are absolutely fatal problems of certainty in law about personal records , passing on and checking names , as the report which was published in the Spring shows , one might of course think that the Council has had some thoughts ( now that it has been resolved to integrate the Schengen system ) on how to resolve these problems of certainty in law , which are undoubtedly of a highly fundamental nature .
My question to the Chairman of the Council is whether such analyses and considerations exist .
Schengen is a mechanism that was invented to fight against criminality .
It is not a system which has been put in place to control citizens , their opinions or their convictions .
Indeed , we forget that Schengen is a mechanism set up to fight criminality more effectively and that its results are very often convincing .
I am not excluding some lack of control and I would like us to concentrate our thoughts on the means that we could put in place to avoid this .
We must make a distinction between the principle of Schengen and a number of exceptional failures which it may have given rise to , and which must be avoided at all cost .
Question No 3 by María Izquierdo Rojo ( H-0863 / 97 )
Subject : The associated countries of the Maghreb and " European voluntary service for young people ' ( OJ C 302 of 3.10.97 )
The programme is intended to step up cooperation with third countries with which the Community has signed association agreements , and as regards the participation of the associated countries , it is open to the countries of central and eastern Europe ; one of the purposes of the project is to provide Community young people with experience of contacts with other cultures in an intercultural context .
Could the Council investigate the possibility of opening up participation in this programme to the partner countries of the Maghreb which have signed a euro Mediterranean Association Agreement , i.e. Tunisia and Morocco ?
What might the timetable for this be ?
Article 5 of the draft common position approved by the Council during its session on 28 October 1997 clearly states the countries to which participation in this programme is open . It says , " European voluntary service for youth ' .
The associated countries of the Maghreb , who have concluded an agreement with the European Union , do not figure amongst the countries stated .
However , amongst the specific objectives of the programme , recorded in article 2 , paragraph 2 , appears the intensification of youth participation in transnational activities of community service within the Community , or in third countries , in particular those with which the Community has concluded cooperation agreements .
Completing this , paragraph 3 of the same article stipulates that support of transnational community service activities of a short or long duration within the Community , or in a third country , is one of the main actions of the programme .
Similarly , section 2 of the annex of the draft common position anticipates the active participation , in third countries , of young people residing legally in a Member State in activities which contribute to solving the needs of the society likely to have a direct effect on the well-being of the populations of the host communities .
It follows from this that , at the time of implementing the programme , projects anticipated in one of the countries mentioned in the question could , of course , be considered .
Judging by the tone and political attitude of the reply given by the President-in-Office of the Council , I assume he said yes .
However , I do not understand it , because in fact , in the Commission proposal published in the Official Journal on 3 October 1997 , it is envisaged that the countries of central and eastern Europe and third countries would benefit and participate in this way , but not the associated countries of the Maghreb .
I should like him to state precisely whether , as President-in-Office of the Council , he would be in favour of the associated countries of the Maghreb being able to participate in this voluntary service programme , in two ways : firstly , young Europeans being able to do service in these countries , and secondly , the associated countries of the Maghreb being able to participate in the programme in their own right .
The Council could come to the agreement that you wish as long as it is submitted to a Commission proposal which moves in this direction .
Mr President , I only have quite a short question .
In the case of such a fundamental expansion , would the Council also be prepared to increase resources for this programme correspondingly ?
If the Council was able to associate itself with a proposal made to it by the Commission , it would really have to be interested in making the relevant monetary resources available , in the context of a coherent interpretation of what the Commission would propose .
But as there is no such proposal by the Commission , we are in a very hypothetical question and answer game here .
Question No 4 by Gerard Collins ( H-0865 / 97 )
Subject : Agri-tourism
Does the Council accept that agri-tourism can play a significant role in developing the economies of rural areas and will the Council instruct the Commission to put forward measures designed to assist the further development of the agri-tourism sector in the context of the Union 's tourism and rural development policies ?
As the honourable gentleman himself highlights in his question , tourism can contribute to the economic development of rural areas of the European Union , given that economic development of rural areas is traditionally linked to agricultural development .
The Council shares Mr Collin 's opinion that rural tourism offers possibilities which , judiciously exploited , are of a nature which will increase well-being and create jobs in these areas .
The Council attaches a particular importance to the qualitative improvement of supply in the rural tourism sector .
Such a step is likely to benefit the development of the areas in question .
In this context , the Council would like to remind you of its decision 92 / 421 concerning a Community action plan for tourism .
Finally , it should be noted that rural tourism plays an important role in the Community 's cohesion policy .
In this regard , it is useful to underline the fact that , within the framework of the structural funds and the Leader 2 Community initiative , according to the most recent estimates , 40 % of the budget of ECU 1 , 750 million anticipated for this will be allocated to projects aimed at developing rural tourism .
I just wish to record my thanks and appreciation to the Prime Minister for his very extensive and comprehensive reply .
Mr President , I have the following question : As far as agricultural tourism is concerned , we in Austria have a rather special situation , since we have a very large percentage of farmers for whom farming is a secondary occupation .
I know that this cannot be applied to the whole European Union , but that it is an argument which very much supports this agricultural tourism .
Would you consider it possible either to provide these part-time farmers with special support for agricultural tourism or to support these farmers , who live in a very special situation , from the agricultural side , so that they can commit themselves more strongly here ?
Yes !
I am very pleased that Mr Habsburg-Lothringen kept his question so short ; he did not use up the minute he was entitled to .
I am also very pleased that the President-in-Office of the Council is being so concise . It makes the work of our interpreters much easier .
Question No 5 by Sören Wibe ( H-0868 / 97 )
Subject : EU relations with Israel and Palestine
The Israeli government has committed serious breaches of the peace agreements it concluded with the Palestinian State .
In so doing it has jeopardized peace throughout the Middle East .
Ought not the Council to respond by imposing sanctions against the State of Israel and , for instance , consider breaking off the trade agreements which the EU has signed with Israel ?
The situation in the Middle East is a complex one and the Council does not believe that measures such as those suggested would contribute to an end to the impasse in the region .
The best reply that I can give to you is to return to the Presidency 's conclusions published at the end of the European Council held in Luxembourg on 12th and 13th December .
These conclusions demonstrate once more that the European Union is determined to make a concrete and positive contribution to the peace process .
Thank you for you answer Prime Minister Juncker .
As far as the relationship with Israel is concerned , the situation is still that we have repeatedly adopted resolutions in which we have criticized Israel 's breaches of the peace agreement in fairly strong terms .
These resolutions have clearly had no effect whatsoever .
Is it not so , that the only language Israel understands is if we resort to concrete sanctions , such as in the economic area ?
It is also so that Israel as a State imposes hard economic sanctions against the Palestinians by , for example , obstructing their export of flowers to the Union .
I would like once more , at the risk of being boring , to ask whether it is not time for us to begin to consider concrete economic sanctions against Israel .
I will tomorrow be meeting , in Luxembourg , the Israeli Prime Minister , and on Friday , President Arafat .
I will have the opportunity of discussing with both representatives the problems to which you are referring , but I will not threaten the Israeli Prime Minister with sanctions during these meetings .
I do not believe that this is the method we should employ with regard to the State of Israel .
We need discussions , not threats .
I entirely agree with what the President-in-Office of the Council has just told us twice , and I should like to ask him if he thinks there is any way of clearly defining , in black and white , what we are always referring to as the spirit of Oslo . I ask this particularly , having read very carefully the text approved by the European Council in Luxembourg .
I am familiar with the Oslo written agreements , but I am always hearing people talk about violating the spirit of Oslo and I have still not found anywhere a single written reference to the spirit of Oslo .
I would like to know if the Council would be able to undertake this interesting intellectual task .
I think the details requested by Mr Robles Piquer must , indeed , be given .
It is sometimes extravagant to see with what luxurious detail we try to surround vague notions such as " the spirit of ... ' , in this case " the spirit of Oslo ' .
In fact , we know to what , in general , we are referring when we evoke the spirit of which you speak .
I will tomorrow have the chance to contribute in a modest way to the search for the spirit which is , it seems to me , a little lost .
Question No 6 by Karl Habsburg-Lothringen ( H-0873 / 97 )
Subject : Electoral law in Gibraltar
What does the Council propose to do with regard to the law in Gibraltar on elections to the European Parliament ?
Is it acceptable for EU citizens there to be denied this elementary right on the grounds that Gibraltar would be too small a constituency , thus creating first- and second-class EU citizens ?
Would the Council consider enabling EU citizens of Gibraltar to cast their vote in or for another EU country , if they are unable to do so through the UK ?
Mr Habsburg-Lothringen undoubtedly knows that Annex II of the Act of 20 September 1976 relating to the election of representatives to the European Parliament by direct universal suffrage anticipates that the United Kingdom will apply the measures of the Act in question only with regard to the United Kingdom , that is to the exclusion of Gibraltar , which is not part of the United Kingdom .
The 1976 Act was adopted on the basis of article 138 , paragraph 3 , of the Treaty setting up the European Economic Community , on the basis of a project drawn up by the European Parliament , which made no mention of the particular situation of Gibraltar .
Nor would the Council be able to extend , by its wish alone , the application of the 1993 directive on the exercising of voting rights and eligibility for the European Parliament , which refers to the 1976 Act , to enable the citizens of the United Kingdom resident in Gibraltar to vote in European parliamentary elections in a Member State where , hypothetically , they do not reside .
Indeed , the 1993 directive is based on article 8b , paragraph 2 , of the Treaty , whose application is limited to European Union citizens resident in a Member State of which they are not nationals only .
Mr President , the fact is that I have received the proposal for a law concerning a voting right for Gibraltar from the British House of Commons , but only after I put this question - I did not know about it before .
I have heard that it is not the first proposal .
Other proposals have already been rejected .
But here there was the opinion that this proposal of 1July of this year had a better chance .
I do not know how that can be combined with that .
Furthermore , the legal situation - looking at Gibraltar today - is rather divided , if you take on one side the Peñón and on the other the isthmus , because the Peñón practically belongs to England according to the Treaty of Utrecht , whereas in the case of the isthmus there is some dispute about who it belongs to , even if it is now quite clearly under British administration .
Mr President , the clever people sitting to my left and behind me are of the opinion that I should not burden the last days of the Luxembourg Presidency by now getting mixed up in the difficulties between two Member States .
I think this was clever advice !
So I would like to tell you that I understand your question very well , but I will give you my answer outside the door .
As the author is not present , Question No 7 lapses .
Question No 8 by John Cushnahan ( H-0878 / 97 )
Subject : European Food Agency
Can the Luxembourg Presidency inform me whether the Council is prepared to give its support to the Commission 's proposal to establish a European Food Agency ?
I am sorry to have to say that the Commission has currently submitted no proposal to the Council regarding the creation of a European Food Agency .
As soon as it has been submitted , it goes without saying that the Council will as quickly as possible proceed to examine the text in depth and when the time comes will take a decision in full knowledge of the reason and by virtue of the Commission 's proposal 's own merits .
Mr President , thank you for your courtesy in allowing me to ask a question .
I do appreciate that I arrived just as you were moving on and I also thank Mr Juncker for his answer .
I have taken note of what you said regarding the Commission proposal .
I understood that it was before the Council .
I will check that but can I ask ( and I do not expect you to give a formal answer ) whether - maybe when it does come before the Council - the Luxembourg Government will support such a proposal and whether maybe it is something , as you go out of your presidency , that you will pressurize the next presidency about ?
Can I congratulate you on a successful presidency ?
You certainly moved the European agenda forward .
I repeat that it is the Luxembourg government 's custom to study Commission proposals before being able to support them .
Our support is not a support in principle .
We only take a decision after having read and examined the proposal .
Question No 9 by Carlos Robles Piquer ( H-0882 / 97 )
Subject : Request by thousands of Cuban citizens for a plebiscite
More than ten thousand clearly identified Cuban citizens resident in Cuba have now signed a letter addressed to the President of the National Assembly of People 's Power of the Republic of Cuba respectfully requesting , in accordance with article 88 ( g ) of the 1976 Constitution , that a plebiscite be held to consult the people on whether they wish to amend the Constitution to the effect that it would guarantee freedom of expression , freedom of association , pluralism and the election of the government through a direct , free and secret ballot .
According to Amnesty International ( AMR 25 / 29 / 97 / S ) the first 12 signatories were visited by the police , who warned them that they were risking long prison sentences .
What information can the Council provide on this initiative , the Cuban Government 's response and the likelihood , in its view , that a petition lodged in accordance with the Cuban Constitution might be accepted and acted on ?
Thank you , Mr President-in-Office of the Council .
The information I have is not entirely consistent with yours .
I believe at least one of the two initiatives has already exceeded the figure of 10 , 000 signatures , by means of worthy effort and great personal risk .
However , even if it has not yet reached that number , there is no doubt that it will do so reasonably soon .
So , my supplementary question is whether , despite the awful wording of that terrible article 62 which has been read to us and which is , of course , a proclamation of absolute totalitarianism , there is anything the Council can do to try to persuade the Cuban authorities simply to comply with their own constitution , which they themselves - Fidel Castro - approved .
I believe that once that figure of 10 , 000 signatures has been reached - and as I said , if that has not yet happened then it soon will - there will have to be some effort , on the part of the Council and the official embassies there , to persuade the Cuban Government to comply with its own constitution .
I do not doubt that the Council will be able to act in the way indicated by the honourable gentleman .
Mr President , thank you for your clear statement .
We have not always heard such clear statements in this Chamber on this subject , and I also thank you for what the Council has defined not long ago as the common attitude on this question .
But I wanted to ask additionally , what about efforts to form treaty relationships with Cuba - even membership of the ACP has been mentioned - and what part is played by questions of human rights and freedom of belief and conscience in this context .
Thank you , Mr Posselt .
I am sure you realize that your supplementary question is well outside the scope of Mr Robles Piquer 's original question .
Therefore , it is up to Mr Juncker whether he replies or not .
Mr Juncker , the floor is yours , to use as you see fit .
Mr President , the Council defined its Cuba policy in the common statement of 2 December 1996 .
The questions which you have raised will have to be answered in the context of the implementation of what was said there .
Question No 10 by Alexandros Alavanos ( H-0887 / 97 )
Subject : Abolition of the teaching of ancient Greek in France
According to information from the French Association of Language Teachers , the National Union of Secondary School Teachers and the Toulouse Regional Classics Teaching Association , moves are being made by the French Minister of Education , Claude Allegre , to abolish the teaching of ancient Greek as part of the educational reforms scheduled for the beginning of 1998 .
Ancient Greek is currently taught to 1.9 % of pupils in certain secondary school classes while Latin is taught to 25.4 % .
Despite reassurances from the Minister of Education , these rumours are still giving cause for concern .
While educational curricula are the responsibility of the Member States , action to improve the teaching of European languages is one of the priorities of the European Union .
What representations will the Council of Ministers make to the French Government , which is itself engaged in an intense campaign ( " Francophonie ' ) in favour of the French language in other countries ?
As Mr Alavanos states , responsibility for the content of education and the organization of an education system remain within the jurisdiction of Member States .
In accordance with the relevant article of the treaty , the Community contributes to the development of a quality education by encouraging cooperation between Member States and , if necessary , by supporting and completing their actions , whilst fully respecting their responsibilities .
Furthermore article 126 of the treaty states , in paragraph 2 , that Community action aims at developing the European dimension in education , in particular by apprenticeships and the diffusion of the languages of the Member States .
It should be noted that this relates to the spoken languages of the Member States and not dead languages .
In the absence of a Commission proposal , the Council would not be able to adopt the actions of encouragement in this area that the honourable gentleman has mentioned .
It is furthermore not for the Council to intervene in the content and organization of the education system of a Member State .
I consequently fear that the Council is hardly in a position to undertake any step that may be contrary to the French government regarding the teaching of ancient Greek in French schools .
Mr President , I would like to thank President Juncker for his reply .
It is a reply within his terms of reference .
I would however like to ask him the following question : does he not believe that ancient , perhaps unspoken , languages such as ancient Greek or Latin , are part of the heritage of the European Union that we are in the process of constructing ?
Is our heritage simply what is to be found in museums or in certain buildings ?
Is not part of our cultural tradition just these languages , which play a fundamental role in European culture today ?
Does he not think that they should be supported throughout Europe ?
How does he react to the Greek proposal for the creation of a Centre of Classical Studies in the European Union ?
I await the replies of the President with great interest .
Having spent seven years of my life studying Latin , I would like to believe that the teaching of dead languages enables a better comprehension of the integrality of European cultural heritage .
Question No 11 by Bernd Posselt ( H-0890 / 97 )
Subject : Autonomous status for Kosovo
What steps has the Luxembourg Presidency taken to reinstate Kosovo 's autonomous status , which was unlawfully withdrawn in 1988 ?
The oppression of Kosovo 's Albanian majority , which accounts for 90 % of the population , must under no circumstances be trivialized and dismissed as a " minority problem ' .
Is the Council considering sending international observers , or even peace-keeping forces , to Kosovo , and what means are being used to exert pressure on Belgrade so that it finally agrees to the opening of a European Union office in Prishtina , particularly in view of the fact that the United States has had such an office for a long time ?
The Council continues to give a high priority to the problem of Kosovo .
In its declaration of 9 April 1996 on recognition , by Member States of the European Union , of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia , the European Union declared that from then on the development of good relations with the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the place of this country within the international community would depend on the adoption by the FRY of a constructive attitude , in particular with regard to the full respect for human rights , rights of minorities and the right of return for all refugees or displaced people as well as the granting to Kosovo of a large degree of autonomy within the FRY .
The position that I have just stated has been repeated many times , in particular by the European Council at its meetings of 13 and 14 December 1996 in Dublin , 16 and 17 June 1997 at Amsterdam , as well as by the Council on 29 April 1997 and , more recently , in its declaration of 10 November of this year aimed at the population of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia .
In particular in its conclusions of 29 April 1997 , on the application of conditionality for relations between the European Union and the countries of the region , the Council linked the development of relations between the European Union and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to conditions both general and specific .
Thus , general assistance within the Phare programme requires that the FRY makes a credible offer with a view to initiating real dialogue on the status of Kosovo .
The opening of possible negotiations regarding a possible cooperation agreement will depend in particular on the existence of real dialogue with the Albanians of Kosovo on the status of Kosovo , within the borders of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia .
One of the conditions for the conclusion of a cooperation agreement is the effective granting of a large degree of autonomy to Kosovo .
Furthermore , the Council has underlined , in particular during its session of 6 October 1997 , that the commencement of dialogue between the Belgrade authorities and the Kosovo Albanians is necessary and that all the parties concerned must contribute to this fully and rapidly .
It even insisted on the implementation of the education agreement concluded between Mr Milosevic and Mr Rugova without delay .
The European Union has indicated its intention to support this agreement .
The European Union is asking the Belgrade authorities to allow recourse in the long term to missions of the OSC to Kosovo , Vojvodine and Sandjak and it continues to follow the situation closely , in particular through the ECMM .
To the same end , the European Union intends to open an office in Pristina and it has presented a proposal to the authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia .
As you know , no resolution of the UN 's Security Council has anticipated a peace maintenance force for Kosovo in particular .
Mr President , the problem in Kosovo is simply that because of years of neglect by the international community - by which I do not mean the Luxembourg Council Presidency , which has actually done something - a situation has arisen in which everything threatens to escalate and outbreaks of violence are expected .
Therefore , we must really try , before it is too late , to bring about a political solution , even by pressure .
The Americans have an office in Pristina , and the European Union has been talking about it for years and has no office in Pristina .
The same obviously applies to autonomy .
The autonomy of Kosovo was a constituent part of the constitution of Yugoslavia before it broke up .
We must press for the restoration of this autonomy .
I believe that the attitude which Yugoslavia took at the Petersberg conference in Bonn , that this is an internal affair of Yugoslavia , cannot be accepted simply because we know that there are hundreds of thousands of displaced persons and refugees from Kosovo in the territory of the EU .
My question is therefore : Are further steps planned ?
Mr President , I assume that the British Presidency will continue the efforts of the Luxembourg Presidency in this direction .
Question No 12 by Jonas Sjöstedt ( H-0894 / 97 )
Subject : Supervision of the Schengen Information System register
Does the Council of Ministers consider that the Joint Supervisory Authority ( JSA ) , the authority intended to supervise the correct operation of the SIS register , has adequate resources and powers to carry out its work in a satisfactory manner ?
Does the Council intend to make any changes to the JSA 's modus operandi if and when the Schengen Agreement is incorporated into EU law ?
Will the supervision of the register within the Schengen Agreement and Europol be carried out by separate authorities even if the Schengen Agreement becomes part of EU law ?
The Joint Supervisory Authority was set up by the convention for the purpose of implementing Schengen , more precisely by its article 115 .
The JSA is part of the Schengen patrimony .
The Council , at this stage , is not in a position to give an opinion on the functioning of the JSA which comes within the jurisdiction of the Schengen authorities .
The creation of a Joint Supervisory Authority for Europol is anticipated in article 24 , paragraph 7 of the convention which set up Europol .
Since January 1996 , work has begun in order to draw up its internal regulations , in particular in the light of the work of the European data commissioners .
It is anticipated that the work on a draft text of internal regulations will be finished in the first months of next year .
It is not anticipated at this stage that one supervisory authority alone will cover the SIS and Europol .
Thank you for your reply to the question , and the answer that there are no plans for a joint supervisory authority in connection with Europol .
I think it is important to study the example of the JSA in order to see what problems could be encountered in the case of Europol .
I hold in my hand the first activity report from the authority which is supposed to supervise personal security in the Schengen Information System .
I must say , it makes catastrophic reading .
Among other things the authority has such limited resources that no real inspection can be carried out . For example , it has no offices .
In addition , the authority has been denied access to the central computer located in Schengen in order to be able to carry out the inspection it wants to do .
When some inspecting was done , it was found that there is different information about the same persons in different parts of the Schengen Information System , that it is difficult to find out who has had access to the Information System and has looked for various sensitive pieces of information , that those who have been registered , such as asylum seekers , do not know how to find out whether the information is correct , and that certain Member States use the information in an incorrect way .
A lesson must now be learned from this .
What are we considering doing in the case of Europol so that this is not repeated ?
What are we considering doing about this when the Schengen Agreement becomes part of EC law ?
We believe that this issue will develop in the short term and , when the time comes , the Council will have the possibility of giving the European Parliament all useful information enabling it in particular to exercise , within the limits imposed by the Treaty , its role in the supervision of Community action in this area .
Question No 13 by Maren Günther ( H-0896 / 97 )
Subject : Image of the various European countries in the other EU Member States
A negative , superficial and simplistic image of other countries is often conveyed in EU Member States , especially in certain media .
Prompt measures should be taken in schools to counter this tendency .
What steps are being taken to ensure that as objective an image as possible of the various European countries is conveyed in the other Member States ?
Are efforts being made in joint bodies ( e.g. school book commissions ) to reduce prejudice about European neighbours ?
The Council has for a long time been sensitive to the concerns mentioned .
Indeed , in its resolution of 1976 which comprised a programme of action in the area of education , one of the important themes of the text was made up of what we at the time called the best opportunities for cultural and professional training for nationals of other Member States of the Community and of non-member countries and their children .
Point 2 of this chapter initiated , amongst other things , studies and works of pedagogic research into the place and importance of the culture of the mother tongue of nationals from other Member States in school programmes .
Since then the Council has continued to give concrete signs of its interest in this issue , whilst acting within a wider perspective than that following from the question .
Thus , through its conclusions of 27 September 1985 , the Council introduced the concept of the European dimension into education .
Apart from the promotion of the teaching of foreign languages , its conclusions indicate , as an appropriate measure , the promotion of measures aimed at encouraging contact between pupils of different countries and the development of a European dimension in study programmes , in training and in educational materials .
In the Council resolution of 24 May 1988 on the European dimension of education , the objectives include the need to improve young people 's knowledge of historical , cultural , economic , and social aspects of the Community and of its Member States and to make them understand the interest in cooperation of the European Community with other countries of Europe and the world .
In its conclusions of 27 November 1992 on the measures aimed at developing the European dimension in higher education , the Council confirms , in particular , that , to take up the challenge of an increase in the number of students having access to the European dimension , we must now strengthen the integration of this dimension in the policy and the practise of higher education at all levels .
All of this underlines the concrete interest in anchoring the concept of the European dimension in the different educational systems .
It is due to this integration that it should be progressively possible to wipe out the current bad perceptions to which you have referred .
With regard to the specific initiatives referred to , these can only be taken on the basis of proposals in due form from the Commission .
Mr President-in-Office , thank you for the answer .
A short question : Are you satisfied with the results of all these efforts over the decades , as far as the image of the states - above all in the media - is concerned ?
I am thinking particularly of criticism in the media , in which individual countries are really branded , particularly by young people .
No , Mrs Günther , I am not at all satisfied with what has been achieved !
Question No 14 by Alex Smith ( H-0903 / 97 )
Subject : Community policy towards climate change and the use of nuclear fuels
During the most recent Troika discussions on Community policy towards climate change , was there any consideration of the proposals advanced by the European nuclear industry to increase the use of plutonium-uranium mixed oxide ( MOX ) nuclear fuels in reactors as part of a strategy to reduce CO emission from electricity generation ?
The Council is not aware of the proposals formulated by the European nuclear industry to which the honourable gentleman refers in his question .
In any case , I can indicate to you that , in principle , the Council would give all its attention to proposals which may be submitted to it with a view to reducing the greenhouse effect .
It goes without saying that the Council will examine these proposals according to their own merits and without prior assumptions of any kind .
I would lastly like to underline the fact that the Community strategy , with a view to the third conference of contracting parties to the framework convention of the United Nations on climatic change , which took place in Kyoto , has been recorded in the Council conclusions of 16th October 1997 .
They are available to Parliament .
Mr President , I am indeed grateful to hear the Council say that it would discuss this with no a priori considerations because there is a downside to the use of MOX fuel .
A report recently issued after a two-year project makes it quite clear that it has a potential for terrorist organizations in the fabrication of nuclear devices with socalled reactor-grade plutonium , the stuff that is being produced at Sellafield and La Hague .
It is made chillingly clear how dangerous this is and obviously the transportation of nuclear fuel is equally dangerous .
Would the Council please obtain a copy of this report and study its implications ?
It is called " The comprehensive social impact assessment of MOX use in light water reactors ' .
I would like to repeat that at this current time the Commission has not submitted a proposal to the Council with regard to this .
Once such a proposal is made , we will give it all the attention which an examination of this question requires .
Question No 15 by Nikitas Kaklamanis ( H-0911 / 97 )
Subject : Provocative letter from the Turkish Foreign Minister , Mr Cem
On 20 October 1997 the Turkish Foreign Minister , Mr Cem , addressed a letter to the Foreign Ministers of all EU Member States which not only contains a large number of inaccuracies and allegations against Greece , but also basically threatens the EU with war in Cyprus if this country goes ahead with plans to station the S-300 missile defence system in areas still untouched by Turkish rapacity .
The same letter provocatively states that , even if negotiations are initiated with Turkey concerning EU accession , the problem of Cyprus will still not be solved .
Will the Council give its official view on this matter , given that Turkey is pursuing its attacks with undiminished vigour against the EU , a Member State ( Greece ) and Cyprus and denying the latter country the right to accede to the Union and to protect itself from unrelenting Turkish expansionism ?
I have spoken about this issue three times today . Consequently , I will refer the author of this question to the three replies I gave during the course of today 's debates .
Mr Juncker , indeed you are right since the question was tabled before the Luxembourg session , and is therefore somewhat out-of-date .
This morning I have listened to the whole of the debate and to your replies , but I wish to avail myself of the opportunity to ask you if have heard about the interview given just two hours ago in Brussels by Mr Gilmaz , who said that he is giving the European Union six months ' grace to revise its position , otherwise Turkey will revise its own position in respect of customs union .
Secondly , if you have heard of yesterday 's statement by Mr Denktash in Brussels , who asked the representative of the Commission in northern Cyprus to leave northern Cyprus since , as he said , he was bothering them .
I would like his initial comment on the above two issues .
As for my basic question , thank you , it has been covered .
I do not wish to comment on the opinions given by the Turkish Minister of Foreign Affairs at a press conference in Brussels , as I am not in possession of the precise text of the minister 's speech .
Unlike the Turkish Prime Minister and the Turkish government , I would first of all like to read what the Turkish government said before commenting on the content .
I would have preferred that the Turkish government had first of all read the European Union 's offer before rejecting it .
I am concerned about precisely the same thing .
I have just been in touch with our Foreign Minister in Sweden who has spoken about what has emerged today .
Turkey is going to withdraw its application for full EU membership if the EU does not include Turkey on the list of applicant countries by June next year at the latest . There is a quite threatening tone in that if it is true - I only got the information via telephone and radio .
It is still a serious matter and highly worrying since I and many others do not consider that Turkey is fulfilling the requirements of the Customs Union Agreement .
A war is taking place in Kurdistan , there is continuous torture and there is no guarantee of human rights in the country .
It is of course impossible for you to comment on what has been said today , but it is very urgent for us to now ensure that no conflict arises on the basis of the latest information .
I would like to have a comment from you on that .
You must understand that I would first of all like to be fully aware of the Turkish Minister for Foreign Affair 's comments before being able to comment on them myself .
Question No 16 by Pat Gallagher ( H-0913 / 97 )
Subject : Protest march in Brussels
Can the President of the Council indicate whether the Council is prepared to re-examine the duty-free issue in the light of recent political developments such as public declarations from the Irish , Greek , Spanish , Finnish and German Governments that the issue should be reopened and , in the light of the 15 , 000 workers who participated in a protest march outside the Council , Commission and the European Parliament buildings in Brussels on Monday 1 December to voice their concerns over the abolition of duty-free in June 1999 ?
To reply to this question I will say that the maintenance of dutyfree sales for travel within the Community is in contradiction with the existence of an internal market without borders .
Indeed , the circulation between two Member States of goods bought by individuals for their personal use is of no more consequence from the point of view of tax law .
Thus , individuals can buy goods for personal use in any other Member State without having to declare them or pay tax at the border .
In this situation , the application of exemptions for travellers beyond the deadlines anticipated could create distortions in competition for businesses selling goods with tax included , as well as between the different forms of transport , depending on whether they propose to sell duty-free or not .
If the Council has temporarily extended duty-free sales to intracommunity travellers until 30 June 1999 , it was to alleviate the social and regional difficulties which risk being caused by a too sudden abolition of these sales .
Thus , it was a question of giving sufficient time to the sector concerned to prepare itself for the disappearance of intracommunity duty-free sales .
Furthermore , it should be noted that even in the absence of the aforementioned tax advantage , opportunities for sale will probably remain .
Regarding duty-free sales , these will continue to exist for travellers from third countries , due to the very fact of exports .
While I welcome the reply , which seems to be somewhat factual in relation to the decisions taken , what can he say to the Irish , Greek , Spanish , Finnish and German Governments which , we understand , are anxious that there should be a further extension ?
He refers to the single market .
Surely he is referring to a pure single market .
I am sure there is a lot of other harmonization that could take place .
I also welcome his initiative in relation to the employment summit .
I should like to say to the President that these jobs which could be lost could be sustained if the Council took this very courageous decision to allow duty-free to continue for a further period .
Does he also accept that to suggest that it should not continue beyond June 1999 flies in the face of the wishes of the vast majority of Europeans ?
The Commission gave an assurance to this institution that an economic and social study would be carried out .
That assurance was given in 1991 .
So much for the respect that the Commission has for this House .
What does the Council intend doing about that ?
How , therefore , can the Commission suggest that Community instruments and state aid could be used in the event of jobs being in jeopardy if it does not carry out this study ?
Mr President-in-Office , I suggest that , in the final weeks of your office , you ask the Commission to fulfil the commitment to this House and until such time as it can do that - present the recommendations of a study - that it should allow this duty-free to continue .
We have asked the Commission to provide us with this study .
When the Commission has made a proposal for a directive on this point , we will need to be unanimous to be able to amend the directive currently in force , which the Member States agreed on until 30 June 1999 .
In the absence of an initiative from the Commission we cannot act and , assuming they take such an initiative , I am not certain that we would be able to achieve the necessary unanimity to be able to amend the current directive , which stands until the end of June 1999 .
I congratulate the President-in-Office on his firmness .
He will be aware that the Court of Justice delivered a judgment early in November which clearly stated that the Commission and the Council had proceeded correctly in this matter and that the European Parliament had been duly consulted .
He will also be aware that there is a great deal of misleading publicity and scaremongering on the part of what is generally referred to as the dutyfree lobby .
One example is the figure of 16 , 000 quoted here , which is a wild exaggeration .
It was reported to me at lunchtime by a representative of the duty-free lobby that there were at the most 6 , 000 people there .
I saw a small demonstration outside the European Parliament that I would put at no more than 300 .
So , my question is : Will the Council please stick to its guns on this and encourage the British presidency to do the same ?
During the past few months , each time the Council discussed this question , I never had the impression that we were in a position to unanimously delay the measures anticipated to come into force on 30 June 1999 .
Consequently , I do not think that the British government has need of particular encouragement in this respect .
Mr President , whichever way you look at it , it seems that there is great unrest in a number of regions and a number of sectors .
I refer to ferries , to regional airports , to tourism in peripheral regions .
Did I gather correctly from the answer of the President-in-Office of the Council that he also thinks that in 1997 people have a right to know what the probable consequences will be when this measure , as decided , takes effect on 1 July 1999 ?
Is he prepared to have another talk with the Commission to ensure that this study will indeed be carried out in the short term , so that there will be clarity on the social and regional implications we have to draw from it ?
Could I have an answer on this from the President-in-Office of the Council ?
We have invited the Commission to produce a study for us , which many of you are referring to .
It is true that all of these issues should have been discussed at the time the Council took its decision .
This was in 1991 , at the Ecofin Council .
I believe , furthermore , that I was President of the Council .
Since then I have seen some colleagues move into opposition and ask for the revision of the directive , only to return to office and become very quiet on the subject .
Consequently , unanimity will be necessary to amend this directive .
It does not exist because governments have very different opinions on this issue .
It is true that the Council is not organized along the same lines of systematic persuasion as the duty-free lobby .
I admire the efforts put into this problem by those who are particularly affected .
If Europe had the same competence and the same capacity for marketing as the lobbies in question , we would perhaps be able to explain why we took the decision that we did in 1991 .
As the authors are not present , Questions Nos 17 , 18 , 19 , 20 and 21 lapse .
Question No 22 by Brian Crowley ( H-0932 / 97 )
Subject : EU and a global traffic safety effort
According to a report just released by the World Health Organization and the Harvard School of Public Health , road accidents are set to become the third biggest cause of premature death and disability across the world by 2020 .
Does the Council have a position on this alarming forecast , and does it share the view of the US Transportation Secretary that a global traffic safety effort is needed and , if it does agree , what contribution can the EU and the individual Member States make to this effort ?
The Council shares the honourable gentleman 's concerns regarding the harmful consequences of road traffic accidents on life and human health .
This is why the criteria for road safety , appearing in article 75 , paragraph 1 , letter c of the treaty inspires all the Council 's actions , in particular all the legislative acts that it adopts in the area of transport .
In addition , the Council expressed a unanimous opinion on this question in its conclusions adopted during the session of 17 June of this year .
I thank the President-in-Office for his very short and curt reply .
However , the question was : What contribution the President-in-Office thought that we in the EU and he could make with regard to this global transportation safety question ?
In particular , there are two areas on which I thought you might have responded .
Firstly , there is our duty of care for the health and protection of EU citizens .
Secondly , there are various considerations regarding the different directives which have gone through Parliament , the Council and Commission in the recent past with regard to design and models ; some thought might also be given to standardizing safety features within the automobile sector to ensure they are made available , not necessarily as extras but also as part of the normal construction of automobiles to guarantee the safety not only of the drivers but also of the passengers and pedestrians .
At the current time , the Commission has submitted no proposal to the Council regarding the problems mentioned by the honourable gentleman .
I would nevertheless like to add , on a personal level , that I consider that the European Union should pay more direct attention to these problems , which concern the daily life of many men and women in Europe .
It is a question of putting into concrete practice within Europe these formal , rhetorical , lively discussions .
A Europe of citizens exists , day after day , on our roads , and I think that much could be done , if only to harmonize all the signs and instructions , all the illustrated warnings , which add nothing to the richness of Europe but which make life difficult for European citizens when they travel .
I believe that we show a serious deficit in the area of road safety .
The fault , of course , lies with Member States , with the Commission and with Parliament , with all those in fact , who have failed to provide Europe with a strategy in this area , which would make Europe more attractive and more popular in the eyes of its citizens .
As the authors are not present , Questions Nos 23 and 24 fall .
That concludes Question Time .
However , I should like to offer our sincere thanks once again to Mr Juncker , the President-in-Office of the Council , for being here with us today , and for his answers , and for working with Parliament .
We wish him all the best for Christmas and the New Year .
And we request him to convey to Mr Wohlfart our best wishes for his speedy recovery , and our hopes that he will be well enough to enjoy Christmas .
( The sitting was suspended at 7 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Investment firms and credit institutions ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the debate on the report ( A4-0380 / 97 ) by Mr Cassidy , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive amending Council Directive 93 / 6 / EEC on the capital adequacy of investment firms and credit institutions ( COM ( 97 ) 0071 - C4-0304 / 97-97 / 0124 ( COD ) )
Madam President , I would like to congratulate Mr Cassidy for his excellent presentation of the nuances of this complicated issue .
It is important for the people of Europe , even if they may not readily understand that because it is about underpinning the financial solvency of institutions .
It is an amendment to the CAD I directive .
I would also like to thank our colleagues on the Legal Affairs Committee who have worked so hard in reaching what I think is a sensible practical compromise and Mr Katiforis who has brought a lot of detailed technical knowledge from the Economic and Monetary Committee to this debate .
I am not going to go over what Mr Cassidy said because he explained it so lucidly .
I just want to flag up the importance of Amendments Nos 16 , 19 and 20 .
In particular , with Amendment No 20 , trying to bring in a differentiation between different types of commodities , what is known as the expanded matrix .
To me it seems quite self-evident that the treatment of metals should be different from the treatment of perishables like coffee , cocoa , sugar etc. and the expanded matrix is simply trying to make sense of the need to treat things like tin , copper , silver differently from commodities like cocoa and coffee .
Fortunately we have been able to explain this adequately in the Council of Ministers and in this Parliament and I think now it is accepted that the expanded matrix is sensible .
So I sincerely hope that the vote will go successfully in the Parliament tomorrow .
Madam President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would also like to congratulate the rapporteur on his excellent work .
My group welcomes the Commission 's proposal to introduce a more stringent and effective method of measuring banks ' and investment firms ' capital requirements , and one geared towards market risk .
This involves adopting the Basle rules on banking supervision , with a view in particular to avoiding distortions in competition relating to competition from outside Europe .
Therefore , like the previous speaker and the rapporteur himself , I would particularly ask you to support the three amendments tabled by my group , i.e. Amendments Nos 19 , 20 and 16 , which correspond to the old Amendments Nos 13 , 14 and 8 .
These concern the transitional period up to 31 December 2006 .
The institutions affected require this transition period to adapt to the new rules , and it is needed above all to achieve a uniform deadline for all three banking supervision directives .
This means that Amendment No 20 is important .
Internal risk models are not yet sufficiently developed for banking supervision purposes , and the banks must be allowed to continue working with the extended maturity bank models up to the end of the transitional period .
I would also ask you to support Amendment No 16 .
This amendment is concerned with a method for internal risk models that do not satisfy the criteria listed in paragraph 4 of Annex 8 .
All these amendments reflect the Basle Rules .
Madam President , firstly I would like to thank the committee responsible and , in particular , its rapporteur Mr Cassidy for their excellent work on this highly technical proposal .
I am most grateful for the speed with which they have been able to process the proposal , given the importance of its early adoption for Europe 's financial services industry .
The proposal represents a major step in improving the assessment of market risk for capital adequacy purposes .
Not only will this improve the prudential soundness of our financial institutions but it will also contribute to their competitiveness by helping to optimize the allocation of capital within them .
The Commission believes this reflects our common purpose to promote a safe and competitive financial sector in an environment of constant innovation and technological change .
Our proposal introduces into EU legislation recent developments in the international supervisory community regarding the use by institutions of their own statistical models to set supervisory capital requirements and inclusion of commodity positions in those requirements .
A number of amendments have been proposed , largely reflecting further relevant decisions taken in international regulatory fora since the adoption of our proposal .
We welcome these amendments .
However , we are concerned that some other very technical amendments are not fully consistent with the approach adopted at international level .
These we oppose .
Amendments Nos 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 15 and 17 introduce useful technical clarifications which we welcome .
However , Amendment No 4 duplicates much of Amendment No 2 .
We would prefer to draw on the latter for our amended proposal .
Amendments Nos 15 and 17 duplicate Amendments Nos 5 and 6 , third paragraph .
We could accept both and will make a proposal covering the substance of these amendments .
Amendment No 1 , on the other hand , introduces a new capital charge for recently issued securities which diverge from the international approach adopted by the Basle Committee on Banking Supervision .
This would create an uneven regulatory playing field between the European Union and other G10 institutions .
We fear it may also be prejudicial in certain circumstances .
It means it could impair the success of the market introduction of shares of new companies or of privatizations such as France Telecom and Halifax by imposing an 8 % charge on securities which currently attract only a 2 % charge as highly liquid instruments .
I would therefore recommend that you oppose this amendment .
Amendments Nos 9 and 10 also prescribe a degree of detail regarding the elements of risk to be covered by internal models which would impair the ability of the authorities to adapt the requirements appropriately to individual circumstances .
Such adaptability is the intention of the changes at international level .
It could also result in certain elements of risk being ignored because they are not specifically mentioned .
Our original proposal deliberately employs forms of wording which would ensure that all material risks are covered without trying to prejudge the precise requirements to be observed in every situation .
We believe that this should be left for the competent authority to judge on the basis of each individual case .
On these grounds I would encourage you to support the original wording of the proposal and reject Amendments Nos 9 and 10 .
Finally , a number of additional amendments have been tabled .
Two of them - Nos 19 and 20 - relate to transitional arrangements for the treatment of commodities .
This has been one of the most difficult elements of the proposal .
The models approach requires specialized computer software and highly qualified technical staff to operate it properly .
Not only will this be very expensive for small and medium-sized investment firms but also , as you know , the euro conversion and the millennium problem are already absorbing many of these resources .
Certain institutions will therefore need time to adjust to the new capital regime for commodities .
The proposed transitional period until the year 2006 during which the authorities may apply an alternative set of capital charges for commodities represents a very sound compromise between the need to establish a common set of requirements for commodities business and the interests of individual institutions which would suffer unduly from an abrupt introduction of the new requirements .
I would strongly encourage you to support these amendments .
Another of the additional amendments , No 16 , clarifies that the original standardized method should be used for calculating capital requirements in cases where models do not satisfy the necessary criteria for measuring specific risk .
I consider this to be a helpful clarification .
Thank you , Mr Fischler .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9.30 a.m.
Olives and olive oil
The next item is the report ( A4-0374 / 97 ) by Mr Jové Peres , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the Note to the Council of Ministers and the European Parliament on the olive and olive oil sector ( including economic , cultural , regional , social and environmental aspects ) , the current common market organization , the need for a reform and the alternatives envisaged - Options Paper ( COM ( 97 ) 0057 ) - C4-0096 / 97 )
Madam President , in the first place I would like to thank the Commission for having followed the recommendation contained in the resolution approved by us in October 1996 and for having produced the document which is the subject of this report .
However , the lack of information in the report about the operation of aid in the olive oil sector is to be regretted , in spite of the fact that it was requested by Decision 2261 / 84 of the Council and should have been presented before January 1995 .
The memorandum produced by the Commission does not meet the Council 's requirements , and this deficiency has made discussion and the production of the report more difficult .
The Commission 's memorandum highlights weaknesses in the analysis of the sector and , to rectify them , I made a request for complementary information which was not fully answered in the letter which the Commissioner sent me at the end of July .
One of the problems in the analysis is the pessimistic picture which is drawn in regard to the sector 's position and , above all , about a possible risk of future surpluses .
This is not the case .
The last harvest was exceptional and reached levels which are considered dangerous according to the Commission 's memorandum .
However , at the end of the season there were hardly any stocks registered in the control system .
To have this pessimistic view , the Commission rejects its own research and uses other sources from the International Oleicola Council in which the influence of third countries , who would benefit from a reduction in the possible Community production , cannot be ignored .
As far as the options are concerned , the Committee on Agriculture has clearly played down the option of aid not linked to production - this was the meaning of the vote taken in the Committee on Agriculture at the European Parliament .
The fundamental reason is of a social nature , due to the higher risks in the loss of employment which would show up in the Community regions most affected by unemployment .
If unlinked aid , following the direction of the 1992 reform , is proposed you cannot ignore the fact that between 1990 and 1995 13 % of the Community agribusinesses and 23 % of agricultural work has disappeared , according to the survey on the structure of agribusinesses . These are facts that the Commission cannot ignore .
If these effects have come about after the 1992 reform , the effects of destroying work in the olive growing sector would be much greater for two reasons .
Firstly , olive cultivation involves intensive manual labour .
The cost of gathering the olives is made up of 80 % of the expenses of manual labour and 70 % of the variable costs .
Consequently , if aid is not linked to production , the risks of destroying employment would be more than obvious .
In addition , the reduced level of cultivation costs made when the aid was given - 15 % as opposed to 85 % for cereals or 98 % for bulls - considerably increases the risks of destroying employment .
These sorts of risk are contrary to the Amsterdam Treaty in respect to employment .
These risks would have an effect in the regions where the rate of unemployment is double the Community average , and which , moreover , show important cohesion problems .
It is unreasonable to increase cohesion problems or the need for a possible rural development policy which , at this time , is no more than an abstract formula .
Does the Commission intend to run the risk of carrying out dangerous experiments with a problem as serious as employment ?
Defenders of unlinked aid argue that control is easier with such aid .
However , the Committee , in describing the control system applicable in the case of introducing aid per tree , restricts itself to quoting a Geographical Information System . I do not think it is appropriate to let ourselves be dazzled by technological wizardry .
Although the technical benefits of satellites would be an improvement , they would never manage to drop aid on each olive tree .
A formidable administrative framework would always be necessary to distribute the aid corresponding to each tree among more than two million producers .
These two million producers are usually found in areas of continuous cultivation and there would appear to be enormous difficulties for the distribution of aid .
If we are trying to differentiate aid as a function of returns we face the lack of consistent regulation in the producing Member States and this matter has raised fierce debates which have had to be settled by the Court of Justice .
If proof of changing the olive into oil were demanded the control system should be reasonably similar to the current one with the added cost for satellite pictures .
Therefore it would be reasonable to make the current system perfect .
It is clear that in this debate the producers of olives are in opposition to the aid collectors .
Between these two positions a great number of jobs are put at risk in those regions with most unemployment in the Community , which show serious cohesion problems and whose economies are highly dependent on the levels of olive oil production .
Madam President , I conclude : above all allow me to congratulate and express my personal gratitude to all my colleagues in the committee from the various countries who were determined to achieve a common solution in looking for a unitary position to reflect a single voice , a voice from this millenial culture , firmly based in the Mediterranean as well as in European culture .
Ladies and gentlemen , please excuse me if I have to be very firm about speaking time .
We still have a great many reports on the agenda and a good many speakers , so we will not finish by midnight otherwise .
I would therefore ask you to stick to the agreed speaking times without me having to remind you every time .
Madam President , first of all I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on his excellent report and I would also like to express my satisfaction that Mr Jové Peres has included in his report all of the conclusions that were unanimously approved by the Committee on Employment .
Madam President , the production of olive products is concentrated in the countries of the Mediterranean and in particular the objective 1 regions , which are structurally weak and where the per capita income is less than 75 % of the Community average .
In these regions the percentage of the workforce employed in agriculture is especially high , and the unemployment rate is about three times the Community average .
The olive oil sector is the most important economic sector and approximately 27 % of jobs are directly or indirectly linked with olive oil production , which demonstrates its importance in the wider social balance and cohesion of these regions .
Therefore there are obvious dangers for the socio-economic fabric of these regions in disturbing these balances through a policy that threatens to hit olive cultivation .
The greatest weakness of the Commission communication is that it lacked a thorough analysis in respect of the repercussions that the proposed revision of the COM would have on employment .
The Committee on Employment is deeply worried about the implementation of aid per tree , which may have catastrophic repercussions on employment in the sector .
There is the fear that olive oil producers will lose interest in the quality of the product and in improving it , and that they will be unconcerned with quantity or will abandon olive cultivation for good , resulting in a significant loss of jobs and incomes .
Our fear is that there will be significant repercussions on the entire product chain : oil-pressing ; standardisation units ; trade , creating serious economic and social problems and exacerbating the phenomenon of the desertification of the countryside .
The Committee on Employment calls on the European Commission to act in accordance with the recommendations in paragraphs 7.5 , 11 , 14 , 15 and 16 of the report , which incorporate its conclusions in full , and for this reason it once again thanks the rapporteur .
Madam President , Mr Commissioner , I would like , in the first place , to congratulate Mr Jové Peres on his magnificent report since he is a person who is aware of what olive plantation and olive cultivation mean to his native people .
Commissioner , we are absolutely opposed to fraud and we understand that fraud must not be any form of subsidy in any area of the European Union .
But the fact that we are against fraud and that we support all the measures which should be used against fraud is no obstacle in our thinking that preventing fraud should not be the only way to establish new standards in relation to the production of olive oil .
We understand that olive oil , olive production , is an important tradition in the Mediterranean , especially in regions and areas with objective 1 status where , as preceding speakers have already said , unemployment and economic difficulties are very serious .
In many places the production of olive oil is practically the only produce and it is this which gives rise to a larger proportion of employment in those areas .
I regret that to combat fraud , solutions are sought which may also be defrauded in the future as is the olive tree subsidy , which has not properly assessed the regional impact it may bring to bear in many areas of the European Union , in areas of the Mediterranean basin , which do not assess the consequences of unemployment and the consequences of rural exodus , nor do they assess the impact on the rural area which a reform of this type can have .
A few days ago the European Council met in Luxembourg to discuss employment .
Let us not move now with the measure such as that of olive oil to create more unemployment in areas where there are already serious problems .
Let us bear in mind that the Accounts Court , in 1991 , positively evaluated the way in which the current system of olive oil subsidy has been managed .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Budgetary Control , as we know , had chosen a different option for the allocation of subsidies .
It favoured the option of tree subsidies rather than production subsidies in several majority votes .
I would particularly like to note that in an insular area such as Corsica , which has been criticized for so many things , the system of tree subsidies and the intelligent policy followed by our colleague , Jean Baggioni , who is also president of the Corsican executive , my birthplace , has enabled , with Community participation , the renovation , spreading and replanting of the island 's olive groves .
Corsica has thus been given the means to fight effectively against the fires which have so ravaged it over the past few years , without however setting in motion a frantic course towards yields and production , all of this within the framework of mixed farming and the diversification desired by the European authorities .
A tree subsidy therefore has its virtues .
But I completely understand that our Spanish colleagues from regions of high production are defending another point of view and , consequently , another philosophy based on yield which justifies employment and monoculture .
It is the reason why I decided it would be useless to propose any amendments on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control .
I am indeed persuaded that the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has weighed up its responsibilities well in deciding not to follow the proposals of members of the Committee on Budgetary Control .
I am indeed persuaded that this is not the last we will hear of this issue and I hope , sincerely , that the conclusions of our colleague , Jové Peres , and of those who have supported him , will help us to avoid the severe criticisms of the system currently in place in the future , which I think are at the origin of numerous cases of deplorable fraud .
Madam President , whilst giving credit to Mr José Perez for the mass of work carried out , I have to say that we do not recognize some of the fundamental aspects of the resolution .
Firstly , it seems too conservative to us .
In fact , it would appear that the current olive oil COM problems are the result of the Commission 's unhealthy imagination ; unfortunately , however , we know that that is not the case .
The alarm bells of the marked increases in production declared for the 1996-97 season and the IOOC forecasts for the current season , which confirm them , should also ring for Parliament .
The olive growers ' statements , which are already reporting a huge fall in the prices of olive oil , are not an invention of the DG VI .
Secondly , the proposed resolution too hastily rejects those options that anticipate a disconnection of aid from the level of quantities of product .
We are not enamoured by the tree aid , as if it were the miracle cure to all evils ; we believe , however , that , rather than reject it initially , accusing it of intentions which do not actually exist in the Commission 's document , it would be better to discuss it with judgment and clarity .
The growers fear that this option rewards land income , they fear a decline for all growers , capable or otherwise , they fear effects on employment ; so this is what we have to discuss , and in our amendments we have tried to answer these fears ; for example , by linking the new unconnected aid with the utilization of olive production , combining it with the historic profits for uniform regions and providing the possibility for the producing states to modulate aid according to quality parameters and respect for the environment and landscape , for the disadvantaged regions .
I understand , Mr José Perez , that things may seem a little complicated , but too much planning will not resolve anything , for everything is getting worse .
How can we think of imposing a single , intensive and productive model for European olive growing that does not create marked imbalances between the companies and between the regions .
How can we think of increasing costs and support for olive growers on the basis of a single system of production aid directly connected with volumes of production ; how can we use such a system to keep effective control of two million producers , knowing the cyclical fluctuations traditionally sustained by olive oil production and abolishing the simplified system of tree aid that is currently of interest to the 60 % of Community producers that fall into the category of small producers ?
In my opinion , if we follow this path , uncertainty , disputes and insecurity will flourish with the olives .
All things that do not help the future of the olive growers .
In our opinion , the entire CAP should start to change direction .
While Agenda 2000 finally begins to discuss a modulation of aid , environmental sustainability , rebalancing in the rural areas and limits to the increase in production , specifically for the olive which , more than other sectors , can only gain from these changes , it would be understandable for a huge and incomprehensible cultural exception to be invoked immediately .
Only with a reformed aid system will olive growing be directed towards the often declaimed policy of quality utilized on the market and in an ever more attentive and demanding consumer .
A strategic prospect for growing which is so much a part of the history , culture and landscape of Europe , is at stake , and only with a strategic choice can it be defended .
Madam President , Mr Commissioner , with 28 votes in favour , seven against and two abstentions , the Committee on Agriculture approved a proposed commitment to the reform of the olive oil market , which my group strongly wished for .
In the Chamber today , we confirm the need to ratify those conclusions with a vote in favour , convinced that they are in the interests of operators in the sector and European agriculture .
Together , it was decided to find a commitment within the groups and so I am surprised that , after the clear vote within the Committee , dozens of amendments should be proposed , here in Chamber , particularly by the Socialist group .
I do not understand the logic or maybe the commitments should only be taken when they agree with the Socialist group ?
We , however , are against almost all the amendments , as some of them distort the meaning of the commitment made within the Committee on Agriculture , while others offer useless answers that repeat what is already present .
We therefore call upon common sense .
Beyond the contingent problems , the olive oil sector may expand and develop ; however , we should not simplify the answers to complex problems .
The path indicated by the Committee on Agriculture enables a strong dialogue and a democratic relationship to be maintained with the producers .
The solutions should be sought with the producers and their organizations involved and not against them ; we already have too many examples of divisions in crisis and protests against the agricultural basis as a result of a mistaken relationship between decision-makers and managers of agricultural policies and the operators themselves .
No good reforms are made against producers .
The true reforms are those that act permanently on the structures as they are shared by the interested parties and those that exploit business capacity , permitting joint cultural changes together with a modernization of the sectors concerned .
In the case of olive oil and table olives , the listening attitude adopted by the local communities is even more necessary , if it takes into consideration the social significance of the sector from the point of view of work and employment .
To conclude , I would like to thank Mr José Perez for the way he , unlike others , has been prepared to look for commitment , starting from different positions existing among the producing countries and members of the Committee .
This has been appreciated by our group and we intend to defend it , tomorrow , when the time comes to vote .
Madam President , I would like to begin , rather than end , by thanking the rapporteur , and not just formally , for two reasons : firstly for the substantial corrections made to the Commission 's document and secondly for the effort made in looking for a point of convergence between the requirements of the producing countries , valuable attention to making not just extra virgin olive oil but the entire production sector transparent .
The position approved by the Committee on Agriculture , by means of the commitment amendments , which my almost united group will support tomorrow when it comes to voting , lays down three fundamental pillars for the future of this agricultural production ; these pillars can certainly be perfected but , at the moment , they represent the one and only way of satisfying everyone a little or , at least , disappointing as few producers as possible .
Firstly , the adoption of national quotas is proposed instead of the guaranteed maximum quantity calculated on a Community scale ; this brings it into line many other COMs .
Secondly , tree subsidies are rejected and production subsidies are offered , based on the quantity actually produced ; corrections could be made here as well , but it is a valuable way of ensuring the protection of employment .
At the same time , the abolition of consumer aid is maintained , as it fosters suspicions of fraud and doubts as to the quality of the product obtained from mixtures which are often difficult to certify , particularly with oil of a generally uncertain origin .
Finally , the funds that will no doubt be saved could be used for a valuable promotional action favouring the incentive not only for the much-desired quality , and therefore for consumer trust , but also for promotion in people 's use and taste for this valuable food ; also , and above all , they will be used to give a little more trust to the category which , as you know , is currently a prey to considerable anxiety , and not just in Italy .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Commissioner , the Commission 's document prefers simply to subsidize the mere physical existence of trees , which may or may not produce olive oil , but which in any event would always be subsidized .
The Jové Peres report , on the other hand , prefers to subsidize the actual production of olives and olive oil , rejecting an alternative which would lead to absentee landlords who would simply be receiving money for having planted olive trees , and also to an increase in unemployment among the people who help to bring the olives to the presses and actually turn them into olive oil .
The Commission justifies its option on the grounds of the fraud for which the present production subsidy leaves room .
The report informs us that the problem is not the rules , which should be improved , but the lack of specific policy measures to prevent fraud .
Finally , the Commission would like subsidies to be paid on the basis of the existing land registers .
The Jové Peres report opens up the possibility of increasing national production , allowing for new plantations which would make it possible to return to traditional production levels .
The options are clear .
Our vote also goes to the Jové Peres report .
We must reject changes which are designed to conceal the Commission 's intentions , overtly or under cover . It is essential to support by that act of rejection the political philosophy the report represents .
Madam President , I have just come from my group 's Christmas party , and I was wondering whether I should be eating olives or come and talk about them , but out of respect for our rapporteur , Mr Jové Peres , and in view of the importance of olives for the history of civilization in the south of Europe at least , I decided to come for these one and a half minutes .
Our group has of course also been concerned about the potential for simplifying matters and the possibilities for preventing fraud .
However , we believe that the rapporteur is right , and that olives should actually be harvested .
If we grant aid related solely to the olive tree itself , then we are not recognizing the value of work .
This would be tantamount to paying for planting without any intention of achieving a crop , and that is why we support the rapporteur .
I am sorry , Mr Fantuzzi , but we want to reward work , and the quality of the product .
There are good reasons for accepting your ideas on account of manageability and fraud prevention .
But because of the fundamental considerations I have mentioned , our group has decided to stick to this approach , which we also adopted in the Agriculture Committee .
Madam President , Commissioner , I would like to begin , as the other speakers have , by recognizing the complex and difficult work which our colleague , Mr Jové Peres , has carried out in this report . I know that he has devoted very many hours and a great deal of effort to this and it has caused him some difficulty .
We must point out , in general , the positive effect which , up until now , the current COM has enjoyed with regard to olive oil : since a modernisation programme and an improvement in the operations and quality of the product has gone as far as a higher level of protection of the environment consolidating the European Union as the top producer , consumer and exporter of olive oil in the world .
Unfortunately all this will turn out to be useless if the reform proposal , which the European Commission proposes , is included in Agenda 2000 , and this is because it introduces elements which are prejudicial to the correct working of this sector .
In concrete terms , the proposal to grant aid to the tree and not to production , which also includes small producers , would do no more than cause a deterioration in the quality of oil and in the stability of the market itself .
It would generate an increase in speculation which would directly affect the consumer , would cause an increase in rural exodus and the risk of turning the affected areas into deserts , this would bring with it a great and serious environmental deterioration .
To this situation , moreover , we must add that the Commission has not produced either the consequent research about the regional impact of the measures that are contained in this proposal .
This research concerning regional impact is indispensable because the main productive areas for olive oil are situated in the south of the European Union as has already been said .
Most of those are objective 1 , that is to say they are underdeveloped regions , with no alternative products and with a work-force dependent on the sector .
The olive is a product which is difficult to replace and , as we have already said , is concentrated in areas with serious structural weaknesses , deprived economic status and high levels of unemployment .
Having said that , the Commission must respect the principle of economic and social cohesion , and the COM must mark out oil within a regional strategy in which its impact is researched and the agricultural , socio-economic and structural development of the areas concerned is guaranteed .
I conclude , Madam President , by demonstrating our conviction that this Parliament will take on board the proposals contained in the report which we are debating today and on which we will vote tomorrow .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Alleanza Nazionale delegation agrees with the resolution passed by the Committee on Agriculture on the olive oil COM , as it considers it more balanced and fundamental than the initial proposal made by the Committee , which , in our opinion , did not bring clarity into a sector which needs specific , definite rules for everyone .
We can only agree with the fair demonstrations of civil protest made by the olive growers of southern Italy , who have seen their income fall , as a result of a lack of control over the origin and quality of the oil in circulation .
Ahead of the more negative forecasts , there is chaos on the olive oil market , resulting from the Community and national laxity towards those who , in breach of the Community quota , have planted higher numbers of olive trees , proving detrimental to the honest farmers who have respected the Community regulations .
Consequently , the introduction onto the European and Italian market of oil of doubtful origin and quality , bought at very low prices , is causing the collapse of the domestic price of oil , aggravating an already very critical situation .
To conclude , the Alleanza Nazionale is therefore against tree aid and in favour of a single production aid , able to guarantee a fair level of income based on the quantity of oil actually produced .
We are also in favour of an abolition of consumer aid and the creation of an integrated control system running from production to consumption itself .
It is therefore essential for all the producing countries to set up an olive growing register , similar to the one introduced in Italy , to check the production declared and to define the production capacity of the agricultural companies involved .
Finally , we are also in favour of an increase in the European guaranteed maximum quantity , in a fair definition of national quotas and in a strict regulation of product labelling , permitting the utilization of quality and the identification of the place of origin of the oil .
For these reasons , we confirm our support for the resolution , congratulating the rapporteur and all the members of the Committee on Agriculture , who have really done a good job .
Madam President , we wish show the support of the Spanish socialists for the text of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and especially as it is arranged .
We understand that it is a question of an agreement at the lowest level , and in any case , we wish to make a contribution so that this report is approved tomorrow in the full session .
We agree with the request for an increase in the guaranteed maximum amount which , although the text does not say so , we think that might reach a figure of about 1 , 800 , 000 tonnes .
The lack , in every way , of realism in the current figure of 1 , 350 , 000 is only incurring unfair penalties which specially affect , together with a decline in prices , small and medium-sized producers .
We think that a system of intervention must be maintained , we want the support for future rulings to continue to depend on real production and we also show our agreement with whatever measures are proposed for the promotion and improvement of quality .
And , moreover , it must occupy in this framework a central position in the banning of mixtures since these are always produced to the prejudice of olive oil and as a fraud for the consumers .
Linked to the previous point , we think that we have to strengthen the role of producer organizations as an essential element in a commercial and promotional policy in regard to the product .
Likewise , we cannot overlook at this time a specific consideration , that is table olives .
This focus should not , anyway , lead us to forget , in future rules and regulations , the existence of a large number of small and medium-sized olive growers for whom , through a specific complementary system or through appropriate modification , their role as producers ought to be recognized .
This agreement , in general terms , with the text from the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development must not prevent us from calling attention to some smaller discrepancies but they have to be addressed .
Therefore it is hard for us to understand that we point out the efficiency with which current regulations have operated and , yet , we need a deep and rapid reform and that even in this report the correction of serious damage caused by rules and regulations is demanded .
Something is not right .
It is not possible to make two positive statements which in themselves are contradictory .
Likewise we think that we should escape in the future from certain wilfulness , as stated in certain paragraphs .
There seems to be no justification in stating that , in a short period of time , large increases in demand are expected , and nor does there seem any justification for us to consider that the results of the extraordinary harvest in the years 1996-1997 would be the future reality .
On the contrary , we would say that we should be a little more realistic .
I would not like , anyway , these partial and minor discrepancies to tarnish upon our general agreement with the text which must offer a positive framework so that millennial production , tightly bound to the south Mediterranean area of Europe , can carry on occupying an important position in the Common Agriculture Policy .
The olive in some regions of Spain , and especially in Andalusia , represents a strong source of employment , an environmental concern , the struggle against deserting the land , settlement of population , rural development , and to sum up it represents economic , social and territorial cohesion .
Therefore , in this sense , I insist that tomorrow we socialists vote in favour of the text presented by the Committee on Agricultural and Rural Development .
Mister President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the debate today is the first priority for us , the producer countries of this precious product .
The document put forward by the Commission has been analysed by all the previous speakers and especially by the rapporteur whom I wish to congratulate here and now for his work and for having been able to unite , without sparing any effort , almost all the views in a consensus document which many people thought impossible .
It is an assessment I share - congratulations to Mr José - and here we are , Commissioner , sending him a clear , majority message whereby this Parliament , having heard all those who had something to say on the subject , believe that this reform must go through .
A fundamental reform , I would say basic , for all producer countries , and therefore for the European Union , but especially for the Objective 1 regions - such as Crete , the Peleponese or the Alentejo and Puglia , Sicily , Calabria , Castilla-La Mancha , Estremadura and Andalusia - with a rate of agrarian unemployment varying from 45.6 % in the Peloponnese to 12.0 % in Andalusia and , more importantly , with a rate of unemployment of 4 to 33 % , but which would be increased if we moved to a reform which would not take priority over real production , agrarian environmental measures and , therefore , employment .
We are opting for a reform which is based on real production with an adequate guaranteed maximum amount with which we , all the producer countries , can feel comfortable .
We are also opting for a simplification of the rules and regulations .
Simplification , not lack of control , but rather a greater control of fraud .
But above all , Commissioner , you have shown your sensitivity because you know the situation in producer countries - for which we thank you - and you know the reality of the sector . We await a balanced response to deal with the concerns expressed which will allow a balanced development of the sector .
I hope that the words spoken by President Santer this morning become reality and that , with ambition and realism , the future reform will be set before us .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , if it is true that the COM for olive oil has worked more or less well over the last few years and has enabled the maintenance of a large number of business operations and thus jobs , in spite of the competition from other vegetable oils , it is nevertheless necessary to embark on a reform of the sector .
Mr Jové Peres ' report reveals the wider options which must today prevail in the proposal for a common market organization that the Commission will announce to us at the beginning of 1998 .
In some Member States , the potential for olive oil production has greatly developed over the last few years and we can now see that , due to this development , the COM is no longer suitable .
The reform to be undertaken must in particular take into account our economic , social , cultural , regional and environmental concerns .
We must keep in mind the following principles : simplification and a greater transparency in the functioning of support systems , an improvement in controls with the aim of fighting against fraud , the guarantee and equity of olive growers ' incomes .
France , as a small producing country with a majority of small concerns and which is currently engaged in a phase of restructuring of its groves , particularly in Corsica under the impulse of our colleague , Mr Jean Baggioni , could not support proposals which would penalise or discriminate against small producers , nor could we support anything which could be considered a threat to the continuation of this production in the disadvantaged regions of objective 1 .
Like France , other producing countries of the Union which also have a large number of small businesses will support , I am sure , a reform which ensures a prosperous and balanced rural base .
Let us preserve the specificity of the small quality European olive grower .
The olive tree , a three thousand year old tree , will remain the cultural and spiritual symbol , the feature of union and the memory of the Mediterranean region .
Madam President , in Greece , when a priest baptises a child , he anoints the child with oil and makes the sign of the cross over it , and this , I think , shows that the identity of a Mediterranean person is very much tied up with oil .
It is an element of his or her culture and existence , of the economy and of the environment .
Mr Jové Peres ' report acknowledges this and I thank the rapporteur for that .
However , we must also bear in mind that all the regions of olive tree cultivation are objective 1 regions , that is , structurally weak and with a high level of unemployment , and that olive oil production makes a significant contribution to their socio-economic development .
From this standpoint I think that the existing common organization of the market for olive oil was essentially constructive , despite certain problems , and that we should categorically reject the European Commission proposal for aid per tree .
It is important that we raise the maximum guaranteed quantity to higher levels than today 's so that it can be adjusted to total Community consumption where there is a gap that can be filled , to average annual exports and to the establishing of a measure of security .
I believe that the proposal for reform of the common organization of the market provides a very good foundation .
Madam President , Mr Commissioner , we are holding a policy debate on a note from the Commission concerning olive oil and the rewriting of the COM anticipated for next year , a COM which I hasten to mention has been in place for thirty years , which is already quite good going .
We are all agreed that it is a Mediterranean issue , the four sides of the square largely being Spain , Portugal , Italy and Greece , but also including my own region of Languedoc-Roussillon , and Corsica , where we have more than two thousand hectares of olive groves .
We have our small producers . We have our three million olive trees .
It is nothing next to the approximately two hundred million in Spain , but they do exist .
You could obviously tackle this problem from the technical angle of the maximum guaranteed quantity of 1.3 million tonnes , which should be raised to 1.5 million ; or of the national reference quantities , on condition that they are not historic ; or subsidies for production , for marketing , of which we have always requested the removal ; or even of fraud , there are thirteen thousand mills which are difficult to supervise , there must be a mixing of vegetable oils .
We also talk of the need for a register of olive cultivation .
Mr Fantuzzi was worried about the ECU 2 billion that this will cost the EAGGF annually .
We also talk , obviously , for it is the crushing argument , of the risks of surpluses which justify a reworking of the COM .
All this , ladies and gentlemen , seems to me quite trivial , because the Commission is dealing us the same blow as it did for wine .
You start from an old base , you project it and you find surpluses where there are none .
Mr Jové Peres explained to us that the market could expand by more than 400 % in the United States and more than 350 % in northern Europe , who are just now discovering what civilisation is all about .
Oil has a great history .
I remember that , in the Greek amphora they had , not oils , but olive oil .
But oil also has a great future , for this is the sort of production which poses no problems in Geneva . Tell us that is no big deal , Mr Commissioner .
This is a production which is at the heart of five great European policies : employment policy , rural development policy , environmental policy , health policy , Mediterranean policy .
And it is going to be compromised for a handful of ECUs .
Employment policy because , when there are 750 , 000 people employed and tree subsidies are requested , it is in your interest to save 85 % of your costs by no longer maintaining your olive grove .
So in Amsterdam we are creating jobs and in Cadiz we are creating unemployment .
Social cohesion policy is also being challenged .
It is not worth having a cohesion fund , an objective 1 , for Spain ; if social cohesion is destroyed in Andalusia , Sicily , Extremadura or the Peloponnese .
Environmental policy because the desert is expanding , and the olive tree is the tree of mountain life , it is the tree of life for fragile existence , it is the tree of life in the droughts of La Mancha .
Everyone should go once in their life to Almeria to know what drought really is .
Also health policy , because Europe is a Europe of old people , a Europe of heart disease , not a Europe of AIDS , which affects only a sexual minority .
So , it appears that where olive oil is consumed , there are no Americans , fat with ice cream .
Where men are lean , billions of savings can be made on the national health .
Finally , Mediterranean policy because opening up to the east is going to destabilize Spain , Portugal and the whole of the Mediterranean .
It has been said in Agenda 2000 : we are working on the basis of a constant budget and we will share objective 1 with Poland and the others and we will have an unbalanced Europe .
And I have not mentioned cultural policy !
We are coming up to Christmas and we talk of the Mount of Olives , not the Mount of Oils .
Even Mr Brittan understood that we were not talking about the Mount of Financial Services .
It is therefore at the heart of European culture .
So , Mr Commissioner , I say this to the European Commission , to Mr Giansily , do not cause a budgetary disaster for the sake of saving the end of the candle , a candle made from olive oil , moreover .
There are technical solutions .
Fraud has been mentioned .
Fraud in Greece represents ECU 21 million , but ECU 21 million is nothing alongside the Brussels costs .
Mr Commissioner , I know very well that even with an olive branch in your mouth , you could never be a dove !
But this is no reason not to make peace .
I believe that the European Commission must stop attacking wine , stop attacking honey , stop attacking olive oil , stop attacking the Mediterranean .
Mr Commissioner , you have already been invited to visit Andalusia .
You will be invited again .
You will be made to eat bread rubbed with garlic , with a little olive oil on top .
You will be made to eat a sweet onion .
You will be made to drink a Corbières , a Rioja , a retsina from the Peloponnese , or a Chianti , and you will be made to discover life , Mr Commissioner !
Madam President , within the Committee on Agriculture , following an exchange of opinions among all interested members , we have arrived at the following conclusions .
Firstly : the present system of support for production has under no circumstances presented problems such as to make its abolition necessary .
Secondly , a radical change in the system towards aid per tree would create many problems .
The prevailing logic of simplifying the system in order to avoid possible fraud opens the way for many real growers to abandon their small-holdings and creates additional problems of unemployment in regions which are already disadvantaged , while failing to guarantee or maintain the high quality of European olive oil or the leading role of the European Union in the global market .
By the same token , aid per tree will require new control mechanisms for the avoidance of new forms of fraud .
Thirdly , continued reference to the need to avoid fraud creates the impression that this constitutes the main raison d 'être of any system of support within the framework of the COM .
However the main objective of the systems of support is to preserve the balance of the market and to maintain the level of income of the producers . The avoidance of fraud lies within the competence and responsibility of the control mechanisms .
Fourthly , improvement of the existing system and the correction of any shortcomings that have so far appeared must be the objective of the reform of the common organization of the market for olive oil .
Thus the abolition of the special system of support for small producers , the abolition of support for consumption and the creation of a unified system of support for production will create a framework for a more rational operation and a more effective control of the market .
Fifthly , granted the leading role of the European Union in global production and the high nutritional value of olive oil , a policy to promote European olive oil must be formulated and sustained by means of specific measures and by the authenticity of the product .
This policy must target both the global market through an increase in exports and the European market through an increase in domestic consumption .
In anticipation of the legislative motion of the COM for olive oil , which I hope the Commission will table very soon , I would like to believe that the European Parliament will give a clear indication that it will support the product , based on the principles underlying the report of the Committee on Agriculture and of Mr Jové Peres , whom I congratulate on the results of his hard work .

Madam President , I too am impressed by Mr Martínez 's contribution to the debate .
I would like to emphasize three points .
The first is that the present system of subsidizing output , based on actual production for professional producers , cannot simply be compared with that of tree-by-tree subsidies which are totally divorced from production .
Since we know that in this sector the olive crop represents around 70 % of variable costs , it is obvious that if we were to opt for the tree subsidy system and apply it to producers we should have to make them prove their actual olive yields .
Otherwise we should be running the risk of abandonment and desertification .
In that respect , I am sorry that the Commission has not properly elaborated the various possible yield subsidy systems , because there are more of these than the two we have been presented with .
Secondly , I would like to say that , whatever subsidy system is used in the future , I think the two main sources of fraud in the sector should be abolished .
The first is the unification of the two present systems ; the second is the absolute ban on mixing olive oil with other edible oils .
Thirdly , I would like to say that the consumption subsidy , which was created as an aid to packaging and quality , was reduced in 1993 and now amounts to such a derisory sum there is no sense in keeping it .
For that reason I think the amount we can save by abolishing it could be used to finance the strengthening of producers ' association , the promotion of consumption and also the quality of olive oil .
In conclusion , I would like to emphasize that , since a new global reform of the CAP is currently being prepared , it is important to ensure that olive oil subsidies are not subjected to misguided reforms , but that they remain consistent with the fundamental principles to be laid down for agriculture throughout the Union ; because in fact , in spite of the differences between them , the challenges they face are very much the same , and therefore the resources and responses to be provided by the CAP should also be the same .
And last of all , I would like to say that Mr Jové Peres 's report deserves our total respect and support , because he has done sterling work here .
Madam President , Mr Commissioner , last night I had a nightmare . I discovered that I might have a colleague doing the same thing as is being done to tobacco - making up a report that tells us that poly-unsaturated oil damages the arteries and is bad for health .
Anything can happen in this Parliament ; anything can happen in this world .
When I was a boy , I remember that olive oil was considered bad for health in Portugal , like unsaturated oil , and now we see doctors urging all old people to take this oil because it will do them good .
Anything can happen in this world .
Anything can happen with this Commission and this Europe which is always ashamed of something ; we 're ashamed of producing olive oil !
If we were in the United States , the Minister of Agriculture would be saying ' Just watch us flood your markets with our Californian olive oil ' . We do not have the courage to do that , but you can 't buy courage on the market and so it 's not easy .
Then we find cases of fraud , fraud that 's perfectly controlled so that only those who want fraud get it !
Because the truth is that a combined investigation of the producer and the processor can always bring fraud to light .
Even Al Capone and Lucky Luciano got caught , so why not a poor olive-grower or oilproducer if he commits a fraud ?
I would like to say , however , that there is an important point , and I will conclude with this .
That point is to determine the maximum guaranteed quantity on past figures .
For the Commission the past always means the last three years , irrespective of whether there has been a drought , as in the case of hard wheat .
This is a disgrace !
Otherwise I congratulate Mr Jové Peres , who has drafted an excellent report , for also proposing an olive subsidy , because that will make it possible to start picking the olives earlier , since they are also picked as green olives and for conserving .
Madam President , Mr Commissioner , some figures have already been provided - namely seven million families in the Mediterranean .
So there is also this very important aspect , that olive oil only represents 3 % of total oil sales worldwide , and is therefore a minute part of the world oil market .
In my opinion , the Commission 's proposal does not provide a strategic perspective for this sector ; I find it suffocating and also unable to provide a market perspective , perhaps because it focuses too much on mediation within EU countries and it is not directed at the great boost that could be obtained on the world market , a market that provides the possibility for enormous expansion if we only have a quota of 3 % , with a good return .
The Commission has always proposed its documents with a good statistical basis ; this time , the document leaps up like a statistic which I think is fundamental and does not mention employment at all , In Italy , for much of the year , the total employees engaged in the olive oil business amount to employment in four FIAT factories and this is a fundamental aspect .
The Commission 's document hardly mentions employment at European level , while we are talking of nothing but employment , and we are setting up extraordinary Councils ; this risks becoming a very counter-productive factor compared with the market prospects .
I think that the document drawn up by the Committee on Agriculture is a good document , indicating a path to be followed by the leading associations , by growers , by national political forces and also by the members of the left democratic party .
As far as I am concerned , this proposal is good but certainly needs to be improved .
It needs to aim at ensuring that the aspects of quality , environmental ecological factors and the possibility of exploitation of the international market are improved .
I believe the Commission should be called upon to give answers on these aspects .
Madam President , Mr Commissioner , I would like to congratulate Mr Jové Peres because , clearly , without his work and capacity for dialogue it would have been impossible to achieve this result .
I say this sincerely to you , from my long experience in searching for consensus .
It was a very difficult consensus to reach .
Very difficult , a priori probably almost impossible .
Therefore , I congratulate you .
Commissioner , here is a debate , like all those which deal with agriculture , taking place late at night , almost on our own , but which reflects the debate in European society .
Here you have the response from European society , from European farmers , to the Committee 's proposals .
You have here a reasonable and balanced group of measures .
I would like the Committee to consider this seriously and rigorously .
That they do not resort to financial inaction to reject reasonable proposals .
That the Committee sometimes forgets the dogma that Mediterranean production faces financial inaction and that an Agenda 2000 may be drawn up where the Commissioner 's portfolio is to invite everyone except the Mediterraneans .
Commissioner , open your portfolio and this time divide to north , south , east and west because that is your duty as Commissioner .
I am concerned about the amendments that have been put forward .
I am concerned about Mr Mulder 's Amendments Nos 1 to 4 , based on budgetary control , when the myth of fraud in the COM is quite important in absolute and relative terms .
I am also concerned about the amendments from Mr Fantuzzi of the Socialist Group , because , if they were approved , they would mean a subtle and controlled destruction of an agreement which has been very hard to achieve .
Therefore , I ask the Assembly to support the Jové report and reject the rest of amendments so that the Committee can start work on this proposal , presenting us with a more reasonable alternative than the one initially submitted for this Parliament 's consideration .
Madam President , much has been said thus far but I , in turn , would like congratulate the rapporteur on his report .
The reform of the COM for Olive Oil is a major issue and for this reason the report has very great significance , given the fact that there are structural differences between the producer Member States , which , thanks to the compromise that has been reached within the Committee on Agriculture , are being faced constructively .
Which is why I share the views of those who do not agree with the amendments that have been tabled a posteriori and which I believe we must not vote on .
It is a well-known fact that thousands of workers in Southern Europe are employed in the olive oil industry . In Greece , for example , we are talking about 710 thousand families , not just workers .
Aid per tree , as proposed by the Commission , not only does not protect basic production , but also entails the loss of jobs and the downgrading of the product .
We back the proposal for support for all those involved in actual production , including small producers , as well as proposals such as that for a register for the cultivation of olive trees .
However , at least in the initial stages , the new method of support must not be bound up , with respect to time , with the existence of this register , because there are certain states which have not yet completed this .
Also it must be stressed that keeping the same model of support for olive oil in production must not , with respect to time , be associated directly with marketable quantity but with actual production .
Madam President , when we support olive producers we must be aware that we are helping people who live in the mainly poor regions of the European Union and that , through the cultivation of olives , we are at the same time protecting the fragile Mediterranean environment .
With this in mind , the fact that reform of the common organization of the market for olive oil is the only reform which is connected with fraud causes quite an impression , and I ask myself whether fraud has not yet manifested itself with respect to other products .
Is it only with respect to oil that irregularities have been shown to occur ?
Have we not seen such phenomena with respect to products from Northern Europe ?
Have all the sins been committed by olive producers ?
In addition I would like to say that , if amendments to the common organization of the market for olive oil are needed , they are not the amendments that are being proposed by the Commission .
In other words we must not move towards subsidy per tree since , in reality , by so doing we are equating those who produce with those who do not produce , and at the same time olive producers will cease to carry on intensive olive cultivation .
What we need is a system of premiums based on production and on a unified system of control for all Member States .
We also need to move away from a unified quota system . We need national quotas , legally established , because now , when there is overproduction in one country and a low level of production in another , producers in the latter are punished twice over : once by nature and once by the European Union , when the quota is exceeded .
At the same time we need promotion of olive oil worldwide , since its positive effects on health are well known and , Madam President , we need to proceed to the abolition of support for consumption and to the utilization of money that is left in reserve for production premiums and for the promotion of olive oil on an international level .
Madam President , the new olive oil COM should have a double objective : on the one hand , it should develop the sector by improving production and the productivity of the plant , the producers ' living conditions and world consumption ; on the other , it should ensure the protection of the environment and olive growing , a fundamental asset for the whole of the Mediterranean Basin .
On the problems of guarantees for the sector , I would like to point out that the EU should consider the need to establish regulations seeking to prevent the mixing of seed oil with olive oil , a practice which is unfortunately permitted in some Community countries , for consumer protection .
With regard to the system of controls , it should be recalled that the olive growing register exists in Italy which , in addition to permitting a knowledge of the consistency of production , is used as a means of controlling the various levels of procedure in establishing aid .
Finally , we need to guarantee a stability of the oil price as soon as possible , by specific means such as the establishment of a private stock of product , assigned to the producers ' organizations , and improving all promotional activities .
To conclude , Madam President , we intend to make a fairer redistribution and improvement of current financial resources seeking a rebalancing of the entire sector , to achieve the objectives of maintaining olive growing in difficult regions without production alternatives , where its disappearance would create serious social and environmental problems .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9.30 a.m.
Combatting tobacco consumption
The next item is the report ( A4-0341 / 97 ) by Mr Valverde López , on behalf of the Committee on Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on the present and proposed Community role in combatting tobacco consumption ( COM ( 96 ) 0609 - C4-0014 / 97 ) .
Madam President , we are entering into a quite different subject which is the European Union 's strategy against tobacco consumption .
And if I recall the title it is because I want the debate to concentrate precisely on this health strategy and not be confused with an area which , although linked , is not the purpose of this report from the Committee .
Here it is not a question at all of agricultural problems nor of tobacco aid .
That is dealt with in another Committee proposal on the common organization of tobacco production and it would not be good to mix up comments and amendments here on this matter , because then we can devalue the strategy of combatting tobacco consumption .
Also there is another matter which I believe it is important to define , and that is the matter of tobacco advertising .
There is another directive ; and only a few days ago the Committee on Health has agreed to phasing in a total ban on tobacco advertising .
I think we should congratulate the Committee and especially , Commissioner , you should convey to your colleague , Mr Flynn , our congratulations for the work he has done and for the pressure he has had to bear from the political as well as other viewpoints .
I think that , at this time , institutions have to leave their priorities behind and in this debate the absolute priority is the defence of the right to health .
And there we have focussed most of our proposals in this area and therefore are making a first positive statement which I think is essential and it is that every person is entitled to breathe clean air and that this right must prevail over the rights of smokers .
This is not establishing any sort of discrimination , but quite the contrary .
Likewise , Madam President , I believe that it is very important to protect the workers in the workplace for the same reasons .
And we also have a very strong proposal to put to the European Commission asking it to begin an interinstitutional enquiry , with the help of scientific committees , to determine if tobacco companies incorporate additives in tobacco to increase the addiction to nicotine .
It seems there is proof of this .
We also have to point out the need to carry out information and awareness campaigns to change the behaviour of tobacco smokers in public , with the aim that courtesy and respect for non-smokers will prevail .
I think this can be an essential strategy for facing the future : education above all and respect for others .
There is another really important subject .
It is that we request the Commission to launch a legislative initiative to declare , in the European Union , nicotine as an addiction producing substance ; it may make quite a difference to the whole treatment in this sector in future .
Finally , Madam President , we place great emphasis on this report requesting the Committee - I would say national Governments also - to support the setting up of a body of Government and non-Government organizations to demand indemnities from the tobacco companies operating in the European Union for the damage caused to the health of smokers .
As you see , they are proposals wholly within a strategy to defend the health of every citizen and therefore it is no surprise that in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection we , all the political groups , have reached a general consensus regardless of our feelings because we are all in this Parliament to defend our basic rights and one of the basic , fundamental rights of a person is the right to health . So we have reached this general type of consensus .
I would like to thank all my colleagues from the Parliamentary groups for the efforts they have made to present a common approach .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am not going to speak about politics but about the right to health for citizens in the Union , the right laid down in articles 129 and 129a of the Amsterdam Treaty which , as little as a month ago , was the subject of heated speeches in this same location .
This prompts me to say without beating round the bush that tobacco kills , proof of this is that half a million people die of their own free will each year because of the harmful habit of smoking .
One death every ten seconds in the world , Madam President , and I really mean of their own free will although then it may be the whole of society which has to take on in addition the cost of these cardio-vascular illnesses and deliberately contracted cancers .
It is inconceivable that the European Community , inheritor of the age of enlightenment and , accordingly , of reason considers legal a product which it is obliged to label saying that it seriously damages your health .
However , it considers the public sale of hashish illegal .
As they are both addictive drugs , Madam President , there can be no greater incongruency .
Having said this , there is no doubt that we celebrate , as the rapporteur said , that finally the Council has begun the process of agreement - yes indeed timid and limited - on banning tobacco advertising as Parliament has been requesting for years .
Nevertheless , we also regret that in the debates referred to in Council , the policy on health was predominant .
The Council can be sure that our Committee will continue to maintain its stance on a total ban and we trust that the Council takes note of this , before settling on a common position .
Madam President , we want a smoke free Union and without the lethal marketing of the tobacco companies who have now decided to target their poisonous strategies - as the rapporteur points out - on the most unprotected sectors in society - children from 11 to 15 years of age , countries in the process of development and socioeconomic , culturally deprived groups .
It is really scandalous .
It is obvious , therefore , that we will support this report and congratulate the rapporteur for his work and especially for its worth .
I conclude , Madam President , by calling for more rigorous legislation for the protection of non-smokers .
Let us begin in this House , where no smoker respects the smoking ban .
Because , for many other reasons , Madam President , I refuse to be murdered by this product , even passively , as the World Health Organization has it .
Madam President , Mr Commissioner , Mr Valverde , thank you for all the work that you have put into your report on reducing tobacco consumption .
Your report impressed me in that it made me aware , in a completely new way , of how we treat tobacco , and it became clear to me that in recent years we have probably often ignored standards of courtesy , social standards as you call them , standards of politeness and consideration for people who do not smoke .
You have probably made a lot of people more aware of this .
I believe that this is also an important way in which we can achieve a reduction in tobacco consumption .
Ladies and gentlemen , tobacco advertising is one aspect .
Some people believe that banning it is a panacea , while others believe that in a free and liberal world it should be allowed .
I welcome the fact that we are now in a position to discuss this important subject in relation to a separate directive which the Council has now prepared .
It has certainly taken long enough ! We should consider that directive with due care , taking into account not only scientific findings but also , no doubt , emotions .
I shall be taking part in that debate .
However , I am not so enthusiastic about some of the amendments , whose authors seem to think that health warnings covering 25 % of the total packet surface for tobacco products will make people give up smoking .
This demonstrates very precisely that we are merely relying on the law , and that is the wrong approach .
I believe that if people cannot understand the present perfectly good health warnings , nothing will be achieved by making them twice as big ; that approach is mistaken .
I would like to come back to your idea that awareness needs to develop inside our heads .
I would like to see us working on that .
One last point , as a rapporteur with many years ' experience on the Committee on Budgets : one point is constantly overlooked in this House , i.e. that we generously subsidise tobacco production here in Europe .
Even worse , we produce tobacco that no-one in Europe wants to smoke .
If you smoke this tobacco it blows the top off your head !
Ladies and gentlemen , let us start by supporting the Commission , which has made some good initial progress towards finally developing a new market organization that will gradually take us in the right direction .
I have no time for these dramatic proposals to abolish everything in one year .
That is impossible and it is antisocial anyway .
But there is a new approach to employment and I can imagine that by combining improvements in quality with employment aspects we could come up with a better means of supporting tobacco growing , with a view to gradually phasing it out in the long term .
We should all have the courage to work on this .
I certainly hope that I will be involved in this work on behalf of my group .
Madam President , we all agree on the approach adopted in this report and on the undertaking to promote any action helping to discourage consumption , particularly among young people .
We therefore agree to the prohibition of advertising , sponsorship , the promotion of drastic restrictions on smoking in public places and in work places , etc .
However , I fail to see how this undertaking focuses on the motion to abolish aid for tobacco production in Europe , contained in paragraph 29 .
Perhaps the person supporting it is cultivating the misleading view that , by not providing more European tobacco , some smokers at home would give up ?
The idea is ridiculous !
Smokers would continue to smoke by buying cigarettes from third countries and thus worsening an irreversible crisis of agricultural production in the poorest suburbs of southern Europe , that is , in Greece , Italy , Portugal , Spain and so on , where tobacco is often the only crop possible .
The tobacco sector currently employs 284 thousand direct workers in Europe , with the subsequent stages of production bringing the figure to a million workers .
European production represents 4.6 % of world production and only meets 40 % of domestic demand ; however , the quality is clearly superior , at least for that consumed in Europe .
And so , in the light of this , the request for the abolition of aid is vague , because it would only make money for the American multinationals .
Madam President , Mr Commissioner , colleagues , although not everyone in my group agrees with me , I am a strong advocate of a strict anti-tobacco policy and I fully support Mr Valverde López 's report .
Every year tobacco kills 500 , 000 people in the Union , and what 's more , the health costs for high-risk behaviour are passed on to society .
I had never thought that , on the occasion when discussing this report , we would be able to welcome the hopeful decision of the Council of Ministers of 4 December .
Throughout more than ten years of Council presidencies , the European Parliament 's Committee on Public Health has agitated for a ban on advertising .
This is hopefully a first victory in the fight against tobacco .
In my country , too , a law was recently passed which curbs tobacco advertising .
Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we must go further than a mere ban on advertising .
Price is also an important instrument in anti-tobacco policy .
To discourage smoking , especially amongst young people , a drastic increase in tobacco prices would be the ideal measure .
The price increase soon turns out be an extremely efficient tool for reducing consumption .
It is believed that a price increase of a 100 % can reduce consumption by half .
Moreover , present European legislation gives rise to enormous price differences .
Cigarettes in Spain , for example , are five times as cheap as in Denmark , and rolling tobacco much cheaper than in the United Kingdom .
These differences must be levelled , because they encourage massive smuggling and fraud .
The tax on rolling tobacco must raised to the same level as tax on cigarettes . Otherwise rolling tobacco threatens to become a dangerous alternative for more expensive cigarettes .
Analogous to ordinary cigarettes , a maximum tar content must be set for rolling tobacco .
Initiatives from the industry on this are welcome .
I only hope that a proposal will not be too long in coming .
An end must also be made to the contradiction between public health and communal agricultural policy .
We should therefore not speak in terms of a gradual cutback and long term solutions , because this period has long since elapsed .
Finally , I support the rapporteur 's proposal to urge for a legislative initiative by the Commission which declares tobacco a substance with addictive effect in the Union .
This approach is comparable to that of the Food and Drug Administration in the United States .
Why not investigate how compensation can be claimed from tobacco manufacturers in the Union ?
Mr President , colleagues , the argument on behalf of employment is only too often abused .
In my country , too , a fight is under way to retain sponsorship of Formula 1 racing in Francorchamp .
Maybe a little creativity could be displayed here .
In Australia , for example , sport and cultural events are funded by a special levy on tobacco products .
It may be true that a strict anti-tobacco policy means the loss of a few jobs in the short term .
However , the absence of a health policy can mean the loss of many human lives in the long term .
It is our mission to make the right choices .
Finally , I would like to encourage the Commission to continue its fight , and I wish to congratulate the rapporteur warmly on his excellent report .
Madam President , I think that we have to begin with the obvious .
But it is necessary because in every group there are going to be people who defend this report as necessary to public health while other colleagues , with the great respect and affection in which we hold them , will consider that this report is over the top .
It is clear that , from the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection a report has to come out which defends public health .
In concrete terms I wholly agree with the report from Mr Valverde for several reasons .
Because the rights of non-smokers need to prevail , as he himself was saying , over the rights of smokers to smoke in public places .
It is vital that young people and children are completely separated from that world , from addiction to that world and education and training are needed for this .
In no way must it be allowed for more than 26 products to be labelled , from valerian to chocolate and the scent of liquor , which are in tobacco - this was acknowledged some days ago by a tobacco company in the Spanish press - and there are some we are not sure whether they are also addictive .
And because we think - I do not agree Mr Florenz here - that , indeed , the expression which says that tobacco harms your health should be more visible .
Finally , we see it as immoral for the European Union to export poor quality tobacco to third world countries .
It is for that reason that we - I should not say we , but rather some colleagues in my group - are going to support this report in full , because we think it necessary and it seems to us that health is above all other considerations .
However , a way out has to be sought , of course , for those farmers who see themselves as trapped and unable to grow tobacco in the future .
Madam president , this report has come at just the right time , against the background , among other things , of the Council of Ministers ' common position not so long ago concerning the ban on indirect advertising of tobacco products , and also against the background of the Court of Auditors ' annual report which was presented at the last session of meetings here in Strasbourg .
This report shows , among other things , that there are very big problems in the tobacco sector in the EU .
However , I do not support the rapporteur when he says that we should limit this debate to a small part of the tobacco issue .
On the contrary , I believe that we must look at the whole picture in the tobacco policy in order to effectively be able to have a strategy on the tobacco issue .
That is why we in the Left Group fully support paragraph 29 in which Parliament calls on the Council to stop direct income support for the Union 's tobacco sector .
It is quite morally wrong for us to give money to tobacco growers at the same time as we discuss other anti-smoking strategies here this evening .
It is not only non-smokers who think that is wrong .
There are also many smokers who think it is quite wrong for EU money to go towards a lot of tobacco subsidies .
Madam President , passive smoking is a source of broncho-pulmonary cancers and yet three eminent chest specialists , after having studied a number of epidemiological studies said they were unable , given the available statistics , to make a formal statement on the issue . Nothing is therefore established ..
I do not know if the excellent technical report by Mr Valverde López is going to be a hit or a miss , since the public health aspect and the production aspect are unfortunately contradictory in economic terms .
You will need to be vigilant on this point , Mr Commissioner .
On the other hand , what I do know is that this report runs the risk of putting numerous tobacco producers in a difficult situation and , if that were not enough , also many seasonal workers in disadvantaged rural areas , even though this situation is in no way comparable with that of the processing and distribution multinationals , should the fundamental assessments of the rapporteur be misinterpreted .
The rapporteur knows this .
His knowledge and passion , under the Hippocratic oath , for medicine and health , must be for us a credible witness .
But the dark forces of money and , consequently , of policy will be able to distort the validity of his real and legitimate fears .
It is therefore appropriate to set the debate back in its true context .
Indeed , the European tobacco industry imports nearly 67 % of its tobacco which it processes for internal consumption within the European Union .
Also , suppression of production subsidies would in no way resolve the fight against tobacco consumption .
The image sellers , the pleasure traders , those of casinos and other vitriolic places , will only have to make sterile recommendations .
Controlling the imaginary Schengen borders , perhaps , we will be aware of the reality .
Between abuse and abstinence there must exist a happy medium in which producers , distributers and consumers can meet .
It is perhaps enough that interests should be better shared and state taxation better allocated .
The highest French authorities tell us that smoking a joint is not catastrophic .
Allow us then , Mr Valverde López , to smoke a good cigarette .
So if we cannot see life through rose-coloured spectacles , we will at least be able to make smoke rings , for dreams are sometimes a source of wisdom .
Mr President , as a doctor I know that the harmfulness of tobacco consumption is quite clear and , from the point of view of a humanist , which we all are , the massacre of innocent people , victims of passive nicotine poisoning , must stop .
Is it still necessary to remind people that there are plenty of other pathogenic agents apart from the cigar and the cigarette , such as town pollution , to which the Member States of the European Union appear surprisingly tolerant .
Perhaps it is better to be a smoker in the countryside than a non-smoker in the town .
We must also remember - and I am glad that on the right as well as the left of this Chamber , several colleagues have noted this - that 67 % of the tobacco smoked in the Union is imported from third countries .
It does not therefore seem illogical to me to ban all forms of advertising which encourage smoking , including of course , the sponsoring of cultural and sporting events , whilst taking care to maintain the employment generated by tobacco growing in Europe .
Finally , I have great difficulty in understanding why some groups which , with an admirable determination , relentlessly hunt down Gauloise smokers , at the same time demand the free sale of drugs which they call soft , against the official opinion of competent doctors .
Madam President , can I add my extreme thanks to the rapporteur for a very principled , intelligent report which very much deserves widespread support in the House .
While we are debating and voting on the report tomorrow , over a thousand Europeans will die for no good reason .
They will be killed by diseases of the heart or lungs or by cancer because they inhale tobacco smoke .
The odds that smokers take would deter anyone but an addict .
The risk of painful and premature death is one in two .
Perhaps even worse is the effect on those who choose not to smoke , especially pregnant women and children who are forced to breathe in dangerous particles emitted from those around them who light up .
Just this week independent European medical specialists have reported than 180 million citizens are exposed regularly to the smoke of others and that twenty-two thousand of them will die as a result this year .
In the face of that , the measures in this report can be seen to be justifiable and sensible , although some are perhaps more appropriate for action at Member State level .
However they are a welcome contribution to the overall plan of action .
The proposed ban on advertising and sponsorship will be discussed here in detail next year .
It will be an important part of a package of measures which should be introduced not just within our borders but in applicant countries too .
The aims of providing proper and accurate information , of encouraging health promotion and education initiatives , of using excise systems to help health measures and of removing temptation in the form of vending machines which are too accessible are not just worthy wishes but practical , effective , proven steps forward .
Separately they will be less valuable , taken together they represent a democratic assault on the lies , the smears and the shameless mendacity perpetrated by much of the tobacco industry , much of which is beyond , and hostile to , the European Union .
To tackle that misinformation fully we must put our own house in order and reform the European Union tobacco production sector rapidly and completely .
We cannot continue to spend a pittance fighting cancer and a fortune supporting tobacco .
It is time to stub out the unhealthy depressing habit to which too many of our younger citizens will become addicted and from which too many more will die unless we and our national governments succeed .
To help that , I and my Labour colleagues will vote tomorrow for the report , but against virtually all the amendments in support of the strategy explained earlier by my excellent colleague , Carmen Diez de Rivera Acaza .
Madam President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , all of us here know and appreciate the dangers that this consumption involves for smokers and passive smokers .
But in wanting to substitute health guarantees , limiting free choice , responsibility itself , there is something missing .
And there are also statistical extrapolations which are made about the incidence of lung cancer in smokers .
How is the question of non-smokers explained to us ?
Anyway , it is their choice .
And results are not going to be achieved by banning , as the facts show .
But here I wish to point out the danger entailed in points 28 , 29 and 30 , as has already been highlighted by the rapporteur , for which the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has asked for a separate vote .
I would like to make a firm stand on point 29 , which makes a concrete request to the Council about the withdrawal of aid .
I am against this request .
Firstly , because it does not proceed in the context in which it was presented .
Secondly , because it is not appropriate , since there will imminently be a new proposal for regulations in the sector .
And thirdly , because it has not been made in a suitable forum .
Ladies and gentlemen , if this point 29 is approved and I am keener on regulating and not banning , in the full session tomorrow there will be many of us who vote against the report .
And it would be a problem for us , since we are indeed in favour of health , but not by force of an official report , leaving farmers out in the cold .
Madam President , Mr Commissioner , a lot has already been said about tobacco .
I have drawn up a report on tobacco and pleaded the cause of tobacco-growing , I know perfectly well that tobacco is harmful , I know whisky is harmful , I know it does you no good to be overweight , in fact I know that any of these things are bad for you if you have too much of them !
It is up to me to keep my cravings under control , and I hate having a Commissioner or a politician prevent me from indulging what I see as a pleasure .
I take the risk , I pay for the things and when someone actually dies of lung cancer , and it is not always due to tobacco , he has undoubtedly paid enough with the tax on every packet to pay the hospital expenses .
The truth is that the prohibitionists do not want freedom .
The truth is that they want to impose their hygienic will on all of us .
I am hygienic because that is how I was brought up , and it was preferable to concentrate on educating children , so that they actually become careful about tobacco , tobacco abuse , alcohol abuse , and anything bad for health .
At this moment , however , something more repulsive is appearing in the modern world : passive smokers suing the big tobacco multinationals for compensation for the damage they have suffered from passive smoking .
And some day we shall certainly find non-smokers suing for damages because their forebears were passive smokers .
This happens in America because they pay less tax on tobacco over there .
The fashion may possibly catch on in Europe before long .
My colleague , Mr Pimenta , has said here that tobacco was introduced into Portugal when we joined the European Community .
Not so !
Tobacco was not introduced into Portugal because in the days of the dictatorship Salazar prohibited tobacco-production there to protect the colonies ' tobacco .
Please note this fact , my dear Mr Pimenta .
You 're old enough to be aware of it !
Madam president , on the whole I think the report we are debating is very good .
That applies to almost all the paragraphs .
However , I have some observations .
The first concerns what the rapporteur said in his speech about the fact that we should separate agricultural policy from this .
I believe it is impossible to do that if we are to achieve credibility on these issues .
It does not make sense to use very large sums of money to subsidize tobacco growing at the same time as we are going to fight the effects at the other end .
That is why paragraph 29 is very important , and it is also important that it is adopted .
I believe all support for both production and export should cease within a few years . The time should be reasonable with a view to social considerations .
Another observation is that it is important to distinguish between what measures are effective at an EU level and which belong at another level .
It is quite clear that clear marking is needed and that EU rules are needed for that .
There is also need for an effective and comprehensive ban on advertising .
However , I think that other measures belong more at the national or local level .
That includes tax issues , age limits , where people sell tobacco and what rules should apply to jobs .
Madame President , we need more information to young people on the effects of tobacco , a ban on tobacco advertising and clear labelling .
We should also not be giving ECU 1 billion in tobacco aid to a dreadful tobacco in the EU on the one hand while giving ECU 11.2 billion to fight cancer on the other .
So my colleague , Kirsten Jensen , tabled and put through an amendment to the Valverde López report to cut direct aid to the tobacco sector in the Union and so release resources which will assist with the switch to other crops in those areas .
Mr Valverde López 's draft report contains much which is good , but stops just as it is beginning to get important , namely at the fact that the EU is not credible if we admit the risks involved in smoking but still go on producing tobacco .
Each year , some 400 , 000 people die of smoking-related illnesses , while tobacco production supports 170 , 000 tobaccogrowing farmers .
This is hypocritical , and it is pointless .
My colleague , who left the chamber once he had had his say , did not want to hear other views .
I must say that he was unbelievably well paid by the tobacco industry to come and say as much nonsense as possible in a short time .
It is a real scandal that members who are paid by the tobacco industry can stand here and talk about such things without knowing what they are talking about .
It is really scandalous .
Could the ushers please sort things out there at the back ?
No , I am sorry , I am not having that .
Can I ask the ushers to sort things out please .
Please sit down again .
Mr Rosado Fernandes , can I please ask you to sit down again .
We can then sort this out , please !
Excuse me , Madam President , but he is saying that I take money from these people , he cannot say that ...
Mr Rosado Fernandes , you should have made a request to raise a point of order , that would have been quite normal .
And I would have let you speak if you had made such a request .
You have now done just that .
Mr Blak has asked for the floor .
If you could perhaps put your headphones back on , you will be able to hear what Mr Blak has to say now .
Madam President , I am deeply shocked at being attacked by a member who cannot bear to hear the truth .
I have never been exposed to being violently attacked in a democratic society , being physically attacked by someone .
Madam President , I would be grateful if you would report the incident to the Presidency and that the necessary action be taken .
Ladies and gentlemen , in accordance with Rule 109 of the Rules of Procedure , I have the right to call Members who create a disturbance during the proceedings to order .
I am doing exactly that now and I hope that we can now forget what has just happened .
We will now continue the debate .
Mrs Thyssen , I interrupted you , please forgive me .
Please continue .
I will then let the Member affected make a point of order .
Madam President , what I was saying was that over the past few years , we never talked as much about the public health as after the outbreak of the BSE crisis , which led us to taking a clear stance on how to deal with foodstuffs .
We said that this must be based on scientific findings , and if science cannot offer any certainty , we would like to see a political decision-making process which is based on a scientifically-responsible risk management .
Tobacco is not a foodstuff , it is a stimulant , but this fact surely does not imply we are going to be satisfied with less .
If we are talking about tobacco consumption , we are not even talking in terms of risk , but in terms of indisputable scientific findings .
We know for sure that tobacco consumption is bad for one 's health , and that every year it is an avoidable cause of death and the source of much misery for 500 , 000 , that is half a million , Europeans .
Today we are talking about a statement from the Commission on the role of Europe in combatting tobacco consumption .
We are of course used to negotiating these resolutions .
But in this case it is not possible .
In this case we cannot have it both ways .
Public health cannot be negotiated . Transferable health rights do not exist either ; this is something which was suggested here before .
So let us approve a clear message for the benefit of public health , and let us approve colleague Valverde 's report as near as possible to its original version .
It is an excellent report .
The rapporteur not only deserves our congratulations , but also our support and our voice .
Thank you , Mrs Thyssen .
I now have two requests to raise points of order .
I would like to point out once again that I have made an official warning about disturbance during the proceedings , and that incident was really a gross infringement of the Rules .
I hope that we can let the matter rest there this evening .
Mr Santini now has the floor to make a point of order .
Madam President , I am speaking , but it is as though Mr Rosado Fernandes were doing so .
We are sorry about this incident but I would like to point out that the Chair may also be partly responsible .
If you , Mr President , had intervened duly and heavily in reprimanding a colleague who so grossly and directly offended another MEP , the incident would probably never have happened .
Mr Rosado Fernandes has already apologized for his reaction , which is understandable in many ways .
If the colleague who offended him would do as much , I think the incident can be considered closed .
Otherwise , we will proceed according to the Rules of Procedure .
A gross provocation has occurred which the Chair should have taken the initiative to suppress .
Mr Santini , at first , I could not see what was happening at all .
Then , taking into account of what had happened on both sides , I thought that the physical assault was the more serious , and accordingly gave a formal warning .
Mr Blak has also made a request to raise a point of order .
I wish to refer to the Rule on disciplinary measures , Mr President .
I think we should appreciate Mr Blak 's politeness , a politeness which we have unfortunately seen violated by a very serious act .
Beyond the apologies and the personal forgiveness that Mr Blak very politely expressed here , I think the Bureau of the Presidency should judge an unprecedented episode in this Chamber , a physical attack against an MEP .
I also think that the debate should now move forward but I think there is still a huge difference between a political dispute , which can take on more indignant tones even in this Chamber - but we are MEPs , politicians and we know all that - and physical attack .
This is the difference between a civilized parliament , made up of civilized people , and circles and people who can be classified differently .
I think that , although , on the one hand , we should note Mr Blak 's extraordinarily responsible and significant attitude , on the other , what has happened here is more than a clash of individuals and I think it should be examined by the Bureau of the Presidency with great calm and at the same time with great firmness .
I agree with your assessment of the situation , Mr Vecchi .
I hope that nothing of the kind will happen here again , and I thank both Members involved for their willingness to accept the apologies offered .
Mr Rosado Fernandes has the floor again .
Madam President , I apologize and beg your pardon for my action .
I will never allow any fellow-Member to say that I take money from anyone .
I was not brought up to be a thief .
For that reason I do not like being called something I am not .
I have no way of punishing anyone who calls me a thief and hides behind his Parliamentary immunity .
I do not have the slightest means of defending myself .
Being insulted in this way is something that puts me in an extremely difficult position .
I have no hesitation in apologizing to my fellow-Member for what I did , but I would most earnestly ask him not to call any Member a thief , because there are Members who do not like being called by such a name . They are not thieves , they take no money from anyone , because they are here to defend their constituents ' interests .
That is my only intention here , and I therefore apologize to the President once again .
And if you wish to take any disciplinary action , I shall be prepared to accept full responsibility for my action , quite willingly , because I do not have the natural temperament of a St Francis of Assisi and I do not like being insulted .
Mr Rosado Fernandes , you have apologized , and Mr Blak has accepted that apology .
I would be pleased if we could leave it at that now .
The more we talk about this , the more complicated it becomes , and the more difficult it is to bring to a conclusion .
I would also ask Mr Blak , who has now asked to speak once again , and Mr Valverde López to note what I have said .
If possible , I would ask you to withdraw your requests to speak , so that we can continue with the debate .
Madame President , I am pleased at what my colleague who made the actual assault has said .
I do not know what the translation was , but this is a political debate to which I came with some remarks .
I may well have upset him : if so , I apologize .
But I do not think that that means I said I forgive his violence towards me .
But I am prepared to refrain from taking matters further .
The matter is closed as far as I am concerned .
I do not want to discuss what happened any further .
Mr Valverde López , can we leave it at that ?
Madam President , tomorrow the committee will have to assess , with its usual calmness , the events we have witnessed .
It has not been a mere change in order .
It has been a direct physical attack which we have all witnessed .
I do not want to throw coals on the fire , but of course the committee has to assess the facts .
In this Parliament these events cannot be repeated .
There has been a physical onslaught .
I share your opinion and I shall of course report this .
Madam President , I do not smoke , but more than addiction to tobacco I fear addiction to fanaticism and excess .
Nobody maintains that smoking is good for your health .
However , the persecution of smokers , tobacco producers and all those who work in the tobacco industry is almost turning into a witch hunt on the American model .
Many of the recommendations contained in the report go beyond the Commission 's proposals , while some of the proposed measures give the impression that there has been no fundamental study of their economic and social repercussions , nor any consultation with the social categories that are affected .
The proposed channelling of aid for tobacco into the restructuring of production is to be equated with the annihilation of tobacco cultivation , to say nothing of the fact that this will lead to an inordinate increase in imports of a product in short supply in favour of third countries and without of course any hope of reducing consumption .
Madam President , I am surprised by the ease with which the north , in the main , invokes morality and health in order to wipe out an important Mediterranean product and all who work in the industry , when it is indeed well known that by so doing we are simply helping the products of multinational companies to enter our markets and when nobody says anything about our other evils such as alcoholism .
Why does nobody talk about alcoholism ?
Within the framework of this logic we could begin a very nice campaign against whisky production .
We in the south , who have no alcohol problem , will be at the forefront of such a campaign .
Madam President , I congratulate Mr Valverde López on his very succinct and illuminating report on the hazards of smoking .
The many risks associated with the consumption of tobacco are well-known .
Nevertheless , smoking is the greatest single preventable cause of death in the European Union .
The greatest change in smoking habits has taken place among the generations .
In present times smoking has become far more common among young women , and will account for an increase in female deaths in the future .
So what are we do to about it ?
The most important task of society is the promotion of health with every resolution made .
That is why I support the ban on tobacco advertising , which must extend to all parts of the European Union .
I do not think we can afford to wait until 1006 for the ban to come into force , as was proposed at Luxembourg .
The other main way of controlling consumer behaviour is taxation .
We should tax the life out of tobacco consumption .
There is a need to enlighten people in the Member States as to the dangers of smoking much more obviously than at present .
I would expect this to be targeted at young people , especially young women , because they are the group at most risk .
Among the young smoking is very often seen as a way of being more grown-up , a kind of fad .
We as parents and guardians have to get involved too .
Madam President , I would like to say that taking the law into one 's own hands is in no way a political argument , but , by the same token , saying that someone who expresses different arguments is being paid is not a political argument either .
This is unacceptable and I think that the President should call Mr Blak to order .
Madam President , of course we are all for the protection of public health , but we cannot allow , in the name of health , to be treated hypocritically the crushing of hundreds of thousands of our co-citizens who , in unfavourable conditions in the most infertile regions of the South , are employed in tobacco production .
The implication that tobacco producers are responsible for hundreds of thousands of deaths in Europe is not only hypocritical but verging on the suspect , since it is a well-known fact that there is a shortage of tobacco in the European Union , and that tobacco imports exceed 70 % of its total needs .
The abolition of Community aid for tobacco producers will not reduce the effects on public health .
It will simply increase imports from third countries and the United States , while at the same time completely destroying the poorest regions , which do not have alternative solutions and where tobacco is essentially the sole industry .
The solution to the problem must be sought in an extensive anti-smoking campaign , in providing information , in the drastic reduction of imports and in the promotion of actions to substitute production in tobacco-producing regions .
Until then the subsidizing and support of producers and their employment must continue unabated .
Madam President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , lung cancer is certainly not just a problem for health ministers , but also for finance ministers .
When the health ministers decided here a few days ago here to introduce a ban on tobacco advertising , incidently despite dissenting votes by my country , Austria , and by Germany , I believe that only some of the ministers affected were present .
We know that no European state can keep its budget under control without revenues from tobacco taxes .
So European governments benefit from their citizens ' addiction .
It is very much in their interest for people to smoke a lot .
Not only is 20 to 30 a day better , 60 a day is much better , as the revenue is correspondingly higher !
We know that children and young people who can be stopped from smoking do not turn into addictive smokers later on .
So how can we manage to protect our children ?
I believe that is the main question .
We will never get people who already smoke to stop .
My husband smokes 60 cigarettes a day , and in the course of a long marriage I have given up trying to get him to stop .
But how can we protect our children ?
Is the Community-wide introduction of a minimum age of 18 for buying tobacco products feasible ?
We already have a minimum age of 16 in Austria , and it is not observed .
Today a twelve-year-old , even a ten-year-old child can go and buy cigarettes , saying they are buying them for their dad , and the child will get the cigarettes .
Nevertheless , I believe that if we were to get through this increase in the minimum age , we would at least have a chance of helping a lot of young people .
Is an advertising ban the answer ?
We are talking about something which it is legal to produce , which the state earns revenue from , a lot of revenue , and which quite definitely shortens many people 's lives considerably .
But this product is actually a drug !
So how is it that we allow it to be sold ?
There are so many contradictions that we are aware of nowadays .
I wonder - today it is cigarettes , tomorrow it will be alcohol - there you have cirrhosis or cancer of the liver - next it will be smoked meat . We Austrians love smoked meat and smoked meat certainly also causes cancer of the stomach .
As an Austrian I am perhaps very sensitive about the idea of a state , like the one we share a border with , which has forbidden everything .
I would like to thank you very much , Mr Valverde , you have given us food for thought .
And tomorrow we shall all have to follow both our hearts and minds when we vote .

Madam President , the rapporteur Mr Valverde López is to be congratulated on his excellent report which brings forward a series of interesting ideas to strengthen the Community 's smoking prevention efforts .
I can assure him and others who have spoken that I will draw to the attention of my colleague Mr Flynn the particular extra ideas that have come forward , and also to my colleague Mr Fischler the points that have been raised with regard to support for tobacco growing .
The Commission 's communication was the first text devoted to an overview of the subject which is increasingly recognized as one of the main areas where joint efforts at prevention can save lives and avoid disease .
Studies show an annual death rate of half a million citizens of the European Union caused by smoking-related disease .
It follows that a similar number of new smokers have to be recruited each year just in order for the market to stay the same .
That is why the Commission considers it is so important to restrict advertising for tobacco .
TV advertising is already banned by a 1989 directive .
Member States have also introduced or are actively considering further measures to restrict tobacco advertising in other media .
The Council of Health Ministers meeting on 4 December , as has been mentioned by many speakers , reached a common position on the Commission proposal on tobacco advertising and this will shortly be put again before this Parliament .
The measure has been referred to so often and is so clearly well known that there is no need for me to rehearse its contents .
The text provides a Community framework for Member States to restrict tobacco advertising while respecting their internal market obligations .
The Commission hopes that the Parliament will support this important initiative when the text returns before you .
Turning to the report on the smoking prevention communication , Mr Valverde López refers to several additional ideas which could be studied either at Community or Member State level .
For example , the Commission services have already begun a study of how Member States regulate additives to tobacco products .
Also , improvements in the labelling directive are being actively considered taking account of our experience in the application of the existing rules .
The technical standards for determining the tar content of cigarettes need to be brought up to date and the limitation of nicotine at Community level also needs to be examined , as has already been done with tar in cigarettes .
Last November the Commission presented its report to the Council and Parliament on smoking in public places .
Further attention now needs to be given to updating the 1989 Council recommendation on the subject to take account of the evidence from research that passive smoking is a preventable danger .
Health information and education are the principal means of preventing smoking among the young . The Europe against Cancer programme and the Community fund for information and research on tobacco provide the funds and framework for Community smoking prevention efforts .
These include the creation of joint school projects to educate pupils on the effects of smoking , the development of strategies to reduce smoking during pregnancy and a Community-wide project to involve general practitioners in smoking prevention , for example .
All of these projects are developed partly using national resources , ensuring that projects are locally based while at the same time having a Community dimension .
I hope that what I have said shows the extremely active interest and action that the Commission is taking and is contemplating taking on this important subject .
The very great interest shown by Parliament in this communication and the support already expressed by Ministers at the Health Council in June of this year show that there is a necessary consensus to pursue and reinforce smoking prevention at Community level as a major priority of our public health policy .
I am grateful both to the rapporteur and to those who have spoken in this debate for giving that effort a further spur .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9.30 a.m.
Humane trapping
The next item is the report ( A4-0325 / 97 ) by Mr Pimenta , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a Council Decision concerning the signing and conclusion of an Agreement on International Humane Trapping Standards between the European Community , Canada and the Russian Federation ( COM ( 97 ) 0251 - C4-0425 / 97-97 / 0019 ( CNS ) ) .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we are today voting on the European Parliament 's opinion on an agreement which , significantly , was signed this very week , two days before this debate .
Parliament expressed its opinion on the substance of this agreement last June , with a clear majority .
At that time I talked about the reasons why I considered that it did not accord with the spirit and letter of European legislation .
European legislation was and is aimed at the total prohibition of all these cruel and inhumane methods of killing and trapping animals .
Briefly , and apart from questions of cruelty , we are opposed to the non-selective nature of this type of trap .
As you know , it is impossible to prevent the trapping of species which in principle are not supposed to be trapped , because the traps are not selective .
We also opposed the lack of any clear definition of ( I quote the English term ) ' conventional leghold restraining traps ' .
We opposed the authorization of the use of any of these traps in water , rivers or lakes , as killing traps .
At the same time , we were very strongly opposed to the fact that in the wording of the agreement the Commission had accepted a period of five minutes for animals trapped by these devices to agonize and die .
I would point out to my fellow-Members that the Commission 's proposal was thirty seconds .
And it has accepted five minutes as a dying period for animals caught in killing traps .
This shows that the Commission wanted ' an ' agreement , rather than a good agreement , because the issue at stake was not to create any more problems with the commercial agenda between the United States and Europe , and between Canada and Europe , when there are already so many others .
And that is why the Parliament has so often come out against the substance of this agreement .
I would nevertheless like to state my own view at this point on the moment we have reached and on the tactical aspect of the agreement , since we are discussing its substance .
The European Union is this very day in the process of entering into a new agreement , this time with the United States of America .
So far as I could see from the two texts I specially obtained , this agreement with the United States of America is even weaker than the agreement with Canada and Russia which we are now examining .
This agreement with the United States of America is worse , because it allows more time , it gives the United States longer to prohibit the use of traps with jaws .
And the worst thing of all is the question of supervision and implementation , because we all know that is in the hands of the authorities of the various States of the Union rather than those of the Washington Federal Government .
Lastly , this agreement is worse because in this era of spin-doctors , when we look at what the American Press says about this agreement on the basis of the negotiators ' statements , we conclude that it is not the same thing as the European Press says on the basis of the information supplied by the Commission .
And in particular , with regard to the derogations , that is to day the possibility of non-implementation of what is written into the agreement , I should like to ask the Commission what the American representative , Charlene Barshefsky , has already put in her letter to Minister Klaus Kinkel , where she says that these derogations will be applied in cases of extreme necessity and that they will be the same as in the agreement with Canada and Russia .
And I would ask Commissioner Sir Leon Brittan in English :
Will the Commission kindly confirm that there are no derogations as far as the phasing out of conventional leghold traps is concerned ?
Further , I should like to ask Sir Leon what the Commission will do if the United States and Canada try to use the derogations .
I would point out to my German colleagues - who , I assume , are here in the House - that the letter in question was motivated by the very reasonable doubts expressed by the German Government on this agreement .
My friends , if it had not been for pressure from the European Parliament we would not even have an agreement with Canada here today ; because last January , as you know , there was an attempt in the CITES Committee to allow free exports from Canada , Russia and the United States before we even had an agreement .
If it had not been for this Parliament , the first version of the agreement , which is even worse than this one , would have been approved .
If it had not been for the pressure of European public opinion , which we represent , the first versions of the agreements with the Americans would have been approved .
My friends , we must keep up the pressure .
We have all expressed our views now on the substance of the agreement .
It would be a tactical disaster if at this moment we were to adopt any position other than the rejection of this agreement .
Mr President , we are here debating a very peculiar creature .
It is called an agreement yet in reality it is a non-agreement .
I would liken it to the Cheshire Cat because all you can see is its smile .
First , it should be said that Parliament did not seek this agreement , we want the implementation of the 1991 regulation .
That was very carefully put together to end the worst cruelty associated with the trade which allows rich women to wear the furs of tortured animals .
In the face of threats of WTO from Canada and the United States , the Commission took it upon itself to negotiate this non-agreement and it is fundamentally flawed .
The non-agreement is certainly not about humane trapping standards since , just for instance , it still permits the use of trapping underwater , leading inevitably to death by slow drowning .
The PSE wholeheartedly endorses Mr Pimenta 's report , in which he comprehensively shows exactly how this non-agreement fails to protect trapped animals from cruelty .
The proposal does not even present a level playing field , since the USA deal is even weaker than that with Canada and Russia and the deadlines are about out-of-sight out-of-mind verbal undertakings .
The Americans cannot ensure implementation because of their federal system .
The Canadians are happy for it to have enough loopholes for a pack of wolves to run through , and the Russians love the self-enforcing , self-evaluating system .
So there is still no commitment to abolish the cruel , leg-hold traps .
At the end of the day this unwanted , unworkable non-agreement will perpetuate the use of the leghold trap and is unable to improve the welfare of trapped animals .
Even the Cheshire cat trapped behind its smile .
I urge support for the Pimenta report .
Madam President , my colleague , Mr Pimenta , has written a report on the international agreement on the painless snaring of animals .
This agreement is important for the international fur trade , and it also is of immense interest in the Nordic regions with regard to the protection of animals .
Mr Pimenta has now stated the agreement is a bad one .
Very often the best is the worst enemy of what is merely good .
This is something I really want to stress .
It is , of course , easy to sympathise with Mr Pimenta 's concern over the well-being of animals .
Unfortunately , however , I must totally disagree with him as far as protection of animals in the agreement is concerned .
I think the agreement is an important step towards improved conditions for the trapping of fur animals .
The acceptance of the agreement would give guarantees from the EU that finally how humane trapping methods are can be judged according to international criteria .
Up till now there have not been common yardsticks for the evaluation of traps insofar as what is acceptable and what should be prohibited .
The agreement would provide for EU investigation into snaring methods currently in use within its borders , which will go a long way to improve the welfare of animals .
Mr Pimenta suggests , however , that the agreement be quashed , because it is not perfect .
So no good will come of it .
The Committee on External Economic Relations , which also cares for the wellbeing of animals , and for whom I now speak as draftsman of the opinion , considers it absolutely vital that the Community fulfills its international obligations and that a possible new WTO dispute be averted .
A possible trade war would jeopardise tens of thousands of jobs , which clearly conflicts with the aims of Union employment policy .
Unlike Mr Pimenta , the Committee on External economic relations believes the proposed agreement , such as it is , be accepted as a better alternative to outright rejection .
If you can 't get the best , take what is good .
This is a never-ending story , Commissioner Brittan .
We started it as far back as in 1991 .
At that time a ban on the import of fur from the thirteen animal species should have come into effect , and yet now in 1997 , we are still not there .
We have an agreement with Canada and Russia .
But this agreement only states that it will be another four years before the conventional traps are banned and another eight years before the other types are done away with .
This is not enough if we look at the agreements we made earlier .
I would even say an agreement is agreement , and we will have to stick to it .
We should not accept any poor substitutes which do not meet the decree of 1991 .
I know full well that in the European Union there has been a struggle between Commissioner Brittan and Mrs Bjerregaard .
Mrs Bjerregaard lost ; Mr Brittan wanted to avoid trade conflicts with other countries , but I have to say Mr Brittan is in the wrong , because the proposed international agreement fails dramatically in the field of animal welfare , and in fact tries to reconcile trade and the environment by not implementing the provisions of the import ban pursuant to the decree .
That is why I fully agree with colleague Pimenta .
We must vote against this .
I am interested to know , Mr President , what is the situation regarding the agreement with the United States ?
What is the agreement , and , in particular , in which US states does the ban on the use of leghold traps apply ?
Madam President , I normally have the utmost admiration and respect for Carlos Pimenta 's work , but in this case , I could have wished that he could have employed his efforts in a better cause .
The Council 's regulations have always been totally hypocritical .
Innumerable examples of hunting methods in Europe which are just as gruesome could be put forward , involving far more animals , but which my two minutes do not allow me to mention .
But , of course , it is easier to score animal welfare points off helpless Inuits in Northern Canada than here in Europe , where the worst that can happen is to tread on a few voters ' toes .
The Environment Committee has said on the subject of fox traps that gravid animals can be released , even if these are only set up in three winter months during which no animals are gravid as far as I know .
Another objection was that the Inuits of Northern Canada can only live off tourism , in the style of Marie Antoinette , who suggested that the starving people of Paris should eat cake if they were unable to buy bread .
Now we are close to an agreement which , unlike the Council 's regulations , regulates and establishes standards for catching wild animals on both sides of the Atlantic , in other words here in Europe too , where we have had nothing so far .
But the Environment Committee and Carlos Pimenta as its rapporteur have sensed that the Commission has not followed Parliament and implemented the regulations .
So this agreement does not have a chance .
It was thrown out , irrespective of what was in it .
The Committee on External Economic Relations has produced an outstanding statement which regards the agreement as the first step on the road , although of course it does have its faults .
It contains both healthy common sense and animal welfare .
Madam President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , for years the subject of leghold traps has regularly featured on our agenda .
And for years the European Community has supported internationally agreed humane trapping standards .
That was and remains a good thing , and I believe , contrary to your view , Mr Pimenta , that it has been successful .
The agreement between the EU , Canada and the Russian Federation could of course be improved .
But something has actually happened , which we could scarcely have hoped for years ago .
There is now a treaty , and countries are committing themselves to implement animal protection measures on the basis of treaties .
That is why I think it is right that we have taken the measures adopted up to now , but we must also start to be reasonable , by which I mean reasonable as we now understand it , because we were also being reasonable before .
I would like to tell you very quickly why I believe the Parliament should support this agreement , despite many reservations .
This agreement will achieve more than anyone could have imagined a few years ago .
Canada and Russia are finally willing to enter into binding commitments .
Europe 's interest in this matter used to be regarded purely as interference in internal affairs .
We now have a chance to achieve positive changes in these countries in favour of animal protection .
The agreement goes beyond leghold traps and also covers other traps .
I would quite simply like to draw your attention to that .
Only by consistently implementing the agreement do we have a chance to show that further improvements in protection standards are necessary and possible .
Everyone involved must have a chance to bring their experience and knowledge to the implementation process .
That is the essential task facing us .
I particularly have in mind indigenous trappers and animal protection organizations .
Trappers have already gone beyond what is now found in these agreements .
They have already taken things much further .
Finally , I believe that it is a tactical error to reject the agreement with Canada just because of the current negotiations with the USA .
If we do that , then we will be seen as people who always want to say no in this area , and then the European Parliament would not been taken seriously by anyone any more .
Let us say yes to the agreement between the EU and Canada , and ask for permanent involvement , because that is important . Let us show realism and wisdom .
Madam President , I think it is right that since our views on this subject do not have any legal force , we should establish our position as strongly as we can .
And I think most of the Members of this House feel that this is a very sad day for the European Parliament because the agreement , although it exists - and in a sense it is an achievement that it does exist - is a very weak one and if you have regard to any of the European Parliament 's reports on this issue to date , then the agreement in front of us can only be regarded as inadequate .
It may be that there are other sorts of animal cruelty in the world - I am sure there are ; but an indiscriminate trapping system which traps live animals in indescribable pain must be one of the worst , and incidentally one of the avoidable , instances of such cruelty .
The agreement is inadequate because it exerts very little real force for change on countries which currently permit the leghold trap and other sorts of cruel traps .
The agreement , as Mr Pimenta has said , omits important animal welfare considerations for the future , and its test of what is or is not humane does too little to limit unnecessary pain .
In particular the leghold trap is likely to continue in use for many years .
The derogations in article 10 are potentially massive and the Joint Management Committee that is set up in article 14 is terribly woolly : it will probably rarely meet .
So I hope that because we are able tomorrow to signal our Parliament 's rejection of this agreement , we will simply be able to say to those involved that we regard this agreement as a first step but certainly not the last step .
There is one point on which I would be grateful if the Commissioner could reply .
It seems that the Commission was possibly reluctant to implement the original regulation because of fear of WTO proceedings .
Is this true ?
How does the Commission regard the original regulation is likely to fare within the WTO ?
As it stands there is only one person who really emerges with any credit from all this , and that is Mr Pimenta .
Madam President , rejecting the agreement if you would actually rather have it than not have it would be a piece of self-indulgence .
Parliament has to decide whether it is better to have the agreement or not to have the agreement .
I have no hesitation whatsoever in saying that while it is possible to point out the inadequacies of the agreement it is unquestionably a major step forward in animal welfare .
Without it you could have the ban but you would have no improvement in animal welfare .
With it you will have a standard to be applied and the absolute commitment to phase out leghold traps in Canada and Russia , and now that we have an agreement with the United States , in the United States as well .
Some questions have been asked about the strength of that commitment and of the derogation .
I want to make it quite clear that in the Commission 's view the derogation to the commitment to phase out the leghold traps is not possible and the Commission is behind the declaration that will be made at the time of the signing of the agreed minute with the United States making that quite clear .
I want to make it clear that as far as Canada is concerned if there were any attempt to use that derogation , we would activate the dispute settlement mechanism of the agreement in the confident belief that it would not permit such a derogation to be used .
In the case of the United States we are not restricted in any way and we could take immediate autonomous measures if there was any attempt to use that derogation including a reintroduction of the trade ban which I personally would unhesitatingly support .
Therefore this is an effective measure .
It does not go the whole way .
In the case of the United States it binds the states as well .
The United States is responsible for the commitment on the part of the states to honour this agreement .
As such it is unquestionably one which , of course , could be bettered , but which marks a significant improvement in animal welfare .
Only the agreement can do that .
Nothing else could and as far as selectivity is concerned , there is no reason to believe that is a serious problem .
It is undoubtedly the case that selectivity is really caused not so much by any particular type of trap but by the circumstances and natural conditions in which a trap is used .
As for the longer time for the United States , that is a consequence of the fact that the problem is more severe in the United States and it takes longer to get rid of it .
The fact of the matter is that we all share the same commitment .
The only question is how to go about it , how to bring about a significant improvement in animal welfare .
It is easy for Members of Parliament to say that this is not good enough .
But I should like to see them do better .
Of one thing I am quite certain : if there had been no agreement , not one single animal would be spared one moment of suffering .
With this agreement we will find the phasing out of the worst traps , the application of the standards and a significant improvement in animal welfare .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9.30 a.m.
Foodstuffs
The next item is the recommendation for the second reading ( A4-0379 / 97 ) on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , concerning the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting the European Parliament and Council Directive amending Directive 89 / 398 / EEC on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to foodstuffs intended for particular nutritional uses ( C40439 / 97-94 / 0076 ( COD ) ) ( rapporteur : Mrs Sandbæk ) .
Madam President , during the Environment Committee 's hearings on food and food legislation , Commissioner Bangemann of Germany said that the main aim of food legislation in the EU is that it should be consistent , simple , user-friendly and formulated in consultation with all the interests involved .
And precisely the same message is formulated in the Commission 's Green Paper on the European Union 's food legislation , which emphasizes that it is desirable to simplify and rationalise the Community 's food legislation to simply limiting its proposals to measures which are necessary to protect popular health and consumers .
I agree with that entirely .
Before a food can be defined as intended for special nutrition , it must meet specific nutritional requirements in some categories of people who cannot eat normal food , either because their digestion or metabolism is not working properly , or because they are in a specific physiological condition and may derive a particular benefit from a controlled intake of certain substances in their food .
Infants and young children are a class in themselves .
The Council should be praised for the fact that this definition has limited the original list of nine categories of food for special nutrition to five special directives .
But the list should have been four , because Parliament was correct when it said at the first reading that there were grounds for producing a special directive on food for sportspeople .
The labelling requirements of framework Directive 89 / 398 / EEC are quite sufficient to inform and protect consumers of food which is suitable for hard physical work , and article 7 of the directive in particular .
Simplifying the rules should not of course affect consumer protection or information .
But , in this instance , sportspeople are already covered enough .
There is also a serious risk that general foods with particular characteristics which are particularly suitable for sportspeople , such as pasta and some drinks , would be moved over to the special directive on sports food .
This would lead to considerable confusion amongst consumers and go directly contrary to the simplification of the rules in the single market which all Member States are already behind .
So , to me , it seems completely paradoxical that the Council now wants suddenly to re-establish the special directive on sports food .
And Amendment Nos 1 and 2 propose deleting it from the list again .
As far as Amendment Nos 3 and 5 are concerned , I do of course quite agree that no new food products should be used in baby food , and that this must be pesticide-free .
The Council says that special rules for pesticides in foods have already been laid down , but those rules have not been revised in the light of recent scientific knowledge .
Something should be done about this .
In any case , I cannot recommend voting in favour of these two amendments .
If , as the amendment proposes , we demand that the special directive should be called ' Processed and pesticidefree cereal-based foods and pesticide-free baby food for infants and young children ' , such a directive would have to be restricted to saying what the requirements for pesticide-free baby food are .
On the other hand , it cannot demand that there be no pesticides in baby food , because in that case of course the directive would be about pesticide-free baby foods .
It is all a question of semantics .
So , logically speaking , such a requirement for baby food could not be made in a directive with the name which the Commission has proposed , and the contents of which the Commission has already promised to amend by the end of 1998 .
The Commission should stick to this , and I would like to have a promise from the Commission here and now that consideration has been given to banning the use of new foods and pesticides in the directive .
It would also be advisable for the Commission to take the directive on mother 's milk substitutes up for review , as there are also problems here .
The problems in dealing with the special directives which have already been issued should lead us here in the European Parliament to accept that directives may be of a technical nature and yet also have a political content which cannot be left to a committee of experts , but which both the Council and Parliament should have the opportunity of commenting on .
I am pleased that the Council has raised the question of a special directive on food for diabetics .
All diabetics ' organizations are against the idea .
They feel that the marketing of and ready access to diabetic products creates false needs in diabetics and that diabetic products have no place in the contemporary treatment of diabetes .
Diabetics can and should live on ordinary food .
What matters is sensible information to consumers and a correct and above all individually tailored diet , and not labelling diabetic products in blue , as one special directive suggests .
Diabetic products contain high levels of harmful fat .
The product labelling is often deficient , and labelling is vitally important to diabetics , and they also typically cost up to 400 % more than ordinary products , which is a totally unnecessary and unreasonable financial burden to impose on diabetics .
The wish and initiative for a special directive comes only from Germany , which has an enormous food industry directed specially at diabetics .
There is a lot of money at stake .
I have accepted the Council 's compromise , namely that we should get the opinion of the scientific committee on foodstuffs before the question is settled finally .
I would like to end by calling on Parliament to accept the Council 's joint approach and the amendments proposed by the Environment Committee .
Madam President , before us today we have an amendment to framework Directive 89 , which relates to particular nutritional uses .
There was an argument between the Commission and the European Parliament about how many specific directives should be adopted .
This Parliament had already requested that foods for diabetics and sports foods should be covered by specific directives .
I realise that the Commission want to have fewer specific directives , but these products are already on the market , and many citizens are already used to them .
The problem is that if things are now changed in this way , people who are already used to a particular type of food will suddenly be effectively deprived of adequate information .
The Council has complied with the Parliament 's request .
It was particularly striking that the Council adopted this unanimously , which is why I am somewhat unhappy that it is now proposed to take sports foods back out , and with the support of the Socialist Group , who did not , incidentally , take that line during the first reading .
My group opposes taking out sports foods , so we shall not be voting for this amendment .
I believe that we should keep everything as it was originally .
Sports foods in particular need to be properly controlled , because consumers ' health is at stake , they have to be protected against false and inaccurate claims , not to mention the effect of such foodstuffs .
Nobody is obliged to buy foodstuffs of this kind , but we think that people who want to do so should also have the option of being provided with a high standard of information .
Madam President , there has been a great deal of talk this year about simplifying Community legislation .
The aim is not least to restrict vertical directives in favour of horizontal ones , so the natural consequence should be that vertical directives were only introduced when they were really necessary .
It is therefore remarkable , as the rapporteur has also said , that vertical directives on food for special nutrition are still being put forward .
It seems crazy to legislate for the Union 's sake on something which , when it comes down to it , means eating a lot of pasta and potatoes .
If we continue like this , there will be nothing which is not regulated .
There are two very basic problems with these superfluous special directives .
First , they send a signal to the population group in question that foods labelled in a given way are the most appropriate to east .
This is absolute rubbish .
There are quite ordinary foods which cover the need .
Second , foods for the special groups are often sold to consumers at inflated prices , precisely because ordinary consumers believe they are better than ordinary foods .
And here I think we are at the heart of the matter : precisely because it is a special directive for sportspeople which the Council has added .
There is a lot of money at stake here , the way this field has developed .
After all , sport has become the latest industry , with totally absurd lifestyle requirements , performance requirements and above all high earnings and not least profits for the people moving on the periphery of the sporting world .
If we want to get into sport , it should not be via a special directive on special food for sportspeople .
Of course there are special cases where special directives are in order , and particularly when it comes to food , but they must be limited to groups which are known to have special needs .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to appeal to you again in the strongest terms to support at second reading as well the amendment requiring baby food to be pesticide-free .
Mrs Sandbæk , you are mistaken in saying that is already covered , it is just the opposite !
There is still no agreement within the Commission that this food should be pesticide free .
It has merely been suggested to the committees that the German system , namely a zero detection limit , should be adopted .
But that does not mean pesticide-free .
I feel that particularly in an area as sensitive as baby food , the precautionary principle should apply .
Scandals in the past about baby food contaminated with lindane particularly disturbed consumers .
We have to make it clear that the precautionary principle must apply here .
It is possible to produce pesticide-free baby food , and the child 's body is after all especially sensitive to carcinogenic substances in food .
My last point is on sports foods .
I do not think that we should make special foods for every group , otherwise we will end up with MEP food , which might have to cater for the special condition needed for sessions which last late into the night !
We should also speak out against the use of novel food ingredients in baby food .
Madam President , I would also like to speak about baby food .
Like others in this House , my group is calling for a ban on pesticides in baby food , although I have to say that we believe this criterion will be met if the limit value set is close to the detection limit .
Unfortunately , the Commission has not got that far yet .
We are extremely annoyed that this subject has been repeatedly put off by the Commission , and that they quite simply do not get round to it .
Scientific data is already available , and there are clear grounds for saying that , for lindane for example , the limit value applying to adult foods is just not enough , and babies are clearly more sensitive than adults .
BSE should have taught us that whenever there is even a mere suspicion , we should take it very seriously and rule out any risk .
Now , maybe the Commission is going to say that this is the wrong place , and that this should not be sorted out here .
In that case , I wonder why the Commission has not yet sorted it out in the right place !
You should have decided on a limit value close to the detection limit long ago , and then we would not still be discussing this .
If you discuss this over the next few weeks , I hope it will be settled , and then there will not of course be any need for this amendment .
If you can say today that you will do that , then our amendment can be dropped .
But I appeal to the Commission to set really strict limit values .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the purpose of this proposal is to reduce the number of directives in this area .
Nonetheless , during the first reading , the Commission accepted Parliament 's request to add another group to the four originally proposed , namely foods for diabetics , and to define the conditions for using the terms ' low sodium ' and ' gluten-free ' .
The Commission submitted an amended proposal doing that .
The Council did not entirely share our views and wanted to replace diabetic foods with sports foods .
We were not convinced about the necessity to have a specific directive on sports foods and I am glad to see that view is widely shared here today .
We said so at the time .
We also said so in the Council where the Commission defended strongly our amended proposal .
The Council modified it against our will and sports foods , according to the Council 's common position , would be the subject of a specific directive .
As we said in our communication to you on the common position we do not agree with that and we consider that treating sports food separately is neither scientifically nor politically justified .
Amendment No 3 concerning the use of novel food ingredients is another matter .
This is not the right place to introduce such a provision .
In addition , I do not agree with this blanket prohibition since it is not necessary in the interests of the health of infants and young children .
There are rules concerning the use of these products in the Community which we think offer necessary guarantees .
With regard to the addition to the title of cereal-based foods and baby foods that they should be pesticide-free , our view is that this is not the right place to have such a compositional provision .
I am not able to say whether it would be considered appropriate elsewhere .
If it is to exist , the right place is in a specific Commission directive where we have delegated power to adopt and which is currently being prepared .
Parliament will be informed of that in accordance with the modus vivendi procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9.30 a.m.
Cofinancing with NGOs for developing countries
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0371 / 97 ) on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the common position established by the Council with a view to the adoption of a Council Regulation on co-financing operations with European non-governmental development organizations ( NGOs ) in fields of interest to developing countries ( C4-0442 / 97-95 / 0168 ( SYN ) ) ( rapporteur : Mr Paasio ) .
Madam President , the cofinancing of the projects and actions of the non-governmental organizations in development actions in the poor countries of the world and training for the development of Europe has probably been the most positive , dynamic and innovative sector in the external projection of the European Union for many years , utilizing the direct contribution made by civilized society in relation to the populations in the southern part of the world .
The current budget line B7-6000 has grown constantly over the years , thanks in particular to the boost given to the European Parliament and to a broadly positive assessment of the impact of the NGO actions .
It is natural for such an important sector of intervention to find its own clear and established legal basis : this is the objective of the draft Regulation that we are examining on a second reading today .
It should be pointed out , however , that , for over twenty years , the cofinancing of NGO projects has operated very well , even without a specific legislative regulation .
This has led us to consider , on the first reading , that we should not unnecessarily burden procedure that is already consolidated with useless , inefficient and binding regulations .
I am referring in particular to the aspects of setting up committees , which Council intends to introduce and which Parliament is contesting strongly .

Mr Paasio , whom I wish to thank , has done a good job , by managing to get the entire Committee on Development to agree to his amendments which , with the addition of amendment 9 , will receive the full support of the Group of the Party of European Socialists .
However , I would like to take the opportunity to extend my sincere thanks to our Parliamentary group for the denial and immense and complex work carried out in recent years by the NGO cofinancing unit of the European Commission , and ask the Commission to finally reinforce it in terms of staff .
I hope that , in the next few months , the work involved in defining the new regulations and general conditions for cofinancing that enable a leap in quality to be made in the management methods of the NGO projects by the European Commission will proceed .
Non-governmental cooperation in development has found and will find real and sincere support in our group .
As well as the more general means of cooperation , it is enabling the commitment to new subjects and new objects of human and participatory development to be refocused .
Madam President , I would first like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Paasio , and to congratulate him on his report .
This is actually his first report to the Parliament and I think that in conjunction with our group he has carried out this task admirably .
But I would also like to thank the organizations being discussed here , that is the nongovernmental organizations .
They do enormously important work for the European Union and for people in less developed countries .
In the first place , it is good that they make a contribution themselves and this means that the effectiveness of aid is automatically increased , as anyone collecting donations to a particular project has a great responsibility to make sure that the money is also spent properly .
Secondly , NGOs - especially church NGOs , but also many private initiatives - have partners on the ground whom they can trust and with whom they can work very well , and who also know the local structure very well .
That is why we should continue to help NGOs .
It is a good sign that we have already significantly topped up the relevant funding in the budget for next year .
However , there are also a few problems .
I cannot praise the staff in the unit which administers the relevant budget line too highly - from personal experience I can say that they seem to be very committed .
But the NGOs have a problem in that the time before an application is approved or rejected is very long .
Anybody who knows this business will confirm that it is simply not possible to withhold money for a whole year .
Once projects have been planned with partners , they have to be tackled sooner or later .
For that reason , I think that Amendment No 9 is very important , as it specifies that a reply has to be given within at most nine months .
I think that this actually possible in the present situation , difficult as it is for the staff , but we would also try to shorten the delay still further , and I therefore believe that this unit needs more staff .
I am not saying this to be entertaining , but because I really think that this needs looking at .
I am addressing this comment to Sir Leon Brittan but I also think that the other commissioners need to consider if in one of the Commission 's other Directorates-General there are not perhaps some staff who could be transferred to remove this bottleneck in DG VIII .
These people are really overloaded , and they need more staff so that the money for this important work can be properly administered .
Madame President , I would like to agree with some of the things which the previous speaker , Mr Liese , said about speed in dealing with resources .
It is vital for NGOs , which of course work in a different , unbureaucratic way , that business should proceed reasonably smoothly .
Also , there may well be some people who think that it is rather amazing that we are standing here and talking about how to aid NGOs because , after all , NGOs are just that - non-governmental .
And so of course it is being said that we will support NGOs financially without making them in our own image , because we need them , because they can do things which the public sector cannot .
Above all , they can look at the people they are working with on an entirely different equal principle , because they are not burdened by government bureaucracy , rules and regulations , having to justify every step etc .
And the people they talk with , and who do not agree with the NGOs , can speak out against them without needing to fear repression .
So NGOs should be supported .
On the other hand , the responsibility for how they are supported is still a democratic matter , and so democratic control is still needed .
But it is impossible to exercise democratic control in a completely closed system , and that is why I would like to emphasize the third section of Amendment No 7 , which says that meetings of the Committee of representatives of Member States which assists the Commission should be public unless there are convincing reasons to the contrary .
But what shall we do with this secretiveness ?
Openness is difficult , people have a tendency to meddle , but we are better off with it than without it .
Madam President , I would also like to stress that the non-governmental organizations are very valuable partners in aid work .
They show a great commitment , often great knowledge and often make a large voluntary contribution .
Therefore , as the good partners and good complement that they are for the other aid , they must be treated both with respect and trust .
We can best do that by providing efficient and correct processing of their project applications .
They should not be met by suspicion , almost insurmountable obstacles and complicated application forms , big bureaucracy and long waiting times .
I therefore welcome , as many others here have done , Amendment No 5 to article 6.1 of the report about limits on how long an application from the non-governmental organizations should be allowed to take .
It is good that there is now a clear regulation .
I am , however , convinced that cooperation with non-governmental organizations can be made more efficient . For example , by making more use of the opportunities for framework agreements , particularly with the large aid organizations which have a lot of experience and a high level of integrity .
It is , by the way , a method which I have discussed in a very positive spirit with Commissioner Pinheiro during a previous question time .
I believe we have an opportunity to go further in this area so that there is more time left to deal with applications from the small organizations which perhaps require not only an extra careful examination , but also advice about their work .
Madam President , I wish to begin by thanking Mr Paasio for the excellent quality of his report .
With regard to the personnel questions , I will draw the points that have been raised to the attention of my colleague , Mr Pinheiro .
Parliament , of course , has always attached the greatest importance to cofinancing the development NGOs , and has consistently increased the budget line for these activities .
On numerous occasions Parliament has reaffirmed the specific and irreplaceable roles of NGOs and the importance of their operations .
I fully share that view , as does the Commission as a whole , and this approach is reflected in the draft regulation , which the Commission welcomes and supports .
With regard to the eight amendments , the Commission can accept most of them , either because they reflect common goals already pursued and practices already followed by the Commission , or because their aim is to supply more complete information .
I refer here to Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 6 ( second and third parts ) , and 5 ( second part ) .
However , the Commission has problems with - for various specific reasons - Amendments Nos 5 ( first part and third part in its present form ) , 6 ( first part ) , 7 and 8 .
Amendment No 5 ( first part in its present form ) states that as a rule the Commission must decide within six months whether an operation presented by an NGO will be cofinanced or not .
We agree that an NGO has a right to a definite answer as quickly as possible and have no problem about the six-month deadline but we think there should be added to the amendment the words ' if during the appraisal of the application it appears that the application is incomplete , the abovementioned delay should run from the date of the reception of the information requested , that is to say not from the date of the application ' .
That is done specifically in order to avoid the rejection of many otherwise excellent projects for which full information has not been made available in time .
So we accept the spirit of the amendment but would like to add that further point .
Amendment No 5 , third part , though , is not acceptable because a one-month delay to check the completeness of the documents is already incorporated in the six-month delay , which I have just mentioned , and therefore is not necessary .
It is a drafting point and nothing more than that .
With regard to Amendment No 6 , first part , the deadline of 30 June of each year is unfortunately an unrealistic one and it would not be sensible to indicate our support for that .
Amendment No 7 states that the Commission is to be assisted by an advisory committee of the Member States .
We do not agree with that , because it is at variance with the solution already reached in the common position on comitology , which represents the only compromise that was possible after two years ' discussion with the Member States and we think we should now come to a decision .
Finally , with regard to Amendment No 8 , providing that the Council Regulation should be subject to revision after five years , if you look at the time taken in the discussion on the Regulation - which has already been going on for two and a half years - it is time to have some stability , and we would not favour a five-year revision period .
However , these are comparatively small points and most of the amendments we accept .
I should like to thank Parliament for its commitment over years in favour of development NGOs and their work , and underline our determination to continue to cooperate fruitfully with such NGOs for the benefit of the poorer sections of the population in developing countries .
Thank you very much , Mr Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9.30 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 12.36 a.m. )
Statement by the President
Before reading the Minutes , I have to take a decision which really affords me no pleasure .
Last night there was an unpleasant incident in the House when , for the first time ever , a Member of this Parliament physically attacked another Member of this Parliament .
The Rules contain plenty of measures for dealing with inappropriate behaviour , including extremely aggressive acts , and there are corresponding formalities .
We cannot allow verbal attacks , however aggressive , to lead to actual physical violence .
Mrs Hoff , who was in the Chair at that point in the sitting , issued the appropriate reprimand under Rule 109 of the Rules of Procedure , and at the same time announced that Rule 110 would be applied .
As you know - and I will read out the Rule - ' In serious cases of disorder , the President may , after giving formal notice , move , either immediately or no later than the next sitting , that Parliament pass a vote of censure which shall automatically involve immediate exclusion from the Chamber and suspension for two to five days . '
This morning 's sitting is the next sitting , and , pursuant to that Rule , I am obliged to move a vote of censure on Mr Rosado Fernandes , which would entail his suspension for two days .

As is reasonable , and laid down in paragraph 2 of the same Rule , Mr Rosado Fernandes is entitled to explain his behaviour to Parliament .
I ask Mr Rosado Fernandes whether he wishes to exercise that right , and naturally invite him to speak .
Mr Rosado Fernandes .
Mr President , I will speak in Portuguese , since I have the honour to be addressing a President who speaks my language .
Yesterday something happened which I would have liked to avoid , and which I am not proud of .
I find myself subject to disciplinary procedure and I no doubt deserve it .
But I would like to ask this House what any of us would do when a Member who has no knowledge of our lives and thinks we are not in the Chamber - and I was still in the Chamber , I had simply left my seat - says in front of everyone that I get money from the tobacco companies ?
In the first place , from the political point of view , it is easier to get money from the tobacco companies for speaking against European production than for speaking in favour of it , as I did in my report .
In the second place , I got up and told Mr Blak I was here - because he had been mistaken - I was here and I had heard what he said .
I just did not want to believe what I had heard .
I went up to him and asked him ' What did you say ? ' And he replied , in English because that was the language I used to him , ' You just get money from them ' .
Mr President , I am not made of wood , nor yet of stone .
I was brought up in an Iberian civilization where honour is still respected .
I have two daughters and I would like to them to take pride in their father 's name .
So I shall consider myself to have deserved whatever punishment Parliament sees fit to impose on me , but I shall not be ashamed of it !
The House has heard Mr Rosado Fernandes ' explanation and , without further debate , I put to electronic vote the proposal I made earlier to the House , that is to say , a vote of censure involving suspension for two days .
( Parliament approved the President 's motion )
In view of the outcome of the vote I am obliged to ask Mr Rosado Fernandes to be good enough to leave this House and return on completion of his two days ' suspension , and I rely on him to cooperate .
Mr Hänsch wishes to raise a point of order .
Mr President , since physical aggression against a member of my group has actually been applauded in this House , I must say , Mr President , that I would have welcomed a word of solidarity and sympathy from you for the victim of this attack , namely our colleague Freddy Blak .
If we are still on the same subject , I will invite Mr Giansily and no-one else to speak , because he is a member of Mr Rosado Fernandes ' group .

Mr Giansily .
Mr President , I do not wish to say any more on the incident just dealt with .
I would however like to say that it seems we are now about to vote , without a break , on an extremely important subject : the budget .
In view of what has just happened , I do not think our group will be able to vote calmly .
I would therefore like to ask for the sitting to be suspended for a few minutes to enable our group to hold a meeting .
Mr Giansily , as you know , the vote this morning will be long and very important .
I am sure that the members of your group will be able to cope and vote calmly .
We still have to approve the Minutes , which will give them time to think .
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
( The Minutes were approved )
Mr President , I have the following comment to make . I discovered this morning that a commemorative envelope has been issued , by the European Parliament , of Mr Georges Marchais , who approved of all the communist crimes , who supported the invasion of Poland , and the invasion of Afghanistan .
I would like to know how and on what basis this issue was decided .
Mr Gallou , it is not a European Parliament publication .
A private philately firm published the envelope .
So the European Parliament has nothing to do with this issue , which is completely private .
Mr Puerta has asked to speak .
I would ask him to be brief on this matter .
Accusations have been made against a person in his political group and I must provide the opportunity to rebut them , but I would thank him not to prolong the matter .
Mr Puerta .
Mr President , I must explain that I am the leader of a group which includes communist Members , although I am a socialist .
And I find what we have heard unacceptable .
It does not seem to me to be a fitting reply - if I may say this to you , Mr President - to say that the envelope in question was not officially published by Parliament .
Mr Marchais was the leader of a party which took part in all aspects of democratic life in France and tribute has been paid to him by French democrats , starting with the present French Prime Minister .
I believe he deserves much greater respect in this House than shown by the benches from which this unacceptable description , which I have to rebut , originated .
Ladies and gentlemen , I think the incident is closed .
Mr Lataillade .
Mr President , I returned to the European Parliament in September after a three-year absence .
I see here some familiar faces , some less familiar , and a number of issues which are apparently still recurring .
I do not want to talk about what took place earlier .
The House has imposed a sanction , which Mr Rosado Fernandez has accepted .
But I am concerned about the nature of the remarks I am hearing , here and there , accusing certain people , without evidence , of financial corruption .
I would be pleased , in this respect , if you would give the House all the documentation regarding anyone involved in any way in the design and construction of the Parliament buildings in Brussels , so that we do not have to listen here to libellous remarks which , I believe , might provoke Members to understandable , although inadmissible anger .
I should therefore be grateful , Mr President , if you would remind all the group leaders - and I am asking you this as a Member , returning to this House after a three-year absence , who is very surprised at the atmosphere he has found here - that Members should be more restrained , unless they are able to produce evidence to back up any libellous accusations they make .
Thank you , Mr President .
Thank you , Mr Lataillade .
Your remarks will be forwarded to the Conference of Presidents , whose members have , moreover , had the opportunity to hear to them personally .
Votes
Before the vote is taken , Mr Tillich , the rapporteur , wishes to make a brief statement .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I hope now that as we proceed to the vote on the budget it will help to calm things down somewhat .
I would request that you take note of two comments which have to be made before we move on to voting .
We have to make two technical corrections , and here I am asking for your understanding and approval .
The first correction concerns Amendment No 1 , which refers to the matter of Commission personnel attending last week-end 's summit .
For this reason the reference to last week-end 's summit must be deleted .
This is only one reference .
Then there is a further technical correction to be made to Amendment No 36 .
My proposal here is as follows : since Amendment No 36 contains an expression which is contrary to previous joint resolutions and designations , this should be adapted to comply with normal forms of designation and Amendment No 36 corrected accordingly , so that we can vote on it in the appropriate manner .
Mr President , let me dampen any feelings of preChristmas joy among the members of the Commission by saying that the rapporteur was referring only to the asterisk and not to any relinquishing of the reserve itself !
I only say this in order to keep pre-Christmas high spirits within reasonable limits .
Mr President , there is a Neapolitan expression , which I do not know how to translate , that says , " cà nisciuno è fesso ! '
I want to explain what Mr Tillich refers to as a " technical amendment ' .
The European Parliament has included in the 1997 budget an item for cooperation with the People 's Republic of China : it voted on it at first and second readings in 1997 ; it voted on it again on the first reading for the 1998 budget .
This Amendment No 36 falls into block 3 and the deadline for the submission of technical amendments or corrections expired at midday on Tuesday ; in fact , when I asked you if it was possible to include separate votes , yesterday at 6.30 p.m. , I was rightly told that the deadline had expired .
It seems strange and quite intolerable to me now to accept that the reference to this expression should be deleted : something has been voted through by the Chamber and it therefore has the force of res judicata , forms part of a block and now the rapporteur , not knowing what to do , tells us there is a correction , whereas it was included in last year 's budget and in this year 's budget .
I ask you , Mr President , not to accept this , precisely because , at least in principle , " cà nisciuno è fesso ' !
If I have understood correctly , one of the technical points mentioned by Mr Tillich is more in the nature of an oral amendment .
To be able to include it , I have to ask the House whether there are more than twelve Members who oppose it .
( More than twelve Members opposed the amendment , which was therefore rejected )
On the completion of voting , may I ask the Council whether it can agree with Parliament on the new maximum rate of cost increases on the basis of our deliberations ?
( The President-in-office of the Council agreed )
Thank you very much , Mr Fischbach .
I invite you to speak .
Mr President , the vote was over so quickly that it has taken me quite by surprise .
I would nevertheless like to tell you , Mr President , and all the honourable Members of this Parliament , that the Presidency is obviously delighted with the overall agreement we have reached on the 1998 budget .
This is in fact a good budget .
It is a good budget because it is the result of a good understanding , of mutual understanding between the two authorities , the two branches of the budgetary authority , but also and more importantly the result of close cooperation , based on mutual trust between the Council and Parliament , and today 's result has been achieved , Mr President , essentially thanks to Parliament , its Committee on Budgets , the chairman of that Committee and the two rapporteurs , Mr Tillich and Mr Tomlinson , whose commitment , enthusiasm and loyalty I have appreciated throughout this budgetary procedure .


Mr President , I would also like to conclude by thanking the Commission and in particular Commissioner Liikanen and his colleagues for their efforts , which have made a decisive contribution to this overall agreement .
My sincere thanks to you all .

I am obliged to Mr Fischbach for his remarks and declare that the General Budget for 1998 has been finally approved .
( The General Budget for 1998 was signed immediately thereafter )
Mr Chairman , I just wanted to say that it seems to me - and I think that the rapporteur agrees with me - that Amendments Nos 5 and 2 are perfectly compatible and can be combined .
Starting as you do with the vote on Amendment No 5 , Amendment No 2 can then be added - they are not mutually exclusive .

Mr President , I wish to reiterate what Mr Bourlanges has just said .
These two amendments are basically congruous and indeed Amendment No 5 could be a supplement to Amendment No 2 .
Even the other side of the House , which has shown itself keen to vote against the motion , could support an amalgamation of the two amendments .
I therefore recommend this to the House .
( Parliament approved the resolution as amended )
On behalf of this House , I should like to welcome the new bureau members from the Polish Delegation to the EU-Poland Joint Parliamentary Committee .
It is a great pleasure to have them with us this morning .
We welcome you and your delegation , Mr Mazowiecki , at this historic moment , following the European Union 's decision to commence negotiations for Poland 's entry in a few months ' time .
Mr President , you have taken the votes rather quickly .
I wanted to take the floor to request that Amendments Nos 168 , 104 and 172 be voted on together , as they are an addition .
As I have not had the time to speak , and neither has the rapporteur , I should like the opinion of the rapporteur to be requested with regard to these amendments .
Mr Pompidou , we did that on the responsible Committee 's recommendation .
That is why the rapporteur has not expressed an opinion .
If the responsible Committee considers them compatible , so must I.
Mr President , Mr Pompidou is absolutely right .
The amendment proposed by Mr Adam adds half a sentence at the end and we support that addition .
The rest remains the same .
The amendment proposed by the Liberal Group adds a further two words , namely materials and technologies .
Mr Adam also wishes to remove two other words , namely " new vessels ' .
We are against this deletion .
For my part , I am in favour of both amendments as additions .
Mr President , thank you very much indeed for your Christmas wishes .
Speaking for our group , I would be happy to persevere with the separate voting , as originally planned .
Thank you .
In relation to amendment No 122
Mr President , Amendment No 122 proposed by Mrs McNally and others on behalf of the Socialist Group provides for the creation and development of supporting measures for businesswomen .
A separate programme dedicated to female entrepreneurs , namely the Now programme , has already been set up under the European social fund , and I do believe it is more logical to combine our efforts in this area .
I only say this by way of explanation .
We support the proposal in principle , but believe that it is somewhat out of place here .
I am sorry , Mrs Quisthoudt-Rowohl , but we have already dealt with that amendment and we cannot revert to it at this stage in the voting .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Madam President , as you heard , yesterday the Commission expressed great goodwill towards the European Parliament . I should however like the following point to be brought to the attention of the Bureau .
I asked a written question on the Commission 's information policy . Mr Santer replied that to answer the honourable ( of course ! )
Member 's questions in detail would necessitate a large amount of research , which the Commission was not able to undertake at that time . I do not mind being told , in so many words , that I am of no account and quite useless , but I would however like to ask the Bureau to examine the Commission 's attitude to a question , which it would not actually have cost much to answer !
Mrs Dury , I am very pleased to refer your remark to the Bureau , especially as I know what the question you asked was , and I consider that it was justified .
It would have been very useful for you to receive a reply .
I will try to ensure that you do .
After the vote on Amendment No 2
Madam President , I have already addressed the House on the subject of the motion , though this had little impact .
I find it strange that while our committee is busy drawing up a position on UCLAF , the chairman of that committee is at the same time engaged in anticipating the possible results of these deliberations .
That is all I want to say about the amendment which has just been voted on here .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Madam President , I would like to ask the Group of the Party of European Socialists to withdraw their demands for roll-call votes because we already know what the Parliament 's position is .
It is not necessary to resort to a roll-call vote every time for things which are pretty clear .
Mr Anastassopoulos , I think this is a sensitive issue , but as we have been asked to hold these roll-call votes , we must do so , except of course , if the Socialist group withdraws its requests .
However , I do not think that is the case .
After the vote on paragraph 7.2
Madam President , please forgive me but do the political groups realise that each roll-call vote costs the European taxpayer ECU 1 , 000 ?
Mr Anastassopoulos , that is the price of democracy .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
- Mr President , my group was unable to vote , at second reading , for the 1998 budget of the European Union .
We therefore did not join in the consensus the President applauded just now .
In fact , we noticed that at second reading , the House drew back compared with the vote at first reading .
At that time , in fact , the majority of the House had increased the Council budget from 0.7 % to 2.7 % , the same increase as in the expenditure of the European Union .
At second reading , in accordance with some of the Council 's proposals , the budget increase is 1.4 % .
It is a step , but not a sufficiently large one .
We regret that an effort was not made with regard to structural actions , as well as agricultural expenditure and heading 3 and 4 expenditure .
The commitment made in Edinburgh does not , in this respect , justify maintaining expenditure , which , we are perfectly aware , will not be made in the coming year .
We also regret that the budget has not achieved a zero growth rate , which would have been possible , if the Council 's budget had been followed .
The increase in expenditure allows an increase in national contributions of 1.29 % compared with a 1.39 % increase in expenditure .
If the French budget , for example , increased by so much , my country would not be able to comply with one of the important criteria of the Maastricht Treaty , the budget deficit criteria .
Relative to the Council 's second reading , the proposal from the Committee on Budgets represents an increase in the payment appropriations by around ECU 500 million , or just over SKR 4 billion .
The actual payments are approximately unchanged .
We are opposed to increasing payment appropriations , quite simply because ( sooner or later ) this must be taken from the national budgets , such as Sweden 's .
That means increased income for the EU leads to increased costs for the Swedish national budget , something which will ultimately express itself in cutbacks in Swedish public services .
Even though the EU 's expenditure is deserving ( such as investment in employment ) , it will have the negative result of affecting the Swedish budget .
For this reason we entirely share the government 's objective that the EU 's budget should be kept as tight as possible .
We have particular reservations with regard to appropriations under heading 3 - internal measures .
Parliament 's first reading represents a large increase ( almost ECU 600 million ) in commitment appropriations compared with the Council 's first reading .
The increases relate to appropriations for an employment initiative ( 150 ) , youth exchange and youth training ( 100 ) , information ( 50 ) , social measures ( 50 ) and culture and sport ( 20 ) .
The almost ECU 600 million which makes up the difference between the Council 's and the European Parliament 's first reading includes an item for ECU 200 million which Parliament has combined with the ECU 150 million which has been proposed for employment .
The European Parliament has also said it would leave this ECU 200 million unused on condition that the Council decides on a legal basis for ECU 150 million for an employment initiative .
A legal basis is required to be able to pay out the funds .
If the Council does not meet the European Parliament half way , it has said that it intends to try to spend the whole amount of ECU 350 ( 200 + 150 ) million .
We think this attitude on the part of the European Parliament is quite wasteful .
Since we do not sit on the Parliament 's Committee on Budgets , it is difficult for us to influence the content of the budget .
We have strong reservations about this budget , but we have chosen to show solidarity with our group and to vote for the draft budget in the final vote .
As far as the budget resolution is concerned we are voting for Amendments Nos 3 and 4 .
We believe the European Parliament should set up a travel card , like the one which exists in the Swedish Parliament .
We welcome the main priorities for next year 's budget which have been set up with regard to the EU 's new employment initiative and the employment measures of the Member States .
We also welcome the proposal to introduce a new procedure for the EU 's contribution with more open criteria .
We are pleased to note the present proposal on setting up a separate budget item for environmentrelated measures for the Baltic Sea area .
It is also gratifying to see that the proposed agricultural expenditure for the 1998 budget is going to fall compared with this year 's expenditure level .
However , this is not enough .
We recommend a deep and extensive reform of the common agricultural policy .
That is important not least in view of the forthcoming enlargement of the EU .
We think , for example , that it would be wrong in principle to continue to subsidize tobacco growing within the EU .
However , it is difficult not to notice the contradiction which governs EU 's policy .
On the one hand Community funds are used for the production of a harmful product with little market value .
And on the other hand funds are used for measures against cancer .
It is quite unacceptable to support a sector producing a product which damages public health .
We shall therefore continue to press for an end to the tobacco subsidies .
As far as travel allowances for Members of Parliament are concerned , we are working to change the current system .
Earlier we presented proposals for a thorough overview of the system and together with other Members put forward an amendment aimed at replacing standard amounts with actual costs .
In order to avoid misunderstanding we therefore voted for Amendment No 3 , in the same spirit , even though it is not identical to our original proposal .
We have voted no to the report .
Parliament 's first reading , which involved an increase of ECU 1.7 billion in payment appropriations compared with the Council 's first reading , entailed an extra SKR 400 million for the Swedish treasury in membership fees .
The increase in support for structural funds alone cost around an extra SEK 250 million .
This increase remains in the Council 's and Parliament 's agreement prior to the second reading .
The cutbacks which the Council has proposed are partly in heading 1 , i.e. agricultural aid , and partly in headings 3 and 4 .
However , in the past agricultural aid has been overbudgeted and the surplus has been returned to the Member States .
Thus the drain on the Swedish treasury caused by Parliament 's first reading largely remains .
As at first reading we question the efficiency of the methods of financing the employment initiative .
At second reading of the 1998 budget we have acted largely in the same way as we did at first reading .
Unfortunately voting is made difficult by the fact that nearly all the amendments are put into blocks , which means that people cannot express their dissatisfaction with individual items in the blocks .
That is a shame .
Within one block there may be both good and bad proposals .
Furthermore , the majority in Parliament has once again voted down our proposal to reform the system of travel allowances ( Amendment No 3 ) .
The system which means that Members are able to stuff money into their own pockets can therefore continue . We are strongly opposed to that .
It should go without saying that we Members should only be reimbursed for the actual costs of our travel .
We have also voted against paragraph 11 which concerns ' a common information policy ' , since experience so far has shown that the EU 's campaigns are not objective and only express one side of the issue .
We also voted against paragraph 12 concerning the programme for controlled thermonuclear fusion .
The Danish Social Democrats support the proposal that the EU should give aid towards setting up an information centre for organic farming in the EU .
Converting from conventional farming to organic farming is a necessary and natural development , which the EU should give high priority .
We also believe there should be strict control of the money which is set aside for Turkey in the budget .
We believe it is important that all 11 official languages should continue to have the same official status : so we support continuing to set aside the full amount for translating the debates of the European Parliament .
We also support the idea that there should be more control of MEPs ' travel expenses .
Travel expenses should be reimbursed at the amounts actually paid , and we are pleased that we already need to furnish proof that trips were actually made .
During this Parliament I have twice refused to vote for the budget because it contained not a single mention of support for bee-keeping in Europe .
It was my way of protesting about the Commission 's failure over the years to submit to us any proposals for a regulation or directive - despite the fact that this subject has been of concern to us since 1985 - for creating the legal basis for making money available in the draft budget for this purpose .
In this respect the cat seems to have bitten its own tail .
We made a unanimous request in Parliament for the support of apiculture .
The Council of Ministers was able , quite justifiably , to refuse this since , as I have said , there was no legal basis for such expenditure .
Now at last we have the legal basis we need , even though I would say that the mountain has only brought forth a mouse , since the regulation adopted by the Council of Ministers in June for measures to improve the production and marketing of honey falls far short of the unanimous proposals of this Parliament .
What is more , the Commission even managed to do this by putting ECU 12 million less credit in the draft budget than it itself claimed its halfhearted proposals would cost .
Well , that really is the limit !
As rapporteur , I have therefore been concerned that at least ECU 3 million more be allocated in the 1998 budget to promote the development of apiculture .
I am grateful to our Agriculture Committee , our Budget Committee and also to the Luxembourg Presidency for the fact that the budget now has ECU 15 million , rather than ECU 12 million , for promoting the production and marketing of honey .
It must be the first time this has been achieved in the face of compulsory expenditure , even if this represents peanuts compared with the ECU 65 million requested by this Parliament on the basis of my request for sound structural measures , including the pollination premium .
It really is peanuts when one considers that we have money enough for all kinds of possible and impossible actions around the world , that we can reconcile ourselves to the misappropriation of ECU 60 billion , yet are simply incapable of making a trifling 0.08 % of our total expenditure available for vital activities . After all , did Einstein not say that without bees mankind would die out within two years ?
For all this , I feel that I can agree to this year 's budget with a better conscience , though not without affirming my continued intention to fight for proper aid and structural measures to assist our apiculturists .
At this second reading Parliament is accepting the Council 's proposal for the 1998 budget cutting a further ECU 1.1 million from spending on payments .
At this second reading Parliament is accepting that the Council 's final proposal for the 1998 budget therefore remains at a level of 1.14 % of GDP , the same spending level , when at Edinburgh in 1992 , in the light of financial perspectives for the period 1994 to 1999 , it had been decided that it should be increased to 1.26 % of GDP .
Thus Parliament is accepting the continuation of an austerity policy merely in order to try to meet the nominal convergence criteria laid down in the Maastricht Treaty .
As Mr Tillich 's report says , Parliament accepts the establishment of strict budgetary objectives , which meet the need to respect the criteria imposed for economic and monetary union and the single currency , by approving reductions in payment appropriations to levels below those proposed at the first reading of the budget .
The budget still provides no complete solution to the problem of unemployment and social exclusion in the European Union today , with 18 million unemployed and 50 million people excluded .
The ECU 150 million proposed by the Council for the 1998 budget after the Luxembourg summit on employment are no more than a palliative ; the sums allotted show how important the subject really is .
The Council has not even accepted Parliament 's earlier proposal to allocate ECU 391 million as an employment incentive , although , as we said at the time , those were not additional funds but were transferred from other allocations .
Parliament is now accepting the amendment of its proposal and will only be allowing ECU 150 million .
We do not agree with that position , the less so because over ECU 100 million are going to be spent on information operations , and ECU 42 million are going to be made available for advertising the euro alone .
It is also clear that the objective of creating budgetary savings to enable us to finance the costs of enlargement within the present limits of our financial perspectives , using the Commission 's Agenda 2000 proposal as a framework , is still inherent in this budget .
For all these reasons we are opposed to Mr Tillich 's report .
In this context , I think we should be pleased with ourselves for refusing to give the Council 's proposal to cut ECU 1 billion from the structural funds a second reading .
We are also pleased that some of our proposals have been included in this budget ( East Timor , small-scale coastal fishing , the REPAS system , among others ) .
Mr President , my group voted in favour of the Giansily report although I expressed strong reservations about it yesterday .
That is because we are very pleased that the House has shown a sense of political responsibility , although by a small majority , true , and one swallow does not make a summer .
In recent weeks , great excitement has in fact been aroused by the rapporteur 's proposal to re-establish the ECSC levy .
The vote was contested , but common sense prevailed .
Indeed , this House pronounced itself in favour , in a resolution of 21 April 1994 , of the early abolition of the ECSC levy , in order to increase the competitiveness of the coal and steel industries , whose difficulties in all European Union countries are well-known .
The Commission , usually unwilling to give up any resources , even recommended that it should be abolished , and we were going to maintain a tax , saying - what a surprise ! - that it was the only Community tax in existence .
In our eyes , that is no reason to keep it , in fact it is another reason to abolish it .
The European iron , steel and coal industries already contribute , as does every other industrial sector , by means of ordinary taxation , towards the initiatives adopted by the Member States and the European Union , in favour of job creation .
These industries are in trouble .
The part-session was right to vote in favour of the amendment , which enabled the ECSC levy to be abolished forever .
Thus , these companies will be able to make a useful contribution , at their own levels , towards the prevention of unemployment , and we will not have make their difficult situations worse .
How can we fail to applaud that decision ?
There is no way in which I can vote for this report , because it proposes the reintroduction of the production duty of 0.11 per cent for Member States .
That means a further burden will be put on the EU Member States ' membership fees .
The economies of the Member States are stretched and they have more deserving expenses to cover .
In Sweden 's case cutbacks in nursing , care and education are currently taking place .
There is no way in which I can support the absurd proposal made in this report .
Sandbæk recommendation ( A4-0379 / 97 )
The Danish Social Democrats have voted in favour of this report today .
We are against special directives for sportspeople , because sport can cover a lot of things , and children and young people involved in sport will prefer sports drinks to soft drinks ; they can be half the size but contain the same amount of energy .
Each sport has its own requirements , but the energy required can be easily met by using normal food and drink tailored to the individual sportsperson involved .
Rules on special nutrition should only be issued if they are unavoidably necessary for consumers , which is why we go in for directives such as mother 's milk replacements and mixed supplements for infants and young children .
We do this because we want to ensure that food lives up to certain health requirements .
We support the amendment that there should not be any pesticide residues in baby food , a proposal which the European Parliament passed at its first reading .
Paasio recommendation ( A4-0371 / 97 )
To many societies , non-governmental development organizations , so-called NGOs , make a major contribution towards ensuring democracy , human rights and so on .
It is therefore in Europe 's interest to support these organizations ; but of course we should be careful about who gets Community aid and why .
On this point , it is very pleasing to note that the Council and Parliament agreed on most areas right from the start .
The Council has adopted some of the constructive proposals which Parliament put forward at the first reading .
So I can therefore give the report my full support .
We should not be continually reinventing the wheel ; instead we should be taking advantage of the invaluable experience and skills that NGOs have .
The budget line for cofinancing with European NGOs is therefore important , and is a good basis for helping the developing countries .
NGOs are normally happy with it , and it means amongst other things that NGOs from countries where governments do not approve large budgets also have an opportunity of working in developing countries .
But in this partnership , it is important that NGOs retain their autonomy and independence .
It may be added that if resources are not used up , this is not the fault of the NGOs ' abilities or the number of applications , but because the Commission does not have the resources to deal with the proposals received from NGOs .
This has the paradoxical effect that the NGOs , and also ( which is even worse ) the poor of the developing countries are punished because the Commission does not have the necessary capability .
The change of personnel which the Scandinavian NGOs have seen , for example , means that any continuity disappears .
In dealing with applications , the Commission should use experience from some of the national systems .
For example , the fact that the Commission is slow in replying makes the job of the NGOs more difficult , and even prevents work being done .
That is why the proposal to simplify the changes to the general cofinancing conditions are necessary .
As far as the CSP ( cofinancing support programme ) is concerned , where NGOs in the home country appoint an organization or individual to screen proposed projects before they are sent into the Commission ( to improve the quality of the projects ) , we are led to propose that this arrangement should be only temporary .
We cannot have the NGOs doing the Commission 's job just because the Commission is unable to .
The CSP arrangement is mainly funded through the cofinancing budget line ; and money used for advice cannot be used for good NGO projects which might help people in the third world .
But , at the same time , the CSP scheme acts as a good consultancy function for small NGOs in particular and as such is essential .
I would therefore argue in favour of the CSP scheme being retained but not financed via the budget line for cofinancing .
Changes to the cofinancing line which provides support for the NGOs , that is , a sum of money instead of project-byproject support , are also welcome , but we must make sure that there is still enough money for the smaller NGOs which cannot handle this programmed support .
Community project funding is normally limited to 50 % .
This is a sound principle , that NGOs should be self-financing to some extent .
But the Commission has had ideas about changing the interpretation of what form this self-funding should take .
The Commission has taken it to mean that NGOs should collect money in their home countries .
But such an interpretation creates problems for NGOs in Scandinavia and the Netherlands amongst others .
In Denmark , for example , some additional financing is via government funds .
The Danes find paying for development aid via tax quite natural .
If Danish NGOs are to collect money for aid via collections , most people would have problems with that .
Danes believe that the authorities raise money for the NGOs who do the work and that NGOs ' independence is not threatened by DANIDA .
If the Commission changes the self-financing rules and their interpretation , this would be contrary to the principles of Danish development aid .
I support the Paasio report and the committee 's amendments , which tighten up the Community 's approach on a number of points - but not Amendment No 7 .
This calls for an advisory rather than a management committee .
I am against the whole committee idea in principle , it is undemocratic and closed .
But because of the problematic way the EU system is set up , especially in terms of the Commission 's powers , I would rather see a management than an advisory committee .
That would bind the Commission and ensure that national representatives are involved in the process .
I am of course voting in favour of the section on openness .
Giansily Report ( A4-0409 / 97 )
Our present debate has no particular national significance , at least not for my country .
I shall , therefore , allow myself the luxury of addressing you in a language which those directly interested in the directive we are debating can understand in its full and plain directness .
Those interested are mainly the European financial community who are today scoring an important victory insofar as they are having a longstanding demand of theirs satisfied .
By means of the directive , banks and other financial institutions are given the opportunity to shake off the shackles , or what they perceive as shackles , of the regulatory authorities imposing on them minimal capital requirements for the sake of the security of their customers and for safeguarding the safety of the banking system against systemic risks .
From now on banks and financial institutions , using sophisticated mathematical models of recent vintage will be in a position to estimate the market risk they bear and themselves assess the amount of capital to be earmarked against such risk .
This new power banks and financial institutions can use for good or for evil .
They are enabled to utilize their capital more economically and to better effect under their new freedom of making their arrangements .
Alternatively , they are also put in a position to longer conceal desperate practices which banks , faced with failure , sometimes have resort to ; when under the pressure of bad fortune or of an accumulation of mistakes they decide to go for broke , to use a popular expression .
Against the possibility of such abuses no legislation can ever be totally foolproof .
The directive contains certain safeguards and Parliament has added certain others , trying with great moderation and deliberation to balance the need for flexibility in business against due regard owed to the general interest .
I regret that the industry concerned , judging from the quality of the lobbying to which it exposed us , has not given much evidence of either moderation or deliberation .
This should not incite either Council or Parliament to deprive them of the latest tools of their trade .
I hope , however , that the Commissioner will also pay proper attention to the safeguards and reasonable limits imposed by Parliament 's amendment .
It would be dangerous , on matters like this , for the industry to acquire delusions of omnipotence which might lead it to irresponsibility , for the financial sector to deem itself superior to the dictates of the real economy or for a government of money , by money and for money to become normal practice in this our European Union .
Pimenta Report ( A4-0325 / 97 )
I can only support catching wild animals being done in a humane way , with no risk to endangered species or natural habitats .
I therefore support the Commission 's work on establishing a European hunting standard and regret that the USA , Canada and Russia are not immediately willing to sign an international treaty which ensures that wild animals are hunted humanely .
I also believe , however , that the disagreements between the USA , Canada , Russia and the EU should not lead to a " minor trade war ' , but that we should strive for an amicable settlement without a dispute in the World Trade Organization ( WTO ) .
I have to agree with the rapporteur that this draft agreement between the EU , Canada and Russia is simply unacceptable .
The three sides are at least talking about acting against these cruel animal traps .
But such agreements must be tougher than this .
They need to ensure the humane killing of animals which may be trapped but remain alive in terrible pain .
The EU should insist that its own experts ' view prevails so that the maximum time between trapping and the animal losing consciousness is 30 seconds .
Just as we are moving to ban landmines which kill and maim so many of our own species , we have a responsibility to defenceless animals to get rid of as many leghold traps as we can , making those that remain as painless as possible .
People who may still need to hunt for food no longer need to use such painful and archaic killing technology .
And we cannot justify using cruel leghold traps to catch animals for their fur when alternative clothes can be manufactured .
The many members of the public who ask me about animal welfare demand better than this - and the animals that suffer slow and painful deaths deserve better than this .
EU negotiators should be told to fight on for a stronger deal involving more countries .
Such a policy may not be easy , but like so many of my constituents , I believe it is right .
Scapagnini Report ( A4-0308 / 97 )
We are strongly opposed to the report 's proposals in paragraphs 2 and 3 for a supranational European energy policy .
Supranational control would make the issue less clear in the democratic debate .
Energy policy must be under democratic control .
In its communication the Commission is seeking a common energy policy for the Union .
It is questionable whether that is the most pressing measure in the area of energy in Europe .
Giving priority to security of supply , sustainable development and long-term objectives for the environment and emissions are important starting points .
We could achieve these objectives even more easily through a variety of energy sources which can broaden the supply base and at the same time still satisfy the sustainability and environmental requirements .
This includes solar , wind and biomass energy .
If a common energy policy is introduced , the Euratom Treaty should be abolished and replaced with a programme of environmentally friendly , long-term sustainable sources of energy which fit into the recycling society of the future .
I am pleased to express my full support for the report drawn up by Dr Scapagnini , the Chairman of the competent Parliamentary Committee on the Commission Communication , which gives us a global vision of our policy and actions in the field of energy .
This is only the beginning of that promised " global vision ' .
The document will certainly be amplified and improved in the near future , and I would like to encourage the Commission to do so .
I therefore wish to refer only to the Energy Committee ´ s report .
Firstly , I am sorry that there is still no section on energy in the treaties , including the Amsterdam Treaty .
This means that we have no legal basis for getting started on that desirable global vision in the Union .
The European Commission ´ s effort to be open , as demonstrated by the rapporteur , is laudable .
That effort enables us to enquire which sources of energy protect the environment , create employment and improve the quality of life .
Points 7 and 11 of the report deserve to be emphasized : the first , for its reference to the desirability of a political agreement on renewable energy sources and its explicit mention of natural gas as a possible " long-term risk for the Union ' ; and the second , because it highlights the " desirability of giving priority to renewable sources ' so that the priority in question can be given to the fifth R & D framework programme , which certainly was not sufficiently clear from the European Commission ´ s proposal .
Point 12 also deserves emphasis , because it calls for " financing over several years ' which will make it possible to undertake " significant actions ' , particularly in the field of renewable energy .
I therefore cannot help sharing the strength of feeling with which the rapporteur attacks the cuts - which I consider intolerable - in the budgets for energy programmes as useful as Altener , Save and Joule-Thermie .
This is particularly absurd when the Commission has just completed a lengthy process by finally presenting us with White Paper on renewable energy sources .
I heartily welcome the Commission 's overview of EU energy policy and measures .
This could help ensure a more coordinated EU energy policy in future , as energy and rising energy consumption in particular are becoming increasingly important at both European and world level .
On the other hand , the report points to a number of areas where the Commission 's proposals could usefully be bettered .
First , the committee would like a clear statement by the Commission on the future energy policy 's effects on the environment , standards of living and the quality of life in individual Member States ; second , the committee wishes to emphasize the importance of the Commission doing more on EU initiatives on renewable energy sources .
Mr Scapagnini welcomes the Commission 's communication , with which I can only agree .
The overview is useful and a contribution to more transparency in the field of energy .
It is clearly intended to contribute towards more coordination of efforts for a better and more effective energy supply .
In particular , I support the comments in section 9 of the report , which regrets the drastic cuts in the section of the EU budget on energy .
But there are a number of points which I would like to criticize , especially grounds D and E. Mr Scapagnini is not bothered about dearer energy prices .
I disagree totally .
I believe energy consumption should be expensive , for both industry and individuals , for environmental reasons .
Without a high price policy , energy saving measures will just be so much hot air .
But my main concern is the highly positive view of the nuclear power industry in Europe .
In section 11 of the report , the rapporteur wants to promote the Community institutions involvement in developing the nuclear sector because of the major role it plays in the EU 's energy policy .
These arguments are a good example of how the nuclear power lobby is out to win back ground .
Now they play down the situation and say that nuclear power can be put to good use to reduce CO2 emissions .
I believe that nuclear power should be rejected categorically now as it was before .
As we know , it has other , unpleasant consequences and should be a footnote in the history of energy .
In any case , conventional nuclear power stations use imported fuel ( uranium ) .
Increasing use of this technology therefore merely shifts our dependence on the ' oil states ' to the ' uranium states ' .
The cost of extracting uranium is imposed on aboriginal peoples everywhere in the shape of the inhuman effects of radiation which affect both humans and animals .
Then of course there are the well-known objections to this technology , not least in terms of waste .
Finally , I would like to point out that if we look at annexe 2 to the Commission 's document more closely , it is striking to see what a ridiculously small amount is set aside for renewable energy compared with the figure allotted to the nuclear sector .
This distribution is completely at odds with the political signals which are being sent out by Parliament 's Committee on Environment and the political intentions expressed by many of the Member States .
Despite these points of criticism , I have decided to vote in favour of Mr Scapagnini 's report for the reasons I first mentioned .
European Council
Mr President , the Luxembourg Council has slowly moved towards the affirmation of a truth which will be revealed at a later date , because at present it would sound too harsh to the ears of supporters of the super-state : an enlarged Europe would not be able to conform to the monolithic model which is already unsuitable for the fifteen .
Paragraph 3 of the summit 's conclusions reiterates that enlargement will necessitate the prior reform of the institutions , in compliance with the guidelines of the Amsterdam Treaty .
What does the treaty say ?
That at least a year before the twenty-first accession , a complete re-examination , and I repeat , a complete re-examination of the provisions of the treaties with regard to the composition and operation of the institutions , will have to be carried out .
The words ' complete re-examination ' show that this will not simply be a question of redefining the number of commissioners and re-balancing the distribution of votes in the Council .
It will not necessarily mean extending the scope of the qualified majority decision as proposed by three Member States in a declaration appended to the treaty .
But it is in fact significant that only three Member States are involved .
It shows that all the others consider that extending the majority vote is hardly an appropriate solution to the growing heterogeneity of the European Union .
So , what is the solution ?
What should this complete re-examination consist of ?
The conclusions of the Luxembourg summit show the way , and at the same time , constitute an experiment . A European conference involving the Member States and the applicant countries would provide a multilateral framework of political consultation and cooperation , particularly with regard to foreign policy and security .
We have before us the outline of a pattern of differentiated cooperation , which will tomorrow allow all our eastern European partners to be flexibly included .
Some belittle this innovation , suggesting that it means the organization of a transitional ' platform ' for eastern Europe , which will facilitate the construction of federalism in western Europe .
But they are wrong .
For , when this interesting example of an experiment in free cooperation has proved successful , it will be difficult to contain .
Mr President , the subjects covered during the Summit in Luxembourg serve one purpose : stability , security and peace .
I am afraid I have to observe that , the Union 's relationship with Turkey is not very reassuring as regards this stability , security and peace .
Let me say clearly , Mr President , that Turkey is evidently good enough to defend the borders of Europe as a member of NATO , but there it ends .
I find this attitude dangerous , destabilizing and unacceptable , the more so because the Union has in no way fulfilled its obligations under the customs union .
Unfortunately , Turkey did not do so either .
But it is in the interests of neither the Union nor Turkey to allow the relationship to deteriorate further .
It is important to stop the verbal abuse on both sides , and to take a EU conciliation initiative , Mr President , before the United States , as usual , fulfils its responsibilities in this region , unlike the Union .
First of all I would like to congratulate the Luxembourg Presidency .
It has been a successful presidency and once again demonstrates the ability of small nations to undertake such a task .
The Luxembourg Presidency has had many notable successes .
For me , the most important have been the convening of the jobs Summit and the agreement on the enlargement process .
With regard to enlargement , I am particularly pleased that the Heads of State responded positively to the views of the European Parliament .
It was important to send a positive message to all applicant countries .
In this way we prevent demoralization developing among citizens in those countries who would have been placed in a second wave of accession .
Furthermore , by adopting an inclusive approach , we are also encouraging potential foreign investment in these countries and it should be stressed that this is critical if they are to bridge the economic gap between themselves and their future European partners .
This truly historic decision brings to an end the legacy of the Cold War .
However I am disappointed that a rift is developing between the EU and Turkey .
I hope that this can be healed as I strongly believe that eventually Turkey will provide an important bridgehead between the EU and the Islamic world .
Despite this setback it was nonetheless a successful Summit and provided a fitting conclusion to the Luxembourg Presidency .
The Danish Social Democrats have today voted , along with the rest of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , in favour of the resolution on the Luxembourg Presidency .
We would like to point out that Denmark has four reservations which keep it out of some areas of EU cooperation .
At the same time , we believe that reforming the EU 's institutional framework is not a precondition for the EU being able to start initial negotiations with the new Member States .
It is with very great pleasure that I am voting in favour of this resolution .
The EU summit in Luxembourg on 12 and 13 December 1997 took a historic step towards unifying our continent , which for decades has been divided and ravaged by bloody wars , violent dictatorships and poverty .
The decision by the summit to initiate an admission process covering the ten applicant nations of central and eastern Europe and Cyprus ushers in a new era of European development .
It is incredibly positive that the Heads of State and of Government of the EU are following the recommendations which the European Parliament passed by a large majority immediately before the summit .
From a Danish point of view , I would like to emphasize how important it is that the extension should include all three of the Baltic countries , Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania , our neighbours on the Baltic .
At the same time , I would like to stress the importance of the extension process covering all the applicant nations of central and eastern Europe on the same footing .
The decisions of the Luxembourg summit mark a new historic period in the evolution of the European Union .
Enlargement towards the countries of eastern Europe , without exclusions , that is , the ten applicant countries , including Bulgaria and Romania ) and the priority given to the accession of Cyprus guarantees real European integration , putting an end once and for all to the divisions of the past .
It is very clear that , in this perspective , only those countries can take part which respect and accept the terms and conditions and the regulations that have been set .
Turkey is not one of those countries .
Yesterday 's words of praise for the Council , the applause for what has been achieved and the affirmations of the whole House all seem very strange indeed when one recalls the resolutions of this House in advance of the Luxembourg summit .
Dissatisfaction with the meagre results of the Amsterdam negotiations , the call for an immediate introduction of the internal reform process , criticism of the Commission 's proposal for Agenda 2000 and last but not least the request for a simultaneous process of negotiation for all membership candidates , now seem all but forgotten .
The European Parliament 's current resolutions are nothing short of self-censorship .
However , even this coating of gloss cannot obscure the fact that the Council in Luxembourg has not succeeded in offering all applicants for membership real prospects for membership and negotiation - apart that is from the proposed and purely symbolic joint preliminaries to the membership process .
This is justified by the claim that one should negotiate with the economically and socially most advanced applicants in the hope that the stragglers will eventually catch up .
This shifts all responsibility for the course of the enlargement process on to the candidates themselves .
Here economic arguments have to serve as a pretext for political despair , a policy which is all too common these days .
Ladies and gentlemen , the future course of the enlargement process remains primarily a question of the EU 's capacity for enlargement ; the basic requirements for this are democratic and institutional reforms and a new structural and cohesion policy based on the principle of solidarity between the fifteen Member States and all applicants for membership .
If we want to achieve the ambitious goal of a Europe with no east-west division , then we cannot agree to the Council 's decisions .
These constitute no advance whatsoever on the process outlined in the Amsterdam enlargement protocol , which itself is heading in the wrong direction .
The risk remains that enlargement will be restricted to just a few countries .
Now that federalist ideology has corrupted the concept of the border , no one dares to say where the geographical borders of Europe are .
With regard to Turkey , the ambiguous developments at the Luxembourg summit , illustrate the disadvantages of allowing ideology to predominate over geography .
By refusing to place their cooperation relationship with Turkey within a specific framework , not related to enlargement , and by instead assimilating that country with European applicant countries for accession , have not the fifteen , thereby adopting the same position as the United States , laid a trap which is likely to seriously affect the progress of the whole accession procedure ?
When Turkey has been recognized as eligible for accession to the European Union by the Luxembourg summit , and called a major European State whose position in the heart of the European family is a historical fact , as Mr Juncker said here yesterday , how can the treatment of Turkey be dissociated from the treatment of central and eastern European countries ?
Placing the discussions with Turkey in the centre of the enlargement process means , of course exposing ourselves to constant , recurring , systematic requests from Ankara , to benefit from the same provisions as agreed with central and eastern European countries .
Not only do the fifteen not seem to have taken into consideration the projections made yesterday by Agence Europe , according to which in a few years ' time Turkey will have a larger population than any of the fifteen countries , which , according to the new method of calculation envisaged for the distribution of votes in the council , would make it the country with the most weight in the Council .
And yet , the fifteen have not seen , or have not wished to see , the risks the whole of the enlargement process will run , if they do not deal with Turkey in a clear and dignified manner .
Our relationship with that big country , which is geographically outside Europe , is worthy of more than a specious sort of assimilation , pregnant with misunderstandings , blackmail and disappointed hopes .
Ambiguous discussions are not responsible discussions .
Commission programme
My explanation of vote will relate to an aspect of the Commission 's work programme , about which the Commission , like the Council , in fact , is keeping very quiet .
It relates to the new powers , of intervention and perhaps of sanction , with which the Commission would like to be endowed , in order to impose its very specific conception of freedom of movement within the internal market .
As you know , this problem is in the news again as , on 9 December , the Court of Justice issued a ruling , which finds France guilty of having failed to respect the freedom of movement during the big demonstrations by French farmers in 1993 and 1995 , during which trailers particularly those containing Spanish strawberries , were intercepted and smashed by French farmers .
No one wants to know if those strawberries were not actually grown in Morocco , and labelled as Spanish , or whether clandestine Moroccan workers grew them in Spain .
Whatever else may be wrong , goods must be free to move without restraint .
I think it possible that demonstrations like those censured by the Court of Justice would not take place if the European Union had a right and proper conception of freedom of movement .
But that question has not been raised .
On the contrary , the Commission considers that the Court of Justice does not pass sentence quickly enough .
It has therefore slipped into its latest single market action plan an allusion to the need to find ways of investing itself with the power to intervene in such cases , and even to impose sanctions .
The Amsterdam European Council , last June , approved this action plan globally , without additional remarks .
But it knew what it was doing , because the Luxembourg Council , on 13 December , has just welcomed , again allusively , a proposal , which has just been made .
It is a draft regulation , tabled on 18 November , which refers to a mechanism of immediate intervention by the Commission .
As there is no legal basis for such a regulation at present , its authors have decided to use article 235 of the treaty , which allows anything and everything , provided it is unanimous .
We shall soon see which Member States allow themselves to be stripped by a handful of European civil servants of the right to control what happens in their own country .
Very briefly to draw attention once again to the urgent need to establish a European policy on tourism , in view of the inexplicable absence of any such policy from the Treaty of Amsterdam .
This serious error is already producing its initial negative effects inasmuch as there is not a single proposal on tourism in the programme under discussion .
I have said this so many times since the legislative process commenced , that I am sorry to keep on harping on the matter ; but it still seems to me the height of irresponsibility that tourism , which among its other virtues is the biggest source of employment , is ignored in the Commission 's work programme .
The undersigned members of the Swedish Left Group have decided to abstain from the final vote on the resolution .
The resolution contains positive wording in several areas , not least in its proposals in the environmental and social areas .
However , the resolution also contains several paragraphs which we cannot accept .
These include demands for new Treaty amendments , European parties and foreign policy .
On behalf of the members of the European Parliamentary Labour Party I wish to record that we are supporting this resolution .
However this does not mean that we are modifying our position on free movement where we believe , as was agreed in Amsterdam , that the United Kingdom 's special geographical circumstances need to be taken into account .
The Commission 's Work Programme for 1998 is based on misguided political priorities .
The European Union has failed to tackle the continuing problem of unemployment .
Employment strategies should be the responsibility of national governments . National governments are best placed to understand the economic and social conditions necessary to tackle unemployment in their respective areas .
Grandiose panEuropean schemes for tackling unemployment do not address local need .
Achieving economic and monetary union involving the introduction of the euro is the Commission 's main priority in 1998 and beyond .
The strategy will be responsible for increasing unemployment as national governments continue to introduce unbalanced austerity measures in the hope of being admitted to the euro club .
The absurdity of Commission dogma in pursuing its economic goals at any price has been recent demonstrated by its could not-careless attitude to the thousands of jobs which are under threat in the duty-free trade .
The Commission also continues to take a dogmatic line in regard to what it calls " Union action in the world at large ' by persevering with a strategy which replaces the long experience of individual Member States in managing foreign affairs with the collective inexperience and amateurism of the European Union in this important field .
I am opposed to all proposals aimed at tax harmonization because I think the citizens of the EU 's Member States should have the exclusive right to tax themselves .
Jové Peres report
Mr President , in my view the general lines proposed by Commissioner Fischler , which Parliament has now rejected for a number of reasons , were not acceptable .
I would mention three of them : firstly , a COM is only reviewed when it is not achieving its purpose .
This is not the case here , since the olive sector has been operating without any problems , with improvements in quality in recent years , and maintaining the growers ' income .
If there is fraud in any country , the Commission must fight against it .
The second reason is that this is not a simple problem of maintaining income , which could be solved by a system of subsidies that does not depend on production .
Furthermore , olive oil is a high-quality product , of which there is no surplus , and one that is competitive in the European economy . On no account should production of it be discouraged .
And the third and last reason : in Andalusia , which accounts for 30 % of European and 20 % of world production , and furthermore has a major unemployment problem , olives are a crop with a high social value , using a great deal of labour , and have provided the rural population of an enormous area with stability and eliminated agricultural unemployment for many months of the year .
Mr President , the report which has been approved today represents a good agreement for the olive oil trade .
The tree subsidy option studied by the European Commission would be a tragedy for producers and the regions affected .
The cost of harvesting the olive crop amounts to 70 % of the variable costs of the process , and a system of that kind could cause the abandonment of actual production .
That would result in job losses in those regions , which have one of the Union 's highest rates of unemployment .
We cannot overlook the fact that the industry provides 46 million days ' work for 400 , 000 people at harvest time .
On behalf of the Basque National Party , I should like to express our support for the producers , especially in Andalusia , where olives provide fifty per cent of agricultural jobs .
In that respect we have acted in complete solidarity with our Andalusian friends .
We therefore support this proposal for subsidies for actual production , because it will create more jobs , it supports the less favoured regions of the European Union and it will produce less fraud than the tree subsidy system , which is not transparent enough .
In conclusion , Mr President , I would remind the House of the element of risk involved in the tree subsidy system from the point of view of rural depopulation and the environment .
Mr President , when the Council and the Commission approve the forthcoming regulation on olive oil in the next few months , they should very much keep in mind the employment potential of this product .
They should be very well aware of the extent to which olive oil is a source of livelihood and business throughout the Mediterranean cultural area .
This is very important , because we take too many decisions based on paper bureaucracy .
If , however , we were there on the ground , we would see that the Andalusian olive harvest started a fortnight ago , and that , Commissioner Sir Leon Brittan , completely neutralizes unemployment in Andalusia .
You would see nothing but work going on .
It is the best antidote to unemployment .
There is no point in our holding extraordinary summits in Luxembourg .
Let 's join the real world .
There is no unemployment in Andalusia at present simply because the olive harvest has begun .
The Commissioner for Agriculture should include a socio-economic impact study in his proposals , and what he said yesterday about its parameters is not true .
In his next proposal he should include the question of whether he is going to destroy jobs , because if there is one thing that has been made clear today , it is that we will not approve any proposal that destroys jobs .
The Swedish Social Democratic Group has today decided to vote for the amendment proposed by the Group of the Party of European Socialists .
We have carefully considered the situation and have concluded that , in the voting situation in which we find ourselves today in Parliament , it is the best alternative .
We welcome the fact that the Group of the Party of European Socialists is working to achieve a compromise between the Commission and the producers .
However , we think the Commission 's proposal and willingness to reform are extremely important and we hope we can achieve deregulation within the olive and olive oil sector as soon as possible .
The undersigned have voted for the report because of its criticism of the Commission 's proposal and because of the olive sector 's special circumstances .
This does not mean we are giving up the demand that a general , thorough reform of the common agricultural policy should also include the olive sector .
The question we have to consider today is a very important one .
Firstly , it relates to the economic interests of southern Europe and that fact that the EU is the world leader in olive oil , with about 80 % of total production .
Secondly , the olive is a part of the identity of the Mediterranean basin .
Until recently , the European Union 's system of aid for production and consumption has favoured large producers , although small farmers produce 60 % of the total .
It has also contributed towards promoting quantity to the detriment of quality .
If the system continues , it could lead to a risk of over-production , and in fact , to an increase in market prices .
In the south of France and in Corsica , small quantities are produced , compared with our Italian , Spanish and Greek neighbours .
Olive oil from the Provence region for example , is above all known for its quality .
The reform , which is required , must enable small producers to benefit from a more favourable system of aid .
The transparency of the aid redistribution procedures must also be increased .
For that reason , it is becoming important to set up a new system of support , which will enable aid to be distributed more fairly , in a more controlled way , taking into consideration the role of the environment and the requirements of small producers .
Integrating new criteria associated at the same time with the countryside , the environment and employment , seems to us a fundamental requirement of reform , which would be fairer to small producers .
A reform of this kind must not ignore the new requirements of the World Trade Organization , and , in that respect , must evolve towards a system of aid for producers , which is not connected to production volumes and is adjusted in accordance with the principles of environmental protection and quality .
Ladies and gentlemen , I therefore ask you to support a new system of aid and production control , capable of being integrated into the new system of international trade of the WTO , which will respect small producers and producers who , like those in the south of France , produce high quality olive oil .
The vote this morning , concerning the WTO olive oil reform proposals , shows that you do not have to be a large political group for your amendments to be adopted .
In fact , as you can see , all the amendments tabled by the Group of the Party of European Socialists , were rejected , whereas four of the amendments of the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations were adopted during the part-session .
What is the purpose of this report ?
At the beginning of 1998 , the Commission is going to make a proposal for the WTO olive oil reform .
There are some considerable differences in approach to this Mediterranean product , famous for its dietary qualities and effects on the health of consumers : some defend the European olive oil production policy , in order to protect Europe 's position as world leader in terms of production .
Others , on the other hand , would like the blending of oils to be authorized , which would destroy the intrinsic qualities of the product .
As elected representative of the main French region of olive production , I , and the whole of my group , have at heart to protect the interests of French production , the particularity of which is that it is composed of a large number of producers who produce and market their own oil .
In Mr Jové Peres ' initial report , it was proposed that production subsidies ( tree subsidies ) should be withdrawn and replaced by consumption subsidies .
At the time of the vote in the Committee on Agriculture , we were pleased to see that our position defending aid for production was adopted in the compromise amendments of the report .
Finally , I can say that whatever its initial direction , this report has , during the various debates in the Committee on Agriculture and part-session , been redirected in the direction we wanted .
That is why the whole of the Europe of Nations Group voted in favour of the final resolution and we await the Commission 's new proposals with impatience .
We hope that Commissioner Fischler will take into consideration the European Parliament 's guidelines , the aim of which is to protect agriculture in southern Europe .
The Danish Social Democrats have today voted against the report by Jové Perez on the organization of the market for the olive and olive oil sector .
The Danish Social Democrats support the Commission 's proposals for a reform of the market arrangements for the olive oil sector , which provides for giving aid per tree in future .
In our view , this is a more effective form of aid , and will help reduce fraud in the sector .
We believe José 's report is problematic because it is inconsistent .
It says that the sector needs reforming , but at the same time it says that the present market arrangements are working well .
To a large extent , the report supports the southern olive oil producing countries which are against a thorough reform .
They are against the switch to aid per tree .
The reform of the COM for olive oil is the first of the new reforms to come in the common agricultural policy .
So it is important so support the Commission in its work towards new and effective reforms in agriculture .
Thorough going reforms are needed in the common agricultural policy if the Union is to be ready to admit the countries of central and eastern Europe .
We Spanish Socialists have supported the report on olive oil for one central reason : our conviction that the present COM has worked properly and has played a key role in the modernization of a sector of major economic and social importance .
That COM therefore needs no more than superficial reform .
We consider the final result , which has sprung from a compromise , to be a starting-point , which should not prevent us from continuing to insist on those points which we consider essential in the light of the final decision the Council has to agree on .
These are the points in question :
Maintaining subsidies for actual production as the axis of the COM.-Increasing the guaranteed maximum quantity to around 2 , 000 , 000 MT , together with the necessary budgetary allocation .
We would draw attention to the fact that there has been no increase in the EAGGF Guarantee in the COM since 1992 , contrary to what has happened with most of the COMs , particular as regards Continental production.-We do not agree with the distribution of the maximum guaranteed quantity as between the producing countries .
We would accept it only as the lesser of two evils , but we consider it necessary to insist that any share-out between countries should take account of actual production and the production capacities reflected in the most recent crops.-We will continue to defend consumption subsidies , as a contribution to the modernization of packaging and sales.-Maintaining the intervention system.Finally , we wish to reiterate our confidence in the future of olive oil as a key sector of Spanish and European agriculture , for reasons of quality , for environmental reasons , for social reasons and for reasons of rural development .
Valverde López report ( A4-0341 / 97 )
The cultivation of tobacco is one of the most intensive in the Union as regards the labour force .
It is carried on in small family-run agricultural smallholdings and in particularly disadvantaged regions , which , in the Community south , are mostly regions of objective I , which depend for the most part on this monocrop .
It provides more than 300 , 000 full-time jobs in the primary sector and in processing , and contributes to the protection of the environment and to the fight against desertification and depopulation .
The reduction or disappearance of tobacco production , which would ensue from the proposed abolition of direct support for the tobacco sector in the Union ( paragraph 29 ) , would cause enormous irreversible social , political and economic damage to peripheral economies .
It will not have beneficial effects on public health , given that it will not necessarily bring about a reduction in tobacco consumption , but it will benefit exclusively those multinational companies which produce cigarettes , cigars and pipe tobacco and which will dominate the global market , manipulate it and import into Europe at least 30 % of what it now produces .
Measures are required to bring about a reduction in imports of tobacco products from the USA , a coordinated front to combat tobacco smuggling , an end to indirect advertising of large tobacco conglomerates , in parallel with interventions at a cultural and educational level , which will contribute to the fight against smoking .
A positive step was taken in the vote against paragraph 29 which asked , in a frivolous and unacceptable way , for the immediate cutting off of subsidies for producers .
However , paragraph 30 , which has been approved , has a similar content .
It is a great mistake to confuse the safeguarding of public health from the effects of smoking with tobacco cultivation , which covers only 30 % of European consumption .
Finally , I was greatly taken aback by the fact that the rapporteur rejected my amendments against tobacco smuggling and for the non-participation of Members of the European Parliament in the publicity campaigns of large tobacco companies .
I supported the Valverde López report warmly .
The Dutch section of the I-EDN group thinks that every reasonable effort should be made to combat smoking in the Union .
The Valverde López report makes a number of good proposals to discourage smoking .
Thankfully the Council has now reached agreement on the advertising ban .
Now for everything else .
I have to get it off my chest that I think the continuation of agricultural subsidies for tobacco growing is an absurd kink in Community policy .
I believe that the continuation of this subsidy is diametrically opposed to the Maastricht Treaty .
This states , after all , that protecting public health must be part of all other policy areas of the Community .
So it is time that the Union adjusted its support policy to the requirements of the new treaty .
I have difficulty with only a few points in the resolution .
They concern paragraph 13 on the tar content in rolling tobacco .
Science is still not sure how the tar content can be measured in this kind of tobacco , as no hand-rolled cigarette is the same as another .
A solution has to be found for this .
That is why I supported Amendment No 2 .
Paragraphs 17 and 34 assume in advance that a higher tax on rolling tobacco is justified .
This is premature , which is why I supported Amendments Nos 16 and 17 .
I was unable to support Paragraph 20 .
It seems somewhat excessive to give over 25 % of the packaging of large cigarette boxes to warnings .
25 % is fine for a standard packet of cigarettes .
Amendment No 13 therefore received my support .
To conclude , paragraphs 35 and 36 seem to me to go too far , and I did not support them .
It has been clearly established that smoking can cause serious illness such as lung cancer and cardiac problems .
For this reason I would support any education or advertising initiatives that will dissuade young people from ever starting this bad habit .
The report of Mr Valverde López has some excellent proposals in this regard .
However , there seems to me to be a major inconsistency in the action of the EU .
On the one hand the EU Commission and the EU health ministers support a ban on tobacco sponsorship . However , on the other hand , the EU continues to provide subsidies to tobacco growers .
Where is the consistency ?
Instead we should be encouraging tobacco growers to diversify and provide aid to assist them .
To follow such a course of action would be more consistent with an anti-smoking policy .
Tobacco subsidies from the EU must be phased out .
A timetable should be fixed within which this should take place .
During this time new crops must be developed and alternative ways of earning a living must be offered to those who can no longer generate their income from tobacco growing .
It is important to find a balance between public health , employment , regional policy and a realistic transition period .
The European Parliament cannot support the World Bank 's practice of denying aid to tobacco-related projects without taking the same position in the EU .
On behalf of Labour members of the European Parliament , I indicate that support for the Valderde López report on the present and proposed Community role in combatting tobacco consumption has been given on the basis of its status as a report on a communication .
I believe that several aspects are more appropriate for action by Member States with a measure of cooperation .
The UK government will publish its own views during 1998 and the UK parliament will deliberate on appropriate measures to be introduced .
The Commission and Parliament proposals will be considered in detail if legislative proposals are brought forward , and the broad support of myself and colleagues does not necessarily indicate agreement that every measure should be introduced at Community level in future .
Quite recently , the European Council , under the Luxembourg Presidency , adopted a common position regarding the prohibition of direct and indirect cigarette advertising .
It therefore made haste , without waiting for the opinion of the European Parliament , so as not to defer this important file .
The position of the European Parliament is above all motivated by public health considerations .
As the rapporteur , Mr Valverde Lopez , reminded the House , half a million people die each year from the effects of smoking , in the European Union : smoking has become the main cause of avoidable death .
At the same time , it is necessary to observe that the trend to stop smoking , which began a few years ' ago , has reversed .
Young people start smoking earlier and earlier , women are smoking more and more , with harmful effects on pregnancy and babies .
Passive smoking , which was ignored for a long time , is more often the subject of scientific research which proves how harmful it is .
From this point of view , and in the interests of public health , a total ban on direct and indirect advertising of tobacco products is a good approach .
It is not a question of banning tobacco or its consumption , but of preventing young people from coming into contact ( by means of closely targeted advertising ) with smoking when they are too young , of trying to prevent the risks of passive smoking or the consumption of tobacco during pregnancy or in the presence of babies .
Tobacco will still be sold in as many places as before , but the incitement to use it will be reduced .
It is in this respect that I support the views of the rapporteur to the European Parliament and oppose all views , which support the liberalization of tobacco advertising .
There is no doubt in my mind that tobacco is harmful , so I welcome the committee 's report .
If it prevents children and young people from taking up smoking and becoming addicted to tobacco , they will probably not get into the habit later in life .
So I think the main effort should be on making tobacco less attractive to young people .
The rapporteur is entirely correct in pointing out that the use of tobacco in public places and in the workplace costs society a huge amount , so I support measures which are aimed at improving health and safety at work .
I am also voting in favour of the report for health and social reasons , even if it restricts consumers ' freedom to buy tobacco as they like in some ways .
Our group voted against the final resolution in this report .
In fact , although we are very much in favour of controlling the use of tobacco , we cannot on principle accept the fact that the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection should vote for a report , which aims , at the same time , to withdraw aid for the production of tobacco , and aid for the export of tobacco and withdraws all the Community protection in that sector .
I would like to remind the House that the priority aim of the Europe of Nations Group is the protection of employment : it is necessary to take into consideration the importance of tobacco production in underprivileged rural areas .
In a number of production areas , it is not possible to replace the production of tobacco with any other agricultural crop .
What will we do with the workers employed in this sector ?
In addition , our group wishes to remind the House that the European Union still imports a net 67 % of the tobacco it uses .
Withdrawing production aid , as well as having a very serious effect on employment , would increase our external deficit .
What is the use of decreasing our production , if we replace it with imports from third countries , particularly the United States ?
Indeed , if the European Union no longer produced tobacco , this would have no effect on the prevention of smoking .
To conclude , our group is pleased that the part-session rejected paragraph 29 of the rapporteur 's initial motion for a resolution .
We regret that our amendments , justified by the protection of employment and the control of our external trade deficits , were not adopted .
We have requested a roll-call vote and I think that tobacco producers will be interested to find out what positions various Members will adopt .
I have voted for this report as I agree wholeheartedly that smoking is a proven health risk and should be discouraged .
I condemn the UK Government 's decision to allow Formula One to be given special treatment .
The European Communication on the present and proposed Community role in combatting tobacco consumption was specifically to prevent exposure to young people .
The government has distorted what could have been a very positive message for its own reasons .
The UK Government 's excuse has opened the back door to a whole range of opt-outs and challenges .
( The sitting was suspended at 12.49 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Madam President , I have the sad duty to make an announcement to the European Parliament concerning a tragic , catastrophic air accident which occurred yesterday during the night near my city , Thessaloniki .
An aeroplane belonging to the Ukraine airline company , Air Swift , on its way from Kiev to Thessaloniki , crashed and was totally destroyed .
All passengers and crew , 72 people in all , are unaccounted for .
The aeroplane crashed in the mountainous region near Thessaloniki , following a failed attempt to land . The usual search and rescue efforts are now under way with little hope of finding any survivors .
Madam President , I felt it was my duty to make this announcement and to ask the European Parliament to express its condolences to the families of the victims .
Thank you , Mr Papakyriazis .
This matter of course mainly concerns your homeland , but it therefore also affects one of the members of this Community .
I am grateful to you for this information .
It is something outside my experience .
Parliament will obtain relevant information on this matter so that we too can demonstrate an appropriate level of concern .
Outcome of the Kyoto Conference
The next item is the Commission statement on the outcome of the Kyoto Conference .
Madam President , I simply want to say right at the very beginning that this House ought to apologize to the Commissioner for having brought her here to make this statement on a Thursday afternoon when there is nobody present .
Some of us tried to tell the group leaders that it was not a good idea to have this statement on Thursday immediately before Christmas .
I lost at that meeting ; only one group leader in the Parliament agreed with me in fact .
The Commissioner was in Kyoto last week .
She came back at the weekend .
There was an Environment Council on Tuesday and yesterday was the first day that she would have had to reflect on the results of Kyoto .
Instead of allowing her time to reflect on future policy , we demanded that she come down here and make a statement .
We ought to apologize to the Commissioner for this behaviour .
We ought to have had a proper debate after Christmas when both she and the President of the Council could have been present and then we could have looked forward as well as backwards .
As it is , some people who demanded the debate are not here at all , I think some of them are not even in Strasbourg by this time .
That is absolutely shocking .
I want to apologize for them to the Commissioner .
I would like to thank Mr Collins , in his capacity as Chairman of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , for his kind words .
However , as you know , Mr Collins , we have set an agenda and everyone has agreed to it .
The Party leaders have presented this to us and no changes have been proposed .
I understand what you say , and I know that the trip has been a long one ; nor is it very easy to be right on top of the situation without any time for proper reflection .
Madam President , I personally would like to welcome Mrs Bjerregaard here .
Some of us were in Kyoto and we are all back here and it is fresh in our minds .
So I would personally welcome Mrs Bjerregaard here for this statement .
Madam President , as was stated by the chairman of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , I recently came back , so that is also why I shall make the statement in English and not in Danish , because there has been no time for translation .
Kyoto is over , and a protocol with legally binding targets for greenhouse-gas emissions is a fact .
Everyone participating in the Conference was relieved when Ambassador Estrada on Thursday morning at 11 a.m. , after a long night 's work , closed the Committee of the Whole with a final text , which was formally approved by the Conference of the Parties later in the day .
The Kyoto Protocol will prove to have been history in the making .
I do not believe many of us present , if any at all , have been part of such a difficult and ambitious undertaking before .
Let us take the necessary time to analyse and digest the result .
But I am sure that you will agree with me that this is a milestone in international environmental negotiations .
The potential implications for the global climate , for the economy of 160 countries and for the domestic politics of many major participants are staggering .
It was a particular satisfaction to see how the European Union maintained its role in pushing for the strongest possible protocol throughout the negotiations .
Even if the final result is less ambitious than our original target , there can be no doubt that had it not been for the continuous push by the EU one would not be able to claim any positive result at all .
I believe the result is a positive one for the global environment .
No agreement would have been a bad result for everyone , not least for our planet .
We achieved an agreement which is worth having , and I worked hard for it .
It is true that it is an incomplete agreement and that more work has to be done , but we now have a platform on which we can continue to build in our efforts to save the global climate .
Let me say quite openly that there were many important players in the Kyoto process , including representatives of this Parliament .
They played a key role in offsetting the unreasonable pressures brought to bear on the Conference by the US Congress and , perhaps more importantly , in building a strong bridge from the EU to the developing countries .
The Kyoto agreement is , as is always the case with international agreements , on several important points an unfinished product .
A number of provisions can only be finally judged when procedures , modalities and methodologies have been worked out and agreed in the coming year .
Before I take a close look at the result , I would like to say a few words about the negotiation process itself .
A lot of time and effort was unfortunately wasted on diplomatic positioning games .
This was a disadvantage for the climate issue .
The EU bubble , joint fulfilment of commitments within the EU , was subject to an unusually aggressive attack by the Japanese hosts and seconded by our US colleagues .
This aggression climaxed in a formal proposal of an EU ' penalty ' , for 3 % extra on the target in return for the joint fulfilment .
A lot of negotiation effort had to be spent on turning this idea down , effort that could otherwise have been used constructively to improve the result .
Let me add that it was clear that the attacks on the EU bubble were another way of attacking our more ambitious target of a 15 % reduction by 2010 , a figure that certainly displeased most of our OECD partners .
On the agreement itself , the most visible part , of course , is the reduction targets .
The EU has argued for the same reduction target to apply for all Annex 1 parties , the so-called flat-rate approach .
This line was supported by the United States .
In the end-game , by far the majority of the Annex 1 parties , including the EU , associated member countries , the US and Canada and Japan found themselves within a reduction target of minus 6 to minus 8 % of 1990 levels .
We pushed the United States and Japan as far as we could .
We regret that we could not push them even further .
In the end we chose a position of minus 8 % for the EU to take the necessary extra step for the environment .
I very much regret that other Annex 1 parties were allowed a higher degree of differentiation , notably Russia and Ukraine , that were required only to stabilize , and Australia , that was allowed a possible 8 % increase .
In addition , Australia was granted a provision to include in its 1990 emission baseline the emission from land-use changes as equivalent to industrial emissions .
For these parties it is now a question whether they need to undertake any specific action at all in order to stay within their targets .
Russia and Ukraine will , in all likelihood , find themselves major suppliers of quotas under a future trading regime in the protocol .
I am sure you will agree with me that this is not an acceptable situation .
During the negotiations it has become increasingly clear that the reduction targets themselves are only part of the story .
The way we reach this target and the use of so-called flexibility measures are equally important .
At an early stage of the negotiations the US made it clear that it was not ready to consider a protocol without possibilities to achieve a target through emissions trading and joint implementation .
The EU has made it clear from the beginning that it was not against such ' flexibility measures ' - in fact joint implementation was part of the original EU protocol proposal .
However , such measures should provide for true costeffectiveness and not just allow for trading ' hot air ' , the selling of emissions reductions already achieved .
The agreed text is not very clear on this point .
' Hot air ' from the years before the first budget period cannot be traded - a very important point pushed by the EU .
A proposed article on emissions trading was rejected and replaced with a very ambiguous ' skeleton article ' - article 16 bis - which clearly foresees emissions trading but leaves all modalities open to be decided later by the Conference of the Parties , if possible at COP4 in Buenos Aires in November 1998 .
Joint implementation between Annex 1 parties is now part of the protocol ( article 6 ) .
Joint implementation with developing countries will be possible through the ' clean-development mechanism ' , a new invention described in article 12 .
This new mechanism can be a very useful way of improving cooperation and transfer of technology between industrialized and developing countries but it will only become operational after the protocol has come into force and the parties have agreed on the modalities .
The role of the developing countries in the future process was a critical issue during the negotiations , in particular after the US Senate adopted the Bird-Hagel resolution in July 1997 underlining that meaningful participation by the key developing countries within a foreseeable future would be a prerequisite for US ratification .
The proposed article that would allow developing countries to voluntarily undertake commitments in the form of quantified emission targets was not adopted as part of the protocol .
Resistance to this article was led by China which had been singled out in the United States debate on developing countries ' participation because of the expected strong growth in CO2 emissions .
On a per capita basis China is not likely to exceed 20 % of the US per capita emissions level within the next 20 years .
Thus the Chinese resistance was understandable .
This position was also strongly backed by India .
Irrespective of the uncertainties linked to the various flexibility measures I have described , it is certain Kyoto put climate change at the top of the international environmental agenda .
Further work is needed to create the indisputable success but I am sure that the momentum created in Kyoto will ensure this .
This leads me to my last point .
What will our next steps be ?
On Tuesday I had the opportunity to discuss with colleagues in the Council how we might best proceed .
The upcoming UK Presidency is very keen to assure a fast and efficient follow-up to Kyoto and this will certainly also be followed by the Austrian Presidency during the second half of 1998 up to the first Conference of the Parties in Buenos Aires .
We have no time to waste .
COP4 is of major importance .
Modalities , rules , guidelines for emission trading , joint implementation , clean development mechanisms , sinks , etcetera , have to be discussed there .
Within 11 months from now the world will again have to take crucial decisions .
The EU will again be ready to take the lead in closing all major loopholes included in the protocol .
Our first task is to prepare for a signature of the protocol .
A decision to sign should be taken by the Council in March 1998 .
For that purpose I have asked the Commission services to prepare a factual report describing our commitments under the protocol and the points that need clarification .
The next step will be to prepare for ratification .
This will definitely require the development of a post-Kyoto strategy , a Commission communication to Council and Parliament describing what action will be needed to meet our commitments and a proposed burden sharing .
This communication will also have to address emission trading and joint implementation under the EU bubble .
A final aspect concerns the question of when the protocol is likely to enter into force and on what basis. article 24 stipulates that only when 55 parties , corresponding to 50 % of total Annex 1 CO2 emission in 1990 , have ratified will the protocol enter into force .
The 50 % of CO2 emissions in 1990 is the critical factor .
The United States accounts for approximately 35 % of 1990 emissions and Russia for roughly 15 % .
This implies that at least one of the two will have to ratify in order for the protocol to enter into force .
Since the United States is fundamentally dependent for their target to be met on emission trading with Russia it is not likely that the United States will ratify without Russia .
Together with the EU this will bring the protocol into force .
It follows from this that the United States or Russia has the main key to activate the protocol .
The US administration has made it known that it is not ready to send the protocol to Congress for ratification at this stage .
This seems to be due partly to meagre outcome of the developing countries ' participation and partly to uncertainties surrounding the trading scheme .
To facilitate US ratification it is crucial that the EU moves ahead as quickly as possible to maintain the highest possible political pressure .
It will also be necessary to continue our efforts to establish a constructive dialogue with the developing countries , not because they should be pushed to undertake quantitative commitments at this stage but because it will be necessary to include them in the process to guarantee a long-term successful outcome .
The support from the European Parliament is essential in the future as it has been important in the past .
In this context I want to extend my particular appreciation to GLOBE for their impressive activity .
It will continue to be necessary that you try to influence colleagues in Parliament from the respective main OECD partners and other main players .
Better coordination between Parliament , me and my services should start right now .
Your knowledge and your future presence in Buenos Aires is very important to make COP4 a success .
Kyoto provided the platform .
We are now starting to tackle the enormous task of reversing the upward trend in greenhouse gas emissions .
We came to Kyoto to fight for the climate .
We never expected it to be easy and it certainly was not .
But it was a first step .
We now must work to widen that platform to ensure that climate change is effectively addressed .
I am sure that we can continue to rely on your support in this important task .
Madam President , I should like to begin by directing my sincere thanks and congratulations to the Commissioner and to the EU delegation at the recent talks .
This was a high point for European diplomacy which saw us taking the lead from the Americans for the first time .
In fact , the USA was left sitting in the dock .
Europe set the pace and those involved deserve our heartfelt congratulations .
This is something which we should emulate whenever possible .
At the same time , however , I have to point out that the numerous delegates from the European Parliament and the national parliaments who were present at Kyoto must cooperate more closely on this issue .
In Kyoto we were completely fragmented .
We were not even aware of one another , whereas the Americans had a very coordinated delegation and presented a very united presence .
This is a task for the management of Parliament and indeed for the Commission , with whom we should cooperate more closely in this respect .
This is really the first matter which concerns me , namely the ratification of the agreement by the US Senate .
The Council of Ministers ' resolution of 16 October for Kyoto stated that the emission reduction targets for 2010 and 2005 , which we have resolved to introduce , are technically achievable and economically feasible , provided that other industrial nations introduce comparable measures for the reduction of emissions .
What happens if the US Senate only ratifies the Kyoto agreement in two or three years time ?
Does this mean that Europe can also wait two or three years , or even longer , or does it mean that we should initiate the main phases of the emission reduction process independently of the Americans ?
This seems to me to be a key question for the Council . It naturally affects the Commission too , but primarily concerns the Council .
The question which then arises is why we have not kept our original target of 15 % .
Each of us who has been concerned with this issue knows that the Kyoto agreement is the result of a diplomatic deal .
And if the climatologists are right , then we are falling well short of the requirements which have to be met .
For this reason too I would recommend sticking with the 15 % proposal .
It is one which will be supported by a large proportion of young people , as well as by those engaged in science and research , throughout Europe .
From this commitment will grow a new European identity - one which is based on obligation , rather than on a lifeless agreement .
My last request and proposal is that we should draw up a binding timetable - one which includes sanctions against those who do not keep to the obligations enshrined therein .
To do this we would require a management committee .
This might be based within the Commission , in whom I have every confidence , and should be capable of implementing the scheme as well as monitoring it .
Perhaps we also need a kind of interinstitutional agreement between the Council , the Commission and Parliament , such that each makes an appropriate contribution .
I am convinced that the various parties represented here , and certainly this applies to my own group , would be prepared to convert these dead letters into a living project .
Madam President , five years ago the world 's governments undertook to ensure that the quantities of greenhouse gases present in the atmosphere would be reduced to an acceptable level for our climatic system .
In his impressive speech in November , and in his contribution of today , Mr Linkohr has underlined the fact that the issues tabled at Kyoto have fallen well short of this ambitious objective .
If we assume that in the long term each citizen on the planet should produce equal amounts of CO2 , then we in the industrialised countries naturally have to achieve a much more substantial reduction than all the proposals discussed at Kyoto .
The figure in question should in fact be less than two tonnes per capita .
This becomes all too evident when one realises that a citizen in Tanzania only emits about one hundredth of the amount of greenhouse gases produced per head of the population in some of the industrialised countries .
Everything discussed at Kyoto was therefore of modest proportions .
However , I believe that politics is the art of the feasible and for this reason we were obliged to make compromises .
The difference involved is therefore only a gradual one - whether we had succeeded in getting the EU 's plan fully adopted , or whether we stick with the current compromise .
There is absolutely no reason for defeatism because the EU 's position did not win the day .
On the other hand , it is a matter of regret that there were a number of exceptions to the general agreement .
I would like to congratulate the Commission and the negotiators for having taken such a strong leading role .
However , some criticism is also appropriate .
This particularly concerns the fact that Australia and Iceland may be allowed to increase their emission levels .
This is partly the fault of the European Union because , for various reasons , we have allowed some Member States within the EU to increase their emissions in the coming years .
It is therefore hardly surprising that other industrialised nations will demand similar concessions for themselves .
These countries , both inside the EU as well as outside , produce up to 50 times more greenhouse gases than Tanzania and many other developing countries , for example .
My own country has always been at the forefront of the environmental issue , but here too I can be self-critical .
In recent years Germany has failed to make decisive cuts in environmental emissions in the west of the country .
German unity was a piece of good fortune , especially in political terms .
But German unity was also a success for the environment , since it allowed inefficient industrial installations to be replaced by efficient plant .
Unfortunately , this is a principle which cannot necessarily be imitated by other Member States .
The situation in Germany was a special one .
We therefore have a credibility problem , both inside Germany as well as within the EU , since even the latter has failed to reach its self-imposed targets with the resources currently available .
The post-Kyoto era must therefore be a time for credible action .
We must introduce a more efficient energy policy and provide real support for climate-friendly energy forms .
I believe that we will then also have a better chance of getting further reductions adopted during future negotiations , quite apart from the fact that there are of course many reasons other than environmental ones , for us to be economical in our use of energy - and more particularly in our use of fossil fuels - since these are finite resources , and what is more , they are far too good for burning , seeing that they constitute important raw materials for many processes .
We therefore have many reasons for getting down to the job at hand .
Madam President , let me begin by offering Mrs Bjerregaard my well-deserved compliments .
It does not happen every day that I extend these to her , so she should be pleased with them this afternoon .
This is because it is partly due to the perseverance of this Commissioner that the European Union has been able to play a leading role in the Conference in Kyoto .
Like most speakers present here this afternoon , I was also in Kyoto , and heard the Commissioner speak .
A fine , resolute speech after the speech from the minister from the Netherlands , which prepared us so well for Kyoto during its presidency . The Commissioner deserves our appreciation .
Because , as a result of the European Union setting out for Kyoto with its reduction proposal of 15 % , Japan and the United States ultimately agreed to much stricter reduction targets than they had originally intended .
Neverheless , I believe the European Union should not stick to the global agreement made in Kyoto of 8 % as the target for Europe itself , but that we should stick to the minus 15 % .
Only then the Union will be able to keep its leading role , and will be able to pull the other countries along with it in the coming years .
An alteration also occurred in Kyoto ; six gases rather than three were included in the calculations as part of the reduction .
A thing or two will have to be revised .
The Commissioner herself pointed to this .
Burden sharing between countries in Europe has to be looked at again .
My question is : when will the Commissioner make this announcement so that the decision can be taken under the British Presidency during the first part of next year ?
Finally , Madam President , I am fully confident that during the British Presidency we will tackle this case as energetically as was the case under the Dutch Presidency .
I have already pointed out that under this presidency the Council has had the opportunity to become a historic Council , resulting in the European Union receiving praise from future generations for having broken through an impasse in the fight against global warming .
Madam President , it might be appropriate at this point to remind the House of our earlier intervention at the Kyoto Conference , when we stated that ecological and citizens ' groups in general were asking for a reduction of over 20 % in the year 2010 , in relation to 1990 levels .
We also said , however , that the European Union 's attitude , when compared with those of other countries - basically the United States - was the clearest and most forceful option to take in the face of climate change and in defence of the environment .
We should like to congratulate the Commissioner and the European delegation on their vigorous defence of our positions .
We must denounce the environmental policy of countries like the United States , which insisted that developing countries should reduce their emissions while they themselves continued at the same rate of development as at present .
That is a totally unreasonable suggestion , especially if , as Mr Linkohr said , we take into account Mr John Kerry 's statements that he would fight in the American Senate to see that this agreement on minimum emissions would not be complied with , because it was completely impossible for the Americans to change their rules of conduct as regards energy consumption .
We agree with some of our fellow-Members who have already spoken to the effect that the European Union , which has suggested a 15 % reduction in relation to 1990 levels , should continue to suggest the same guidelines for reduction and that it should be an example to the world of how environmental issues should be dealt with .
In view of the fact that in other matters , such as foreign policy or trade policy , the European Union does not have the independence it ought to have vis-à-vis the United States and other countries , we are delighted that on environmental matters the European Union has been a model of consistency in defence of the world 's future .
I believe there is still a long way to go and we shall continue to require cooperation between the Commission and the European Parliament .
This is how we see it , and we shall pay close attention to events and will support the European Union whenever , as on this occasion , it consistently defends the future of the European Union and the world ; because we believe that when the United States says it is unable to reduce its energy consumption levels , it is acting inconsistently with any concern for the future .
Madam President , first I should like to restore the discussion to its real scale .
We face the challenge of reducing greenhouse gas emissions in the world by 60-80 % .
This is an immense challenge , when we consider that , for example , the number of car / kilometres is predicted to rise in the European Union by as much as 60 % by the year 2010 ; we therefore have a big job on our hands .
But this aside , I wish to add my congratulations to those of my colleagues to the Commission and the Commissioner personally for the excellent work done in Kyoto .
I hope cooperation between Parliament and the Commissioner will continue .
Now we have to pursue a course of international diplomacy , in which national organizations as well as MPs will play an important part .
We saw this very clearly in Kyoto .
I was there with eight other Members of the European Parliament and it is my belief that we did our very best .
But the most vital work to be done is here at home .
I agree with my colleagues and my group insists that the European Union must continue to be among the leaders in this project .
We must stick to our original bid of minus 15 % by the year 2010 .
EU industry is definitely prepared to meet this challenge .
Energy-saving solutions are being developed and they will certainly have got an extra thrust from Kyoto .
I am totally convinced that new technology can improve people 's quality of life and create new jobs .
This is also the model we must hold up to the developing countries , where we have not yet been able to make any great demands , as it is quite true that emissions per capita are far lower in these countries than in ours .
Thus the European Union has a very great responsibility in this matter and a major task ahead .
Madam President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I have rarely , in the whole of my political career , seen so much intellectual dishonesty as last week in Kyoto .
Everyone , be they American , European or Japanese declared themselves ready and willing to save the planet .
In fact , everyone came to negotiate emission rights .
Madam President , this is a disgrace !
The scientific community and NGOs had agreed that a reduction of at least 15 % in greenhouse gas emissions was necessary by the year 2010 , in comparison with the reference year , 1990 , in order to stabilize the greenhouse effect .
Even the European Union had pronounced itself prepared to do so .
What is the result ?
The Americans , who create the most emissions in absolute figures and per head of population , finally agreed to reduce emissions by 7 % , provided that tradable emissions are allowed .
The European Union will only have to decrease its emissions by 8 % , and Japan by 6 % .
Madam Commission , please be brave , accept your responsibilities .
Let us , in the European Union , undertake to make a 15 % reduction , on a voluntary basis , unconnected with the results of other industrialised nations !
According to your department 's calculations , this target is quite achievable , both from an economic and a technical point of view .
Let a show a good example in Buenos Aires .
Let us also undertake not to trade the rights we have thus obtained , with countries who are not yet ready to substantially reduce their emissions .
The system of trading rights , as established in Kyoto , is immoral and cynical , because it allows the worst to borrow from those who are only mediocre .
Madam Commissioner , Madam President , we should not play such a dangerous game .
Madam President , was the Kyoto Conference a success ?
Opinions vary .
Last week in her response , Commissioner Bjerregaard seemed disappointed .
The EU environment ministers were relieved with the result which was achieved .
I am inclined to agree with the environment ministers , and I am pleased with the positive tone of the Commissioner 's argument , and praise her for her dedication in Kyoto .
It was feared that if no one moved , there would be no agreement .
The compromise which we have now is approximately the arithmetical average between the 0 % of the United States and the 15 % of the European Union .
Not very elegant , but the maximum achievable and hopefully the beginning of greater things .
The negotiations were difficult and complex , that much is clear .
That is why it is a victory for the European Union that such clear percentages were laid down .
It shows that amongst the industrial nations the start of an awareness has grown that herein lies a responsibility .
I think that combatting global warming is one of the most obvious test cases of international environmental awareness .
It is a major plus that even countries like the United States and Japan have now agreed to the reductions .
We all know how strong the link is between economic growth and CO2 emissions .
Even stabilizing of the emissions calls for strong measures .
That is why it so important that all industrial nations set themselves reductions targets .
The Union was blamed in the beginning for setting targets which it would not be able meet .
I have to tell you that we also doubt the will to achieve this 15 % by the year 2010 , yet this is necessary .
In my own country latterly economic growth has been deemed more important than achieving reduction targets .
In our view two things are therefore needed for the coming ten to fifteen years .
Firstly , an enormous effort to employ the most effective reduction instruments .
Secondly , to work towards a global awareness that things cannot go on as they are .
We must aim for a new model for economic development .
This is vital , based on respect for the creation and the Creator of life .
Madam President , there are two ways we can look at Kyoto .
We can look at whether the agreement was sufficient to save the planet and we can look at whether it was an important milestone .
From the environmental point of view it is no news that the conference did not agree on the levels of greenhouse gas reduction needed to reverse the process of climate destabilization .
However , as a realist I believe we should welcome what has been agreed as a very important first step on a long and rocky road towards reversing the trend in emissions by the major industrialized countries and recognize how hard it was to get that far and how hard the Commission and other parties worked to achieve what they did .
Having met with the Americans in Kyoto , I found it rather shocking to see how absolutely opposed many of them were to reducing their emissions at all and it is a victory that any agreement was reached .
The main problem will be whether the United States will ratify and of course this is not a foregone conclusion .
In the meantime it is essential that we in the European Union remain committed to our more ambitious target of greenhouse gas reduction of 15 % and put our energies into the economic advantage for European industry in being ahead in the clean technology markets .
We must also redouble our energy saving and renewable energy efforts ; we should also engage in a debate .
I think we should initiate a debate with China , Russia and India to see how we can help these developing countries and others change their trends .
We should not wait for ratification before beginning the very necessary efforts on clean development mechanisms and the necessary transfer of technology with the developing countries .
We will obviously need to analyse the text of the protocol carefully because there are a lot of important issues in the detail , such as emissions trading , carbon sinks , clean technology transfer and so on .
I hope we will be able to debate follow-up action in more detail in the New Year with the British Presidency also present because they made an enormous effort at Kyoto to achieve the deal .
I also look forward to debating the Commission communication at greater length .
Climate destabilization is not going to go away because of what happened at Kyoto , and we have very serious work ahead of us during the next year to prepare for COP4 in November to ensure that we continue to move forward .
Madam President , the results of the climate conference are discussed in today 's edition of a major German newspaper , as has been the case in previous editions .
This morning 's lengthy article appears under the heading " Climate politicians in a fog ' .
The writer is referring here not only to a political dilemma , but also to a practical one . It is a dilemma which faced the Kyoto delegates and which underlies the main problem being dealt with at the conference .
It is based on the fact that statements being made by climatologists are , to a large degree , hypothetical , while their forecasts are unreliable and often have to be revised .
Environmental policy is in urgent need of accurate data .
This lack of information is just as pressing a problem as the lack of action .
Here , action and information are closely interrelated , since the extent and intensity of the behavioural change needed has to match the accuracy of the available scientific data .
I therefore believe that we urgently need to extend the scope of our research .
In addition to the continued application of model calculations , we need to expand our chronological and thematic thinking .
Better prognostics require a more complex research programme .
This will help extend the preferred model calculations used to date and will therefore help to control , complement and even qualify these models .
We must realise that the intensity and speed of climate change is relevant for political decision-making , and even the human impact has to be specified in terms of time and space .
If we do not constantly seek to relate research to politics , then the result will almost always be a loss in credibility .
I have a second fundamental comment to make : If I accept that climatic changes are man-made , that they are caused by human actions , if I say that climatic fluctuations exist , if I say " yes ' to the idea , or consider it probable - and that is clearly what I do think - then I cannot deny the relationship which this has with energy policy , for example .
I must then at least do an approximate calculation of the potential climatic effects of the global increase in energy production .
Then I must also recognize that there is an increasing worldwide demand for energy and that the need and capacity for energy saving measures is limited to those countries which have sufficient supplies of energy available .
Anyone who does not recognize this must have a rather provincial outlook .
And those who do acknowledge it must also accept the various options available to meet our energy requirements .
Those of us who seriously believe in the careful exploitation of our natural resources , and who do not wish to see major climate changes , cannot sacrifice any of the options to blinkered ideology .
Neither can we do without energysaving products and energy-saving technologies .
Nor without renewable energies , the use of hydroelectric power , solar energy , and not even without nuclear fission , Mr Tannert , provided that it is deployed responsibly , and the future application of nuclear fusion .
To forgo any of these options for ideological reasons would , in my opinion , be downright stupid .
Madam President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I , too , would like to start by congratulating the Commissioner on her determination in defending the position of the European Union in Kyoto .
If the Commission had not stood firm , we might not have achieved the result which we are able to welcome today .
It is not the result we had hoped for , but I agree with those who say that a weaker agreement is better than none at all .
We were witness in our parliamentary delegation to the fixed position of our American colleagues , and heard the weak reasoning with which they sought to protect their own industry .
I personally noticed a contradiction between delegates from the Mid-West who defended the old industries and the delegates from California , who like us , believed that the utilization of new technologies is a source of progress and new jobs .
A great deal of questions still need to be answered .
For example , the involvement of the developing countries , the trading of emission quotas , and how to include deforestation and reforestation in the calculations .
The question also arises whether the protocol will be ratified by everyone , and more specifically by the United States , the largest polluter , and how it will eventually be implemented The Commission stressed this only a few minutes ago .
There is no consensus yet , for example , on which alternative sources of energy might be suggested .
We may fear that because of this the practical implications of the Kyoto protocol will remain limited .
Moreover , international organizations are badly equipped to tackle global problems such as these .
They lack material and human resources .
Their legitimacy is weak .
We are facing an enormous challenge and we need to work with the Union on this .
Finally , Madam Commissioner , I would like to support the plea that we in the Union should keep to this reduction of 15 % , whatever the commitment of the other parties may be .
The pioneering work the Union has done must be continued .
Madam President , the outcome of the Kyoto Conference was disappointing .
The climate agreement is neither one thing nor another .
It will not prevent global warming , at best it will only slow it down , and we must assume that emissions will be reduced at most by 5 % , though we know that a reduction of between 60 % and 80 % is required in the industrialized nations .
We are very disappointed that the EU abandoned its position on a 15 % reduction and in this respect we await a clear statement from you , Madam Commissioner , on whether or not you are now prepared to take the lead here and stick with 15 % in the future .
It is incomprehensible that you allowed yourself to be beaten down on this issue , that you gave in to industry 's moaning about competitive advantage , instead of seriously tackling the issue of how to solve our climate problems .
Global warming is too important an issue to be dealt with at such a toddling pace .
We now expect you to take real steps here , since we all know that it is not the summit debate itself which is important , but rather the actions which are taken as part of our everyday affairs .
If you continue to procrastinate on this issue , if you are not prepared to contemplate an environmentally-friendly energy policy , the introduction of an eco-tax and even the reduction of road traffic levels , then you are demonstrating to the whole world that you were only play-acting at Kyoto and that the EU is not really serious about tackling the environmental issue .
In preparation for Buenos Aires we are therefore pleading for the 15 % reduction and for the ultimate introduction of an environmentally-friendly energy and environment policy .
You have done seriously little to bring this about , Madam Commissioner , for where are the instruments needed to achieve this reduction target ?
This is what should be on the agenda , the means for real action , and not merely diplomatic rhetoric .
Madam President , first of all , congratulations to the Commissioner .
If you want to see how this world really works , go into the world of energy and see the vested interests .
She has had that experience and so have some of our colleagues .
If ever there was a justification for the existence of the European Union , our presence in Kyoto was that justification .
Going as individual countries we would not have had the effect that we did have .
Of course , as Mr Linkohr rightly says , in order to enhance our identity , we should stick to our ambitious targets .
This is not a sacrifice .
It is very good business because it gives us a competitive edge , lowers our costs and makes us altogether more successful .
Why do the Americans not realize this , then ?
Because the Americans look at the world through the distorted glass of the heavy vested interests of the fossil fuel lobbies .
That means they cannot see the world clearly .
They see the world in a way that does not show them the simple fact that saving CO2 emissions is a very good business idea .
Nuclear energy is not the answer .
Nuclear energy presents other , equally serious environmental problems .
Secondly , from an economic point of view , in a privatized market , nuclear energy is not viable .
The experience in my own country , the United Kingdom , has proved that .
If you can name me one country with a privatized market which decides to build new power stations at this moment , I will give you a prize .
You cannot .
The answer lies much more in using energy rationally and in turning to renewable energy sources .
Let me take you back to 1957 , the signing of the Euratom Treaty , probably a good thing to do in 1957 .
Now let us think about 1997 .
What we need now is a treaty on renewable energy , a Eurenew treaty .
Nothing is as strong and as exciting as an idea whose time has come .
The time has come now for that idea .
We need some legislation ; we need a directive which will allow renewable energy sources to thrive in a privatized market .
We in the Committee on Energy , Research and Technology are doing some work on that through Mr Linkohr .
We are doing an own-initiative report .
We need the rational planning directive .
Originally that was called the IRP Directive - the Integrated Resource Planning Directive .
Sometimes I think it has become the RIP Directive - rest in peace - because I do not know where it is .
Of course we need to coordinate our work .
Parliament has to coordinate with the Commission .
The Environment Commissioner has to coordinate her work with the Energy Commissioner .
Energy is 90 % of the problem in climate change .
And we in Parliament have to coordinate our work .
The Energy Committee and the Environment Committee both have responsibilities and should work together .
I sometimes wonder whether we do not need a Climate Change Committee where we could concentrate on this massive problem facing our planet .
I am very pleased that we have had this report .
It does not mean because there are few people that it is not taken seriously .
This will not be the last we hear of it .
Commissioner , you will be back when this Chamber is very much fuller , when the whole of Parliament will show that the European Union is a big player in climate change .
( Applause )
I shall be brief , owing to the confusion over speaking times .
I should simply like to make it clear that our group , the European People 's Party , like the other groups , believe that it is correct , as we agreed in November , for the European Union to keep its self-imposed target of 15 % by the year 2010 .
Madam President , Madam Commissioner , though the road to Kyoto has been a long and stony one , the outcome , namely the Kyoto internal agreements , has provided us with a ladder up which we will have to climb in eleven months , before we are ready for the next conference in Argentina .
The climb will be a difficult one for the European Union , since we have a double load to bear .
For one thing we in the Community have to set about changing the proposals which were made by the Commission , with an eye on the Kyoto proposal of three gases and 15 % , to six gases , which are now new .
I too believe that we should stick with our ambitious target .
We must also make a new proposal for the European bubble , which in my opinion should be retained , because I believe that it is good to have a joint model for the individual countries of the European Union and together to bear the burden of emission reduction , modernisation and the modification and renovation of our industrial society .
If the European bubble is to be credible , we need a legislative process which goes beyond the mere coordination of individual national measures .
But above all , we need this common European legislation to stop other countries using the EU bubble as an excuse for running an emissions trading business which saves them the trouble of making any emission reductions themselves , and this at the expense of developing countries who actually need their own reduction quotas .
Madam Commissioner , I believe that we should also revise our existing legislation and policies so that they are in line with this objective for the reduction of environmental emissions .
Other members have referred to renewable energies , energy saving measures and so forth , and to this I would like to add my own remarks .
In addition to a new agricultural policy , we are going to have to consider a new forestry policy , especially if we are serious about tackling the problem of what to do with the credits which are to be made for reafforestation , and not to trail behind other countries but rather to forge ahead with our own proposals and initiatives .
I believe that we must draw up international proposals which set out the next course of action and define the rules governing emissions trading and joint implementation ; these rules should be clear , verifiable , reconstructible and fair .
As well as offering my congratulations to those involved in the outcome of Kyoto , I therefore wish to express the hope that in the new year we shall all find the strength to accomplish the task ahead of the Buenos Aires conference , and I hope in all sincerity that here the support of Parliament will be called upon much more than in the past , for together we can achieve much more for the environment than we ever could by acting in isolation .
Madam President , I would like to say thank you for the many positive comments which have been made .
I agree entirely with Parliament that it is important that the EU continues to play a leading role in this field .
Of course , that was also why , in the last phase , instead of using the same target as the USA , namely a 7 % reduction , stated that we were committing ourselves to a reduction of 8 % .
What happens now that we will be analysing what the changed situation means .
What will it mean to have the six gases instead of three , which of course is part of the aims we established , and which of course also led to the 15 % .
A direct calculation shows that , if the reduction had been based on six and not three gases , the reduction would have been equivalent to 12 % .
In other words , there is quite a lot which has to be adjusted to the up to Kyoto .
So I can confirm here and now that we are getting down to these analyses , but , as Ken Collins has also said , we have not had a great deal of time to do so yet .
I look forward to further discussions on this matter in Parliament .
I also believe that I said in my first statement that we are preparing a communication which will give us a document which we can use as the basis for debate and reaching some joint results .
So I hope that I will have an opportunity to come back once we have analysed the figures a bit better and be able to say how things are going with the targets we have set up so far .
And so I understand we are united in the wish to continue to play a leading part .
And let me finish by referring to what the coming British Presidency said at the Council meeting the other day , namely that we should perhaps stop talking about burden-sharing and start talking instead about possibility sharing .
That is also what Mrs McNally was in favour of , and I believe that it is absolutely correct , that there are some unique opportunities here , including for European industry .
Mr President , I would not only like to thank the Commissioner for being here , but I would also like to say to all my colleagues that I think it is usual for a Parliament which respects itself to make an initial political evaluation a week after Kyoto took place .
In that sense it was quite right to discuss these issues now , and I regret Mr Collins ' words at the beginning .
Mr President , I did ask the Commissioner when we might look forward to the announcement .
Can the Commissioner give a response to this ?
Mr President , there were obviously some problems with the translation .
If the question was about the communication , I have already answered it .
We expect to have it ready by the Council meeting in June , or rather , we would of course very much like to have it before then , so it can be debated here in Parliament .
We know we will be busy , and we are putting quite a lot of effort into making the analyses and putting this communication together , because there is not much time before we will be in Buenos Aires , and we must be properly prepared for the occasion .
Thank you , Madam Commissioner .
Topical and urgent debate
The next item is the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-1042 / 97 by Mr Gunther and Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on the convention of Ottawa on a total ban on anti-people mines ; -B4-1051 / 97 by Mr Bertens , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , on the Ottawa Treaty on anti-people mines ; -B4-1059 / 97 by Mr Carnero González and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the Ottawa Treaty on the prohibition of the use , stockpiling , production and transfer of anti-personnel mines and on their destruction ; -B4-1063 / 97 by Mr Hory and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on the results of the Ottawa Conference on anti-people mines ; -B4-1072 / 97 , by Mr Cunningham and others , in the name of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the Ottawa Treaty on the prohibition of the use , stockpiling , production and transfer of anti-personnel mines and on their destruction ; -B4-1076 / 97 by Mr Azzolini and others , on behalf of the Group Union for Europe , on banning anti-people mines ; -B4-1081 / 97 by Mr Telkämper and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the Ottawa Treaty on the use , stockpiling , production and transfer of anti-personnel mines and on their destruction .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we all drew a sigh of relief when the Ottawa conference showed that a moratorium was being set up to prevent the spread of landmines .
However , this should not signify that we can now take a breather , that we can now relax our efforts , but rather it means that we have even more problems to tackle - such as the illegal trade in anti-personnel mines .
Illegal devices have , for example , already been discovered in mined areas around the town of Vukovar .
The second point I wish to raise is that we must be careful not to lump all non-signatories together , since this group also includes some countries , such as Finland , who operate a very strict monitoring procedure to ensure that no mines are exported from their territory to other parts of the world .
I believe that points 6 and 8 of our resolution are of particular importance .
It would constitute a major step forward if those countries who have not yet signed the moratorium , particularly the nations of Asia , could be drawn into a commitment to stop the export of these devices , so that the trade in landmines , and possibly even the illegal trade in such weapons , would no longer be supplied from these countries .
The question which I wish to put to the Commission is therefore as follows : How do you view the likelihood of forcing those countries , with whom we have a cooperation treaty or suchlike , to introduce such an export ban ?
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , as you know , at the beginning of this month an important step was made towards a global ban of anti-personnel mines .
What was unthinkable two years ago was signed two weeks ago by 122 countries : a total prohibition on the use , sale , export , storage and production of anti-personnel mines .
Credit is primarily due to the non-governmental organizations .
As you know , the coordinator of the campaign , Mrs Jody Williams , was not awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for nothing .
In addition of course the Canadian government which fourteen months ago took the political initiative for a permanently high stake .
Thirdly , the European Commission , Mr Commissioner .
The Commission played an important role in the establishment of three joint actions in the context of common foreign and security policy .
Fourthly , even this Parliament deserves a pat on the back .
Hearings , two reports and numerous resolutions which not only spurred on the Council and the Commission , but also had a positive effect outside the Union .
We all know this , but we need to hang on to the momentum .
The real work is starting .
First we have to see to it that the treaty is ratified .
Three countries have already set a good example , but we need forty in order for to the Ottawa Treaty to enter into force .
The Union must devote more energy to broadening possible participation in the treaty in to order to include more than 122 to 123 countries .
I recall that the Development Council as far back as November 1996 , indicated that the most important thing is , of course , support for mine clearance , which must go in particular to countries which respect to the ban on antipersonnel mines .
This seems to me an important factor in conducting politics with third countries and with third world countries .
The implementation is important .
Ten years after coming into force , the supplies have to have been destroyed , and the minefields cleared .
This is a big task which requires a great deal of effort , as well as a great deal of money .
The Union , ourselves in other words , are the biggest donor outside the United Nations .
But in any case I hope I may look forward to the new joint actions by the Council .
To make sure that mines are cleared as quickly as possible , effective coordination between all international efforts is needed .
I think it would be good if the UN played a role in this by , for example , setting up an International Steering Committee including the UN , the Union and obviously with a suitable role for the non governmental organizations .
It is extremely important that we do not lose momentum .
To achieve this , the NGOs - which , as I have said , have already been so crucial - will have to continue to play a role in the implementation and supervision of the implementation of the convention which will bring an end to immense suffering and a monthly death toll of 2 , 000 victims .
Mr President , we believe it is a matter for congratulation that 14 Member States have signed the Ottawa Convention , that Finland will probably not get through 1998 without signing it and also that several of the countries that have applied to join the European Union have signed it .
Nevertheless , we believe that some kind of pressure will have to be brought on the United States , China and Russia to sign it , because they are the biggest producing countries .
In our opinion the European Union should raise the subject of anti-personnel mines in its negotiations , trade agreements and bilateral agreements with each of those countries .
We would also emphasize - as Mr Martens did just now - the need for over 40 countries to ratify the convention immediately so that it comes into force .
Finally , I would like to emphasize the need to monitor compliance with the convention and provide financial aid for those countries which do not have the means to eliminate mines or help the victims of anti-personnel mines , so that in this way , just as it has in the case of the Kyoto summit we were discussing a few minutes ago , the European Union may continue to lead the world on matters which contribute so much to peace and the future well-being of so many people .
Mr President , it is very encouraging and refreshing to be able to stand up in this House and say that we have some results from our labours - that we see some progress .
I look around the Chamber and I see one or two Members who helped to found the All-Party Campaign Against Landmines some time ago , when I was a new Member of this Parliament .
We have seen a lot of progress made .
When the European Parliament has played a role in this peace process , we should be able to trumpet it about and perhaps take our minds off some of the negative publicity about trivia that we sometimes have to endure .
We should also congratulate Ireland on being the first of our Member States to ratify the treaty .
Also , we should congratulate Mauritius - where some of us hope to go shortly on Parliamentary business - and Canada for leading the way .
These are all very welcome developments .
I also salute the eastern European countries , from Slovakia to Bulgaria , that are also hoping to join the Union sometime , for showing the way in this regard .
All of this is very encouraging .
What we need to do now , as well as keeping up the pressure on the delinquent countries that have not signed up , is to move positively into putting resources into mine-clearance .
Here one sees some encouraging developments in the techniques of mine-clearance .
For example , just last week in Scotland somebody invented a new system which promises to speed up the clearance of mines in a safe and cheap way .
Similar breakthroughs , I know , are being made in other countries , including in Mr Cunningham 's constituency .
There are experts who are just waiting to be given the green light , so let us give them the green light from this House .
I would also ask the Commissioner to be active in cooperating with other countries that want a coordinated response .
In the resolution there is a very important point about avoiding the duplication and multiplication of organizations , but instead pulling together , so that together we can make a positive contribution to ridding mankind of this particular scourge .
Mr President , could I also add my congratulations to the Canadian Government who brought all this about ?
This particular fast-track approach - the Ottawa process - should be applauded and I very much hope that we will be able to use it on other occasions .
I should also like to congratulate Jody Williams and the international campaign to ban landmines , in particular on winning the Nobel Peace Prize .
I notice there are many members of the public here and I should also like to congratulate the public .
When Jody Williams spoke in Ottawa , she talked about superpowers and she referred to the general public - civil society - as a superpower , because it was the work of millions of people throughout Europe and the rest of the world that brought pressure to bear and brought the result that we are all congratulating ourselves on .
There are four things that we need to do .
We obviously need to persuade those countries that have not signed , and in particular the United States , Russia , China , Pakistan , India - some of the main producers of landmines - to sign up .
I very much hope that the Council and the Commission , in whatever dealings that they have with these countries , will raise the issue on every possible occasion .
We also need to lead the way , as people have said , on ratification .
The treaty will not come into operation until six months after forty countries have signed , but I am delighted that one or two European Union countries are in the forefront .
Would it not be absolutely brilliant if the whole of the European Union were amongst those first forty countries which led to the treaty being fully ratified ?
Thirdly on mine-clearance , we need a structured and coordinated approach , not just within the institutions of the European Union but throughout the international community so that what is done is done properly and wisely .
I would like to see some statement of principle , some criterion , some yardstick by which this could be measured because I would like to think that the public money - the taxpayers ' money - which will be spent on mine-clearance will be placed only with those companies who could guarantee , according to a statement of principles , that it would be spent properly , efficiently , wisely , and so on .
Finally , we also need to do something about the victims of landmines .
People have already said , there are something like 20 , 000 amputees already in Angola ; there are almost 10 , 000 in Mozambique ; there are just as many in Cambodia and so on , so we really do need to put more energy and more money into these rehabilitation programmes .
Finally , just to sum up the four points , we need the treaty ratified as quickly as possible ; we need to deal with the tens of millions of mines and the unexploded ordnance littering the world ; and we need to deal with the problems facing the victims .
We need to do all of these and we need to do them as speedily as possible .
Mr President , the Ottawa Conference represented a first small step , a first small victory on the long road to a comprehensive ban on landmines .
I think that the Canadian government should be congratulated on this achievement , as indeed should be Nobel Peace Prize winners Jody Williams and Thomas Gebauer of Medico International , who pressed ahead with their landmine campaign in Europe and who provided support for the Ottawa resolution .
It is now a crime to manufacture , store and deploy landmines .
We must intensify our efforts and work towards a comprehensive ban on such devices .
Whether we call them anti-personnel mines , landmines or anti-tank mines , at the end of the day , a mine is a mine , a mine is a weapon and as such it is an inhuman and deadly device .
It does not discriminate between a bus full of children or a tank .
For this reason , all mines should be banned .
In the wake of the Canadian conference the EU Member States must now ratify the Ottawa Treaty , implement its provisions as soon as possible and urge the USA , Russia , China and India to do the same .
In closing let me point out that further measures are needed in this respect and that funds must be provided for rehabilitation .
The Member States themselves should take steps to ensure that no more mines are produced .
To this effect we must make a commitment so that we are not subsequently obliged to spend money on curing the suffering which we ourselves have caused .
Thank you .
Mr President , I would just like to say a couple of words on this important matter .
Our feelings , mine and my colleagues in the Alleanza Nazionale , are fairly contradictory at the moment because , while we have accepted the conclusions of the Ottawa summit and the treaty incorporating the requests made by our Parliament , a treaty relating to an international instrument that imposes a total prohibition on anti-personnel mines and the undertaking that the signatory companies will not use them under any circumstances , and while pleased with the number of signatory companies , which is clearly higher than expectations , at the same time we can only criticize the position of those states , including in particular the United States , Russia , China and India , which persist in not signing the Treaty and continue to produce and sell this horrible instrument of death .
We therefore ask for strong political pressure to be applied by the European Institutions to those countries , so that they sign the treaty as soon as possible , and on the Member States to speed up the necessary administrative and legislative measures for the immediate inclusion of the regulations .
Mr President , just like many others here , I would like to congratulate peace prize winner Jody Williams and the campaign organization for their successful work on convincing parliaments , governments and the general public to ban these terrible weapons .
In less than five years they and the active members of the public have achieved the success of getting more than 120 states to commit themselves to banning and destroying these mines .
The truth is that these mines are deliberately designed to disable people .
An injured person requires medical care . The amount of explosive has been precisely calculated to achieve that result .
That can be seen from the sales brochures for landmines .
However , the result is not only that soldiers are maimed and killed , but that civilians , women and children also become victims .
When the war is over , the landmines are still there .
The war continues for the civilian population and the silent killers wait for their victims .
I am very pleased that the European Parliament , in anticipation of a total ban , has taken an early position to the effect that each Member State should ban landmines .
Fourteen EU countries have done so , but regrettably neither Finland , nor the applicant countries of Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania have done so .
I think they should sign up to the agreement on the banning of anti-personnel mines as soon as possible .
A ban is not enough , however .
All of the hundreds of millions of mines laid must be destroyed .
To produce a landmine costs 3 dollars . To find and destroy it costs $ 1 , 000 .
It is good that in its budget today the European Parliament has said that we should set about researching into this .
It is also important , as several here have said , that we have effective international coordination , both of mine- clearance and of rehabilitation of victims .
The EU can assist greatly in such work .
But we as individuals can also contribute in fact .
An example of this is what is happening in Sweden today .
Our largest newspaper has got involved in a campaign for the victims of landmines and is collecting money to train mine sniffer-dogs , which are the most effective thing we have at the moment .
I therefore call upon my colleagues here in Parliament to take the same initiative in their countries so we can rid ourselves of these terrible weapons for ever .
Mr President , I have had the less than pleasant task of having to judge the government of a country whose citizens sent me here to the European Parliament .
Namely , the Finnish government .
For once , though , I have some relatively positive news to relate : this week in Finland a high level proposal came out which stated that Finland might at last prepare to sign the Ottawa Convention .
This is reckoned to take place around the year 2006 .
Finland imagines she will require around another ten years ' transition time to ratify the convention , but I believe that a major breakthrough in Finland has already occurred .
Politicians will certainly do all they possibly can to get Finland to give up the use of all anti-personnel mines .
The risk is that Finland will start to consider very expensive alternatives to these anti-personnel mines .
I myself would rather Finland revised its view of the threat from the outside .
I do not think Russia is any longer the enemy of Finland she was during the Second World War .
Mr President , I think we would all agree that the Ottawa Process has been a great success .
The Commission has congratulated the Canadian Government and , in particular , Mr Lloyd Axworthy for a really remarkable effort .
Of course , the process is not yet over .
There are many key states which have not subscribed to the convention and some practical problems remain .
The Commission will take every opportunity to encourage countries that are not yet signatories to subscribe to the convention and I can assure Mrs Günther that we will certainly use the opportunities in relation to the countries she has referred to seek to persuade them to do so .
In any case , the Commission will press for immediate export bans of the kind that are already in place in the European Union so that sources of supply to areas of conflict can be removed .
The joint action of 28 November also introduces measures to implement a moratorium on the production of anti-personnel landmines and emphasizes the need , as has been stated by a number of speakers , for early ratification of the convention .
Since the Ottawa Conference there have been opportunities to discuss with Canada and other leading contributors ways in which greater coherence might be introduced into the global effort .
The European Union , along with other major donors and actors , expects to play a major role in achieving this .
The suggestion of greater coordination which was advanced by Mr Cunningham is very important .
We will strongly pursue the idea of an international steering committee supported by working groups in order to focus international efforts on the priority tasks .
At the same time I would expect that the Commission contribution to de-mining and related research will increase during the coming year and I would estimate that over ECU 40 million will be committed , drawing on various budget lines .
The Commission is grateful for the recognition that has been accorded to its own role in the resolutions .
For its part , the Commission would like to pay tribute to the role of the European Parliament and those members of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy and the Committee on Development and Cooperation who have campaigned tirelessly and with great commitment to overcome the tragedy of anti-personnel landmines .
There is still much to be done ; but we believe that there is still some cause for optimism ; that with continuing commitment the worst of the problems , at least , can be overcome in the medium term .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-1049 / 97 by Mr Tindemans and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Peoples ' Party , on the situation in Burundi ; -B4-1052 / 97 by Mrs André and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , on the warring factions in Burundi ; -B4-1065 / 97 by Mr Vandemeulebroucke , on behalf of the Group of European Radical Alliance , on arms flows to the warring factions in Burundi ; -B4-1075 / 97 by Mr Swoboda and Mrs van Putten , on behalf of the group of the Party of European Socialists , on the situation in Burundi ; -B4-1077 / 97 by Mr Azzolini and others , on behalf of the group Union for Europe , on the situation in Burundi ; -B4-1085 / 97 by Mrs Aelvoet and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on arms flows to the warring factions in Burundi
Yet again we are compelled to raise our voices to condemn the atrocities committed in Burundi .
Yesterday it was one faction , today it is the other ; who will be the perpetrators or the victims tomorrow ?
Massacres took place in Burundi in 1965 , in 1972 , in 1973 ; and between 1993 and 1997 they never stopped .
Even Madeleine Albright felt compelled to speak about the errors made in Africa , albeit in notably hushed tones .
What is the point of us recommending human rights and democracy if the conditions to achieve these objectives are not fulfilled .
We rightly condemn the massacres in Burundi , committed , it says in the compromise text , by Hutu extremists .
But we do not say , or no longer say , that in that same country the present leaders assumed power through a military coup after democratic elections had taken place .
We rightly spoke of reconciliation and reform .
But what are the chances this will be achieved when the balance between Hutus and Tutsis is extremely uneven , 85 % against 15 % .
The latter minority has total control of the country .
What will have to change , or can be changed in a peaceful manner ?
That is why I take the opportunity to repeat once more what I suggested earlier .
The United Nations must act .
A reformed Trusteeship Council must become co-active in the administration of this country , and prevent two warring ethnic groups from massacring each other .
An ongoing , cruel reality calls for bold measures .
Diplomatic rhetoric amounts to hypocrisy in this situation .
Mr President , Burundi has by now become a classic example of the destabilizing effect of arms supplies .
A not insignificant report by Human Rights Watch shows that dozens of countries are involved in this trade , including three EU countries : France , Belgium and Germany .
This has to be stated .
This Parliament would be well-advised to proceed to explicit condemnation of these Member States ' policies .
Despite all our grand plans , like the code of conduct on the arms trade and joint action to combat the illegal small arms trade , the Member States continue to undermine existing policy .
This has to be denounced loud and clear and incorporated into the discussion about the forthcoming Commission Proposals concerning European arms exports .
As regards Burundi , the Union should argue for an international bilateral arms embargo and supervise proper compliance .
The EU must also promote the reactivation of the UN Committee of Inquiry on Arms Trading .
This committee of inquiry should then cover the entire Great Lakes region .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union evidently has no coherent peace strategy with respect to the states around the African Great Lakes .
This vindicates the alarming report by the organization Human Rights Watch on the situation in Burundi .
The arms embargo turns out to be a complete sieve .
Countries such as Belgium , Germany and France are mentioned , and accused , but those accusations are left out in the compromise resolution .
On top of that there is the war mafia from China , Russia , North Korea , Azerbaijan , the Ukraine , and Bulgaria .
African states are used unscrupulously as intermediate ports : Tanzania , Uganda , former Zaire , Angola , Kenya and even South Africa .
I was one of the signatories of the draft resolution , even though the European States carefully deleted their responsibility .
Yet the compromise is extremely important .
A number of international actions are needed , including expansion of the embargo , not unilaterally , but towards both parties concerned , and I fully support Mr Tindemans ' suggestion which states that what is happening here is pure hypocrisy .
I would also like to see the establishment of a peace conference including all states around the Great Lakes , as well as the establishment of a regional agency for arms control with permanent military observers .
But these are few suggestions in which we can merely co-participate .
But to my mind the Commission could take more concrete action .
I will give you a few examples : the drawing up of an arms trade certificate of true destination including the intermediate countries ; bringing in UCLAF which is not satisfactorily involved , stronger checks on foreign pilots who have an EU Member State as their base , measures against shipping companies who violate the embargo and who should therefore be given a licence ban within the EU .
I would like to ask , Mr President , for these things to be discussed during the ACP conference .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are today discussing the situation in Burundi , and some of you , even those on the platform , may be intrigued to know why the European Parliament is debating this issue at all .
As has already been said , as with so many conflicts in Africa , we are very directly involved .
As is the case with many conflicts , our involvement is not a positive one , but rather concerns the fact that our weapons are being used in that country for killing people .
This means that in Europe profits and even jobs , let us be honest , are linked with the death of innocent people in Africa .
I am pleased to see that there is broad agreement within this House for taking active steps to resolve the situation in Burundi and indeed in other crisis regions .
The world will never be a paradise and there will always be weapons .
But surely it is high time for us to stop supplying weapons to obvious crisis regions , to put an end to our support for such conflicts , to stop supplying the killing fields of the world .
So my party is unequivocal is supporting this motion , namely an arms embargo , which must also involve on-the-spot checks to ensure that weapons are not reaching Burundi by more obscure routes .
For this reason we naturally give our full and unreserved support to the restoration of peace through the medium of a peace conference .
As well as restoring peace to the region , we must establish the conditions which will allow people who have lived together peaceably for decades to resume this way of live , instead of going for each other 's throats .
In all these matters it is imperative for Europe to act as the main peace broker , and not as a world power supplying weapons to ensure that conflicts are resolved militarily , through force of arms .
Here I would ask that the initiative taken by the UK government , which is soon to take up the EU , be carried through to its positive conclusion , namely the so-called " code of conduct ' , which ensures that rules are established for arms exports , that these rules be made more transparent , and that they should more readily correspond with the concept of human rights which we have in Europe .
With the permission of this House I should like to close by informing Parliament that a member of our party , who has prepared urgency debates through numerous discussions with other groups and who is very well known to the Parliamentary staff , namely Nadia van Hamme , is leaving us for Africa , although not Burundi , to carry out active peace work on that continent .
In my official capacity I should like to express my thanks to her for the excellent work which she has undertaken in cooperation with other members of this House .
Mr President , it is true that the problem with the resolution is that it remains weak ; but it had one advantage , namely that it deals with an embargo which has to monitor both sides of Burundi , which points clearly to the fact that there is a serious problem with the Burundi army . One should never forget , after all , that it was this army which murdered a democratically elected president .
As far the as the supply of arms is concerned , it is evident that it knows no ideological bounds .
They come from everywhere . China , Russia , France ; Belgian firms are active .
We support the embargo , but the question is , how can it be made effective ?
On that front , too , the resolution is substandard .
I would like to conclude with one remark , namely that if no political solution in Burundi is forthcoming , no embargo in the world will do its work .
Besides , let us not forget that when push comes to shove , there is no need to import arms from abroad : machetes can be used for killing and murdering .
Mr President , it is difficult indeed in the melee of Burundi , which is beset by civil war , attacks on minorities , tribal and clan feuds , to find the all-important red thread which would mark the beginning of a peace process .
It would be easier if we could assume that all those involved were honestly striving to settle their differences without recourse to arms , but that is just not the case .
We have had a quote from an NGO , which has been mentioned by three Member States and by my own in particular .
I would like to say that I would be keen to check out this source , since no other country in Europe has such strict arms export laws as the Federal Republic of Germany .
It is also important to distinguish whether this involves the equipping of police units , whose job is to protect the unarmed civilian population , or what the details of this report actually are .
It is clear that even if our conditions were met , we are still unlikely to see peace in this region , so deplorable is the whole situation .
Everybody will be deeply affected by the concern expressed by Parliament at what is going on in the Great Lakes region , in particular at the quantity of arms that are getting there and at the death and misery that these are causing .
Speaking for myself , one could not but share the sense of frustration felt by Mr Tindemans , bringing all his considerable authority and experience to bear on this subject ; the passionate call from Mr Swoboda to be active was also one that evoked a ready response .
The Commission has considered in the past the possibility of action against the uncontrolled sale of arms .
But rightly or wrongly , this lies within the competence of the Member States .
They have shown all too clearly that it is a competence that they are determined to retain .
Naturally the Commission would support any action taken by Member States or the United Nations to restrict the sales of arms in the region , but it should be borne in mind , such is the complexity of the issue , that even the present economic embargo imposed on Burundi by the neighbouring states , which includes an embargo on arms sales , is patently not working .
The Commission agrees that the Organization of African Unity has an essential role to play in restoring peace and order to the Great Lakes region , which was confirmed by the Council when it decided last October that ECU 860 , 000 should be allocated for logistical support to the OAU Conflict Prevention Mechanism to assist them in this work .
It will not solve the problem in itself , but it is one of the limited number of practical acts - there were many calls - rightfully so - for practical action rather than mere expressions of concern - that can be taken by us .
Furthermore the Commission continues to call on all parties to the Burundi conflict to start peace negotiations .
Clearly the speaker who said that is the only solution is correct .
We have informed the Burundi authorities again , looking at what we can practically do to encourage what others have to perform , that we will provide financial and technical help to set up a débat national , to restart rehabilitation and human rights programmes , and for any other useful measures as soon as there are real signs of progress towards peace in Burundi .
So I share the frustration and anger that is expressed , but can do no more than state , in addition to that , the specific and practical action that we can take .
I believe we are doing what is within our capacity and certainly are ready to consider anything more .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
Mr President , as the sponsor of this resolution , with colleagues , we make no apology for raising the issue of human rights violations in Nigeria yet again .
We do so following the decision by the Council of Ministers at the end of last month to extend for one more year the sanctions imposed on Nigeria .
But what concerns us , certainly me , is an apparent softening of the Council 's attitude towards Nigeria and Nigerian sanctions .
It appears for instance that two or three Member States are now issuing visas to Nigerians to do business overseas , contrary to the Council decision as we understand it .
Furthermore , many of us regret that Nigeria is to be allowed to take part in the Football World Cup next year , the denial of which could ironically have had more influence on the political situation in Nigeria than anything else .
So let us be clear : the situation in Nigeria continues to be extremely serious .
General Yar 'Adua , a principal opponent of General Abacha , died in prison in mysterious circumstances .
On the other hand , some western oil companies , in partnership with the Nigerians , are being denied sufficient funds by the Nigerian oil company to remedy environmental deficiencies in areas where there has been severe criticism .
And I need hardly remind the House that Nigeria is sadly short of a democratic institution : , it lacks freedom of the press , no doubt freedom of speech , and there are many other issues besides - which is ample justification for the terms of our motion .
Mr President , despite existing international pressure the so-called gradual democratization that general Abacha had promised , remains wanting .
Mr Moorhouse referred to the mysterious death of General Yar 'Adua , one of the opposition leaders , and I wish to refer to the sentencing of the Nobel Prize winner Wole Soyinke who is living in exile .
These are confirmations of an existing policy of infliction of torture , the arrests of journalists , and the repression of the Ogoni .
It is a good thing that the Council has extended the sanctions against Nigeria by one year .
It is a clear message , but as Moorhouse said , the sanctions do not go far enough , even more so when they are not implemented effectively , worse than that , when they are being undermined in an unacceptable way because they are evaded .
The Union must look for instruments to monitor and enforce the sanctions .
Furthermore , Mr President , Mr Commissioner , the Liberal Group remains in favour of the oil embargo .
It is the only way to punish this country effectively .
Mr President , we seem to have had a whole catalogue of missed chances in the last few months .
First of all the Commonwealth Summit in Edinburgh failed to take firm action against Nigeria ; then the Council extended sanctions by only one year ; and then , as has been mentioned , there was the failure to apply visa restrictions with Nigeria being allowed to play in the World Cup next year .
All of these are failures on our part , as members of the European Union , and failures by the Commonwealth .
So what is to be done now ?
There is some slight gleam of hope .
I was in Ghana recently with a mission from the European Parliament .
They have shown that they can make the transition to democracy , and we are told that the Nigerians would like to be seen in the same light as Ghana .
So we have to say to General Abacha that if he is serious , he can try to convince us of the return to democracy that he says he espouses .
For him the message is quite clear : if he is serious about this return to democracy , he must free Abiola and the other political prisoners and return to the democratic process forthwith .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner Brittan , I wish to draw your attention in particular to point 5 of the resolution , in which we call for the release of political prisoners .
The list of names includes one Ogana Ifowodo .
Let me tell you something about him .
Ogana Ifowodo is a member of the Heinrich Böll Foundation , which is a German-based political group to which I myself belong .
Mr Ifowodo attended the Commonwealth Conference in Edinburgh , at the invitation of our Foundation , in order to present the annual report of the Civil Liberties Organization from Nigeria on the human rights situation in that country .
He was arrested at the Benin-Nigerian border on his return to Nigeria on 6 November .
The Nigerian security police have so far refused family members and work colleagues access to Mr Ifowodo .
There is therefore a risk that he has been tortured , or even that this is still going on .
The security police have confirmed the arrest and the place of detention and have cited " obstinacy ' as the reason for the arrest .
Of course , no such offence exists in Nigerian law , but presumably this refers to the real motives behind the arrest .
The arrest itself is only one instance in a series of arrests of Nigerian journalists and workers from human rights organizations linked with the Pro-Democracy Movement .
This attempt to silence all critics of the regime is clearly designed to pave the way to a form of democracy which will be controlled by the military government .
Only this can explain the so-called charge of obstinacy .
Commission Vice-President Brittan , we recently received a visit from Nobel Peace Prize winner Wole Soyinke .
Talks were held in the Commission and in Parliament with Council representatives at all levels .
I would like to put to them the following two questions : Firstly , what further steps can the Commission take , together with the Member States , to move towards an embargo on oil from Nigeria ?
And secondly : the budgetary procedure now incorporates a new budget line .
How does the Commission propose to deploy this new line ?
Mr President , the most serious threat to consistency in international relations is the permanent temptation to be strong towards the weak and weak towards the strong .
There is no doubt that the regime in Nigeria falls into the category of the strong .
Strong not in reason , which is totally lacking , but certainly in military and economic power .
Nigeria is a rich country where a large part of the population lives in conditions of total poverty , as the country 's resources , particularly the income from oil exports , are used to keep a military clique and its loyal allies and servants in total luxury .
Sanctions have rightly been taken against Nigeria for some time .
However , we have still not taken the only decision that would really affect the interests of the regime : an embargo on oil exports .
The list of crimes committed by the Nigerian system is now very long .
From the bloody suppression of entire peoples , starting with the Ogoni , to assassinations , arbitrary arrests , torture , the disappearance of any political opponents , and the aberrant measures taken against the Nobel Prize winner Wole Soyinke .
The same arrogant refusal to welcome a delegation from the European Parliament in Nigeria in October , which wanted to hold a series of meetings and visits , that would not submit to the restrictions laid down by the regime , bears witness to the absolute desire not to take positive steps along the road to democratization .
However , the electoral process used in the country is nothing more than a despicable farce , given that it is impossible for any opposition to take part .
On this occasion too , the European Parliament has many requests to make to the Nigerian authorities .
We strongly support all of them but we fear that , if the international community , starting with the European Union , fails to take the appropriate pressure measures , they will once again risk falling on deaf ears .
Mr President , Nigeria is once more on our agenda as a result of the continuous violations of human rights and violations of democratic principles .
Once more , because we have criticized this country many times before , but regrettably it has not really helped very much .
In the meantime new reports come our way like the death of one of the confidants of Mr Abacha , who with forty other political prisoners was incarcerated in rough conditions in a prison near Enubu , 500 kilometres from for example health-care facilities .
Amnesty International has informed us that the conditions were degrading , and it is no surprise that this eminent person , someone we had only just got to know of , died .
It is a sad situation .
It is the umpteenth drama in a long series .
The time has truly come to step us the measures .
This is the umpteenth time a drama is taking place in this country .
It is also the umpteenth time we are pleading for firmer measures .
We observe the contrary is taking place , because visas , which really ought no longer to be issued , are being issued increasingly .
Our request to impose an oil embargo , is not being observed .
Worse still , Shell , which has been reducing its activities in Nigeria , is being replaced by other oil companies , which are keen to fill up the gap left by Shell .
We ask the European Commission to genuinely step up its measures .
This has also been requested internationally .
I think an oil boycott must indeed be unavoidable .
I would like to know what Mr Brittan thinks about this .
Sierra Leone
Mr President , during the June part-session , we censured the military coup in Sierra Leone and suggested the suspension of all European aid to the Freetown regime , and we were also surprised that Nigeria was entrusted with the role of gendarme of law and democracy .
Since that resolution , the European Union has confirmed the suspension of European aid , and the Security Council has established an oil and arms embargo against Sierra Leone and has prohibited international travel by members of the junta .
Finally , an agreement to return to democracy appears to have been reached between the junta and the Committee of Five of the States of Western Africa .
That is all perfect , the recent developments , I mean , but this group would like to emphasize one point : what are our incitements to democracy worth if we do not choose to consolidate them by means of generous development aid ?
The democratic process in Sierra Leone has been described as exemplary , but we have left that country alone to cope with a thousand and one economic and social problems caused , as is often the case , by too rapid a programme of a structural change .
We therefore exposed Sierra Leone to a coup , which cannot fail to repeat itself tomorrow .
As one African journalist phrased it : ' The West sells democracy , but it does not provide any after-sales service . '
Mr President , on 25 May sections of the Sierra Leone armed forced staged a revolt .
They deposed the democratically elected President Kabbah and forced him to flee the country .
This was the third coup d 'état since 1992 .
The process of democratisation introduced by the civil authorities and by the rebels of the United Revolutionary Front in March 1996 , which also led to the holding of free elections with several parties participating , was destroyed .
The result , according to the World Food Programme , was a situation in which 200 , 000 people were faced with starvation , while a similar number became refugees .
The question which now faces us is whether or not we can and should provide immediate aid .
And how could this be done ?
I think that we should avoid assisting the military junta in any way and should instead support the demands of the UN Safety Council for the imposition of an arms and oil embargo in order to force the junta back to the democratisation process .
Mr President , the population of Sierra Leone is experiencing disastrous times .
After three coups the country is totally disrupted , its facilities for housing , education , and health care have been seriously damaged , and food supplies are extremely sparse .
200 , 000 people in the country itself are threatened with famine , as are 200 , 000 in the north of Ghana and the Ivory Coast .
When we were there recently , we found out how serious the situation was .
Thankfully , the European Union does give some assistance in those camps , but it now looks like more help is needed .
On that point we would like spur on the European Commission to take more political initiatives , particularly to support the tentative peace negotiations which have recently begun .
I would like to add that in Sierra Leone there are Nigerian soldiers to keep the peace .
Having only just heard what the Nigerians get up to in their country , and that these people come under the military authority of Nigeria , it is not difficult to imagine that they are not the best people to restore peace in that country .
The European Union has a big job to do here .
There are a number of proposals in the resolution . We support these warmly .
Croatia
Mr President , our group , the Liberal Group , hopes that we will be able to give the Croatian government a clear and unanimous sign of disapproval .
The Tudjman government undermines democracy and freedom of speech in many ways .
Things are made very difficult for independent newspapers such as Globus and Feral Tribune ; and non-governmental organizations such as the Helsinki Committee and the Open Society Institute are obstructed in their work .
These are a few examples of the systematic policy of violation of international agreements which Croatia , too , signed , and violations of the rules of organizations of which Croatia is a member .
Criticism from the Council of Europe , the OSCE , and the Union are systematically ignored .
I do not think President Tudjman expects the international community wishing to continue with Croatia this way .
I only need to remind everyone that the American administration earlier this year pleaded for the suspension of Croatia 's membership of the Council of Europe .
The Liberal Group has also declared itself in favour of this .
Each time we discuss the situation in Croatia , that the number of reasons for supporting this suspension appears to have only increased .
Finally , Mr President , the Union must in the meantime devote itself to further development of democracy , free media and non-governmental organizations as part of the Phare democracy programme .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Croatia is without doubt in a difficult situation .
After a war which has seen the repatriation of refugees , still tending towards nationalism , I can well understand why democracy has not been able to develop fully .
But it is a matter for particular regret that unfortunately , as we witnessed during our delegation 's visit , justified complaints are increasingly common that serious problems exist in respect of press freedom .
Dealing with the media is never easy in any country , and certainly not in one which is in the grip of a social crisis .
But it is because Croatia has avowed allegiance to the European ideal , and seeks a rapprochement with us - or at least that is what is being declared - that the European Parliament must be strict in its dealings and must apply certain criteria .
After our visit I personally suggested considering whether we should provide more financial aid under the Phare programme on the basis of conditionality , when this suits Croatia and when Croatia takes active steps towards democracy , the integration of its refugees , and so on .
I regret all the more that the positive responses which we as European parliamentarians tried to give are not really being met with positive reactions from the Croatian side .
In this sense we naturally support the resolution and call upon Croatia to do everything in its power to develop a fully democratic State .
Mr President , I will use my speaking time to express my support for the honourable gentleman and the other speakers .
I think it is true that in this House we feel that we want and that we try to ensure that the European countries whose ambition it is one day to become members of the European Union respect human rights .
We consider it therefore a gesture of friendship towards the Croatian people to remind them of their obligations , because in our eyes , they are the essential basis of the dialogue with countries which , I repeat , are destined to become members of the European Union .
An important event has taken place today . I mean the arrest of two war criminals , in fact , two Croatian war criminals , indicted by the international court .
This is an important signal , if that country wants one day , and I hope it will , to become a full member of the European Union , when it complies with the principle of respect for fundamental rights .
It is in this spirit that we proposed this resolution , in the hope that the Parliament will shortly adopt it .
Mr President , censorship is prohibited by law in Croatia yet intimidation takes place on a large scale ; intimidation of independent magazines , independent journalists , independent organizations .
The technique used is one the hand to summon people or institutions , and on the other hand to threaten them with financial compensations which are being claimed .
Specifically at the moment , 100 cases are running against Globus , 45 against Feral Tribune , 32 against National , 51 against Novilus .
There are 7 cases against Mr Cisak , the chairman of the Croatian Helsinki Committee .
He is threatened with six months imprisonment .
So this possibility is very real .
These kinds of actions are all clearly politically motivated , these kind of actions .
In that sense I regret that the words " politically motivated ' was deleted from the joint resolution shortly put to a vote , as demanded by the Christian Democrats .
Because that is the crux of the issue .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my Party supports this resolution because we too wish to assist Croatia in developing the type of society which we in Europe accept as normal .
As far as the electronic medium is concerned , we soon expect to see a proper Croatian television service operating under public law .
The sensitivity of Croatia 's rulers to critical articles , both justified and unwarranted , which have appeared in various press media has often led to an over-reaction , and this we condemn .
The new right of association and assembly is now in line with European standards .
Foundations in Croatia can now exist quite happily under the new system .
Only the Soros Foundation has problems with this , since it has now lost its former privileges .
The Open Society Foundation is now also obliged to register as a foundation , and it is unwilling to do so .
It wants to retain its NGO status .
There are more than 1 , 800 NGOs operating in Croatia .
What is needed is a regulative law similar to that which operates in the rest of Europe .
These organizations have to demonstrate , for example , that they are there for the public benefit , that is to say that they are non-profit making .
The bill to regulate humanitarian organizations , which is now before the Croatian Parliament , the Sabor , still has its flaws .
We call upon our colleagues in that Parliament to make improvements by introducing amendments to the legislative process .
We are quite confident that this will happen and today 's motion will certainly help to support these efforts .
Mr President , last night Dutch and American soldiers from the SFOR arrested two Croatians suspected of war crimes in the North of Bosnia .
They are now in The Netherlands and next year will appear next year before the international criminal court of justice .
A positive bit of news we might say .
It appears that in Croatia itself the reports are little more negative .
It appears that statutes of associations are abused , but when I listen to Mrs Pack , a different picture emerges .
At any rate we find that the Helsinki Committee and Open Society Institute which have invested 30 million in the country , are not able to function openly .
Journalists are taken to court .
This is not what the Union had in mind when it recognized an independent Croatia .
In many ways we have been too patient for too long .
It is therefore time to raise the alarm , and to insist that the law is not abused and that the media are given free rein .
Mr President , it gave me great pleasure to read the resolution before us here today . For it is the very newspaper for which I work which is being portrayed as the object of persecution .
I know only too well that Globus is in fact one of Croatia 's keenest opposition papers , that it criticizes the Croatian Government in a manner which would not be tolerated in certain other countries , even democratic ones . I know this because I have a lot to do with the editorship of this newspaper .
I do not even consider it unreasonable that action has been taken against Globus , since I am aware of a number of democratic countries close to Croatia in which similar events have also been reported , where editors of certain newspapers have even had to resign because they have offended the head of government .
I would just like to make one point .
As Mr Swoboda has stated so effectively , Croatia faces enormous difficulties .
The country has been destroyed by war and has a huge problem with refugees , which Croatia has had to accommodate in very large numbers . Yet for all this , there is no doubt that in this respect the situation is not all bad .
I personally was present during the elections in Croatia , where I was following the efforts of the opposition parties , and I can say that these opposition groups were able to operate quite freely and even achieved real successes .
That the outcome of the elections was somewhat different can be blamed on the electors , but not on the government .
I make these comments only to point out that Croatia is a European State , that its culture is primarily European and that we are all keen to help that country in its current difficulties . This does not mean kicking it in the shins , but rather providing real support for the efforts which are currently being made there .
That should be the real intentions of this House .
Mr President , I will not approve the resolution on Croatia before us for various reasons .
I would first and foremost like to remind everyone that we in the European Parliament are badly placed to get on our high horse regards Croatia .
The great majority of this Parliament , after all , never even uttered one word of help to the Croatian population when , with difficulty and enormous risks , it pulled itself free from the Yugoslav straitjacket .
Then , a few years ago , piles resolutions were not produced to dismiss and condemn the struggle for independence of these people .
And I would also like to remind everyone that the European community institutions , including this Parliament , continued to defend the Yugoslav utopia to its dying day , until Germany was the only country the have the courage to chose the side of the Croatian people .
Nor will I approve the resolution , as I refuse to put Croatia on a par with countries like China , North Korea , Nigeria , and so on , who are rightly admonished here .
There is undoubtedly much to be improved in Croatia , but this country does not belong to this list or to those to be put in the dock .
I should also say that I consider the calls in this Parliament today for absolute political free speech in Croatia a little hypocritical .
After all , we adopt resolutions like clockwork in which political free speech within our Union is curtailed and rejected , for example , for anyone who questions the multicultural utopia .
Under the guise of combatting racism , almost all Member States have adopted muzzling laws which punish free speech about this enormous , political immigration problem with penalties , fines , and with ineligibility .
And equal access for all opinions to the media , which is demanded for Croatia , is a joke in most of our Member State when you belong to a democratic but right wing and national opposition , as I do .
When I consider all this , I can only conclude that Croatia should perhaps refine its democracy , but really has few lessons to learn from this Parliament .
Albania
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , my first point is as follows : There have been some problems with the translation of the resolution .
My original German wording referred to a murder attempt in Parliament and this was translated in all other languages as " murder ' .
This of course makes a fundamental difference for us here , and an even bigger one for Mr Hajdari , who was attacked in the House , since he is still alive and was not in fact murdered , thank goodness .
Furthermore , in some of the translations it seems that a connection has been made between my request , or indeed that contained in the resolution , that in collaboration with the European Council an observer be sent to the Albanian Parliament , and the aid which we currently send to Albania .
In the German version it is quite clear that no such conditions have been imposed .
Both issues must obviously be regarded at the same time , but they should not be regarded as interdependent .
When I drew up this urgency resolution , I was unaware of just how pressing the matter would be , since a number of decisions were being taken in Albania , and primarily in the Albanian Parliament , which from our point of view we simply cannot accept .
For example , a number of weeks ago a decision was taken for a time-limit which the Speaker of the Albanian Parliament imposed on the Constitutional Court .
The Speaker said that if the Constitutional Court did not make certain changes , then it would be dissolved on 20 December of this year , that is to say in two days time .
Parliament was therefore stating quite categorically that if certain things were not done , the subsequent appointment of judges to the Constitutional Court would be changed in such a way that this would only be undertaken in accordance with the political sentiment of the ruling Party .
This is something which we cannot tolerate and I believe that those who are today opposing this resolution on Albania must themselves accept some responsibility if the Constitutional Court in Albania is illegally and undemocratically dissolved the day after tomorrow .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am very unhappy to see that the PPE has taken a stance without consulting the other members of the delegation , and is even quoting the delegation as if there were a common opinion on this issue .
This is simply going it alone and , Mrs Pack , I am very sorry that you have decided to depart from the route of cooperation which we were only too happy to travel .
Mr Habsburg , and here I mean Otto von Habsburg , has said that the outcome of the elections was not to the liking of many of those taking part .
This is the fault of the electors , not the government .
But the course which you are adopting is now just the reverse .
Because your sister or brother party did not win , but in fact lost , suddenly everything which the government there is doing is wrong .
This is something which I totally repudiate and reject .
My Party and I are not prepared to proceed with the form of non-cooperation which you have adopted within the delegation .
You have not sought contact and have not convened any delegation meetings to discuss this particular issue .
During our joint visit to Albania you even called upon the opposition to return to Parliament and to cooperate with it , something which was not part of your resolution .
In fact there is not a single mention of it in the resolution .
Your motion does not in any way convey the discussion which we had within the delegation .
I regret this , for you are biased in criticizing only the government , or rather the governing majority , and are focusing only on one side , while ignoring all the other arguments which have been put forward .
You make deadlines and then you postpone them , which makes it very difficult for us to take part in the delegation meetings .
You are then not even prepared to try to find common ground on the Albanian issue .
I regret this very much .
I am also of the opinion that the quotation at the beginning of the resolution is incorrect and unreliable .
I intend to petition the President on this matter .
Mr President , Albania , perhaps more than any other country of the former eastern bloc , is the country that suffered the greatest isolation and whose road to democratization is the most difficult and most arduous .
There is no doubt that what we understand by the rule of law is still facing many problems and , in this regard , the observations that have been set out in the resolution are based on information that we gathered when we visited Tirana within the framework of the Joint Parliamentary Commission .
However there is , I think , another dimension to the problem , which we must not ignore : Albania is trying to find its way following elections which were widely accepted and declared as such by the international community . Only a short time has passed since then .
The country has found relative peace and is trying to stabilize its economy in the wake of a huge scandal and it is also trying to stabilize its international relations .
It has already been emphasized , and it is indeed true , that what is happening on a broad scale is the sweeping aside of political opponents , always following the Balkan model . In other words what happened before is being repeated conversely , only then , unfortunately , we failed to react .
Mr President , I believe that if the European Union had shown less tolerance of the rather high-handed acts of the then government , the fate of that government might have been better .
In any event Mr Berisa would not have gained the faulty impression that we would forgive everything he did .
Of course this in no way means that we must now forgive possible violations of democratic institutions .
But , by the same token , and so as not to appear one-sided , because I believe that none of us has any party preferences in Albania , we should perhaps give an initial period of grace to the recently elected government , which must be well aware of our position with regard to democratic institutions and , more especially , with regard to the independence of the judiciary .
The observations set out in the resolution are not erroneous , but they are rather one-sided and I believe that they are somewhat hasty because , particularly with regard to the constitutional court , our information comes only from the Albanian opposition party .
I am afraid that we are rushing things , Mr President .
Mr President , the Liberal Group will vote against this resolution as , firstly , we oppose the idea expressed in the resolution as behaving like tutors in Albania and to see whether correct parliamentary procedures are followed or not .
I do not believe this is the way to treat democracy in Albania , however unstable it may be .
I think it is a pity , and this has been said before , but at the same time there was a clear exchange of views between Mr Swoboda and Mr Habsburg .
I think it is a pity that the Group of the European People 's Party submitted the text too late , because it is usual in this House to not do so when it concerns urgencies .
I think it is a great pity .
I also have the impression that there are no urgent elements in the resolution and I would find it a great shame if we give the impression that we are voting against Albania , and that we are not concerned about the slow rate of improvement in democracy and rule of law in the country .
In other words , Mr President , I think it a pity that hasty action by the EPP has in fact deprived us of the opportunity to produce a decent resolution .
Mr President , I would like to express my surprise at both the content and the advisability of the resolution pertaining to safeguarding law and order in Albania .
The European Parliament 's delegation responsible for overseeing relations with countries of eastern Europe recently visited Tirana and , in my opinion , undertook an extremely successful mission to Albania , within the framework of the Fourth Intergovernmental Meeting between the European Parliament and the Albanian Parliament .
I had the honour of being a member of the delegation of the European Parliament and , together with the other members , I had the opportunity to identify the complex conditions prevailing in that country and the enormous economic , social and political problems that it faces .
I must point out that we did indeed identify many problems relating to the functioning of democracy in that country , but also the fact of the tenseness of the political situation due to the position adopted by the largest opposition party , which is boycotting the work of Parliament and does not take part in its sessions .
I must also point out that our delegation made note of the responsibilities of both the government and the Democratic Party , led by the former president of the country , Mr Berisa , and that these interventions were considered useful by all sides .
Given these facts I find it impossible to understand of what use this resolution can be , which I very much fear provides an alibi for the reasoning and for the tactics of Mr Berisa .
I do not want to believe that these were the intentions of those who drew it up , however impartially this was done .
With regard to the sending of an observer to the sessions of the Albanian Parliament , I would like to point out that Albania is nobody 's protectorate , and that we must refrain from paternalistic conduct towards Albanian political forces .
I call on Parliament to overturn the relevant resolution as unacceptable , since it undermines the role of our parliamentary delegation following its very successful mission to Tirana .
Djibouti
Mr President , the legislative elections due to take place tomorrow in the Republic of Djibouti will not bring any great surprises , because the opposition does not have freedom of expression and even Members of Parliament for the ruling party are invalidated or declared ineligible if they criticize the President , Hassan Gouled .
However , what seems exceptionally serious to this group today , is the repressive police cooperation between Djibouti and Ethiopia , both arresting each other 's opponents and extraditing them so that they can be sentenced and imprisoned , as in the recent case of Mohamed Kadamy and his family and lawyers .
The European Union cannot tolerate such practices on behalf of a country receiving development aid from the EU .
This group would also like to indirectly address the French government , which likes to refer to a new spirit in its cooperation relationships .
However , Djibouti is the main base of the French army in Africa .
Whatever one 's opinion of that military presence , we consider that it should at least be subordinate to a minimum of democracy , in the interests of France itself , which runs the risk of becoming involved in a political upheaval made possible by its very complacency .
We are concerned about the human rights situation in Djibouti and are disturbed to hear of acts of violence against members of the opposition in advance of the parliamentary elections , which are due to take place on 19th December .
On 26th September this year the main leaders , the representatives of the Front for the Restoration of Unity in Djibouti , or FRUD , were arrested by Afar , the opposition group , this including FRUD representatives who are active here in Europe .
These persons were arrested in Ethiopia and then extradited to Djibouti , where they have been taken into custody .
As well as the European representatives , those arrested included Mohammed Kadhamy and his wife , Aïcha Dabalé , who belongs to a humanitarian organization and who at this moment happens to be pregnant .
We must emphatically call for the immediate release of these persons and for all those affected by the conflict to be allowed to leave the areas into which they have been driven , so that they can return to their homeland regions , if not directly to Djibouti itself .
We should advocate that those dwellings which have been occupied by the government forces be vacated and restored to their former condition .
As Vice-President of the Lomé Convention ACP Assembly , I wish finally to call upon Djibouti to comply with this convention , and particularly article 5 , which states that basic human rights and freedoms should be respected .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , on the eve of the election in Djibouti , this Parliament is expressing its concern with the political developments in the country .
Rightly so , Mr President , but there are other countries in the world where the situation is equally distressing and which this Parliament in its sometimes selective enthusiasm passes over .
Such a country is Surinam , in the north of Latin America .
A country with a population of 400 , 000 people with 300 , 00 relatives in The Netherlands .
Mr President , in Surinam an economic drugs elite rules .
Journalists and human rights activists are once again being threatened .
Last week a photographer was kidnapped by four men and beaten up with the threat that the same fate would befall his child , if his wife , the editor of the newspaper ' De Ware Tijd ' , did not alter her articles to the advantage of the regime .
Mr President , Christmas is approaching , political and media life will quieten down .
At least I now know that the Surinam government is aware that this Parliament has been informed , and perhaps it will also protect the journalists a little .
Starting with Nigeria , I would like to thank the honourable gentlemen for their questions , where the situation is certainly extremely worrying .
Only two days ago the head of state , General Abacha , announced the creation of a new government to replace the one he dissolved on 17 November .
The new ministers are being sworn into office today .
The only question directly addressed to the Commission relates to the provision of a detailed report on the status of cooperation with Nigeria and the prospects for future cooperation .
I can assure you that , as we did this time last year , we shall make available to Parliament such a report .
I can already indicate to you that as of last week , a sum of ECU 326 million of 6th and 7th EDF funds foreseen for Nigeria has been decommitted from the last two national indicative programmes and virtually all EDF projects have been brought to an end .
The only exceptions relate to regional projects , where one project in particular - a regional air security programme - has been allowed to continue because of its importance for the region as a whole .
As for future cooperation , the Commission has not succeeded up to now in negotiating a mandate from the Nigerian authorities to mobilize some EDF funds for decentralized cooperation , as would be permitted by the 20 November 1995 common position .
But we remain hopeful that we can do this .
I would commend Parliament for its initiative in approving at this session a new ECU 3 million budget line for democracy and good governance in Nigeria .
The Commission services will cooperate very closely with Parliament to ensure that these resources are used to maximum effect , but I cannot give any further details at this stage .
Turning to Sierra Leone , since the military coup d 'état in May of this year , the Commission , along with the rest of the international community , has been consistent in its calls for the restoration of the legitimate constitutional government of President Kabbah and in its support for the West African states that have been endeavouring to find a peaceful solution to the crisis .
This position has been reflected in the four declarations put out by the Council presidency on behalf of the European Union .
Support for UN sanctions imposed on Sierra Leone has also been expressed , and measures have been taken by the European Union to implement them .
The Commission continues to recognize President Kabbah 's government as the legitimate government of Sierra Leone and conducts day-to-day relations with that government in exile .
During President Kabbah 's visit to the Commission at the end of October , discussions were held concerning the type of assistance which could be provided to support the implementation of the peace agreement .
It was agreed that support would be provided for the demobilization process and for the return and resettlement of refugees as mentioned in the agreement .
The Commission is currently considering a request from a United Kingdom NGO for assistance to refugees in Guinea .
Although all development programmes in Sierra Leone have been de facto suspended , it is also agreed that upon their resumption , programmes related to rehabilitation and reconstruction would be adapted to take into account the more urgent needs resulting from the crisis , such as housing reconstruction programmes .
With regard to the humanitarian situation , the Commission has continued to provide humanitarian aid throughout the crisis and has recently approved a new package of mainly medical aid amounting to ECU 1.9 million , bringing the total for 1997 to ECU 3.7 million .
Of course we must focus on the quality of the aid as well as its quantity .
The Commission would like to point out that there are currently quantities of food aid from the United States blocked in Guinea , awaiting approval from the authorities there for its transportation into Sierra Leone .
With regard to Croatia , it is clear from what has been said in this House that there are divergences of opinion and that there has not been a coming together of the political parties .
There has been a tendency to polarize views with regard to Croatia .
Having said all that , the Commission does share Parliament 's concerns about respect for freedom of expression and association in Croatia , particularly with regard to recent laws and restrictions on the activities of NGOs and independent media in Croatia .
In saying that , though , the Commission is not seeking to make any comparison between Croatia and any other country , but merely to express a view on particular acts .
The development of improved relations between Croatia and the European Union depends on compliance with the conditionality of the regional approach , including respect for human rights .
There have been some positive developments in some areas , for example , recent cooperation with the International War Crimes Tribunal .
Nonetheless , the Commission is of the view that respect for certain human rights , on the other hand , has deteriorated .
Until Croatia complies more fully with the conditionality of the regional approach , general economic and financial assistance through Phare will not be extended and negotiations will not begin on a cooperation agreement .
The Commission provides support for civil society organizations and to human rights monitoring and advocacy groups in Croatia , with projects to the value of ECU 2.2 million in 1997 alone .
Since 1994 the European Commission has also developed a programme of assistance for independent media in the countries of former Yugoslavia , including Croatia .
So far in 1997 independent media projects to a value of ECU 1.67 including projects in the written press , for example , the Feral Tribune mentioned in the resolutions and Radio 101 have been approved .
The Commission intends to continue giving support in these fields .
With regard to Albania , the resolution is not actually directed to the Commission .
Nonetheless I should say that the firm establishment of democratic culture in Albania remains a major problem given the heritage from the past , and that applies to the political parties , the institutions and society as a whole .
In accordance with the objectives agreed upon by Albania in the international community at the Rome ministerial conference in October of this year , the government and the opposition both need to be pressed to strive for political normalization and there has been a positive signal in the form of recent media agreements between the ruling party and the main opposition .
But it is the first half of 1998 which will be crucial because then we will see what progress is made with regard to the drafting of a constitution and the Commission considers that the participation of the opposition , in particular the democratic party in parliament and in the constitutional committee of parliament is essential for political normalization and for democracy .
Finally with regard to Djibouti , the Commission has taken note of the proposed resolutions and will confirm first that we are following closely developments there and are aware of the reports of opponents of the government having fallen victim to human rights violations .
We fully share the honourable Member 's concern at these events .
The Commission certainly is in favour of any initiative which could lead the government to act in accordance with democratic practice and could ensure that the general election scheduled for tomorrow is conducted freely and properly .
Thirdly the Commission takes the view that firm dialogue with the Djiboutan government will encourage it to bring in greater democratization .
Let us not forget that adherence to human rights is an essential element of cooperation under the Lomé Convention and the Commission , together with the Member States will have no hesitation in reminding the Djiboutan authorities of that salutary fact .
The joint debate is closed
Mr President , my comments concern the urgency resolution under consideration .
I am always for economy measures , but when I tried to get hold of the text of the resolution , as usual , I was given the joint resolutions - but not the original texts . The reason given was that this was a cost saving measure .
This simply cannot be true , since joint resolutions are often rejected in this House , to the effect that one then has to revert to the original texts .
I would ask for clarification on this matter .
Thanks to the efforts of Mrs Pack , for example , the absurd motion on Croatia is now somewhat less so , yet I would still have welcomed the opportunity to read the absurd texts in their original form .
I earnestly request that something be done to remedy this situation .
Mr Posselt , I have taken note of your statement .
It is true that there have been some translation problems , but as far as I know , the texts submitted to the vote and for your attention are available in all languages .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Human rights and democratization
The next item is the joint debate on :
the report ( A4-0381 / 97 ) by Mr Imbeni , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , on the report from the Commission on the implementation of measures intended to promote observance of human rights and democratic principles ( for 1995 ) ( COM ( 96 ) 0672 - C4-0095 / 97 ) ; -the report ( A4-0393 / 97 ) by Mrs Lenz , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , on setting up a single coordinating structure within the European Commission responsible for human rights and democratization .
Madam President , we cannot expect too much of our colleagues ; it has been a very tiring week and , consequently , it is more than understandable that our debate is certainly constructive now , though it has a certain reserve .
Taking advantage of the presence of the Commissioner , I would like to start on a point we were not aware of when Mrs Lenz and I presented our two reports , the document approved by the Luxembourg Council on the 50th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
I would be interested for the Commission to tell me what is meant in paragraph 11 of the Annexe to the document drawn up by the European Council on the 50th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights when it mentions academic programmes within the framework of the 50th anniversary .
If there is a framework of initiatives already drawn up , already consolidated , I would like to ask the Commission , and not just for myself , to send us this framework of programmes and initiatives ; a reciprocal undertaking could be made by Parliament and the Commission because , along with the national initiatives for celebrating the anniversary ( I again refer to paragraph 11 ) , there could be cooperative and positive inter-institutional participation between the Commission , Council and Parliament .
Having said that , coming to the actual report , I would like to make a few particular considerations that I believe should be made on the Commission 's report .
The first is this : we are on the eve of the 50th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
This gives us a special commitment , and naturally a special honour as well , particularly on the point of consistency : consistency between saying and doing , consistency to this strategic matter , the promotion of human rights , particularly to avoid those contradictory aspects that cause harm at times , to our image as well , which is the result of the very essence of the European Union , fundamentally based on universal human rights , on respect for them and on their promotion .
Contradictions often arise - sometimes , the left hand does not know what the right hand is doing - in some cases , the relationship between economic and commercial relations and the subjects of the promotion of human rights are not entirely consistent .
I would like to say that , if we have to record one step forward on the 50th anniversary , we should do so in this direction : greater consistency of behaviour between saying and doing , to ensure that all contradictions are overcome .
In my report , I emphasize the requirements for information : information not just for the European Parliament - which we do need but we are privileged and do have information , though certainly not in real time as we would like but fairly quickly - but for all the bodies operating in the non-governmental organizations , on committed world cooperation for respect for human rights , organizations , including small ones , not just the well-known ones , operating in individual countries that do not have adequate information in time .
My report proposes that the Commission should use the new technologies more to circulate information on the measures taken by the Union for the promotion of human rights in the various countries of the world , so that anyone obtaining information can do so directly and in real time .
The second aspect I wish to emphasize is that of efficacy .
We need the Commission 's delegations , country by country , to be able to provide us more clearly with the relationship between the initiatives conducted , the costs , the resources used and the situation of human rights in this or that country .
In other words , we need to know whether our investments serve any purpose or not , whether the situation of human rights in a country has improved or worsened after our initiatives and our intervention .
From this point of view , we need more appropriate information on the efficacy of our intervention .
Then there is a problem of coordinating the initiatives taken by the various institutions .
On this point , there is one factor that makes my report different from that of Mrs Lenz , which is a differentiation of instruments and certainly not a strategic differentiation of objectives , because anyone can see that there is a consistency and a very broad convergence between these two reports .
There is a difference of interpretation on one point , however , with regard to coordination , to which I would like to draw your attention .
It is good to set up inter-service groups within the Commission . I personally agree that it is good to strengthen an interinstitutional group , but my personal opinion is that Parliament is not a managerial body , that management falls to the Commission , that others are responsible for managing the policies and that we have the task of directing and controlling .
If we are unable to perform our task of control , we should not fall back on the creation of means of coordination and execution seen by the Commission and Parliament , because , in my opinion , this is not consistent with the European Parliament 's tasks of direction and control .
This is a point of difference on which Mrs Lenz and I hold different opinions , opinions which we will certainly try to overcome with discussion .
I would also like to point out the proposals made in my report on the idea of organizing a large conference once a year to check the programmes drawn up by the European Union on democratization worldwide .
I think it was two months ago that we held a large conference in Brussels to check the development of the Tacis and Phare programmes .
This was an important event because representatives of the countries concerned , i.e. the third countries , took part .
To tell the truth , the presence of Parliament and the Commission was not very constant or conspicuous : some of us attended from beginning to end but there were only a few people .
Our colleagues , however , MPs and representatives of non-governmental associations in these other countries , have told us of the positive results and the drawbacks .
For example , they asked us what the relationship is between bureaucratic administrative expenses and expenses going directly to the execution of a project .
This is a subject that also relates to the promotion of human rights .
It would be interesting to know the difference between bureaucratic and administrative expenses and expenses intended for the promotion of human rights .
It was a positive experience and I think that it could also be done to check the effectiveness of our measures with regard to democratization and the promotion of human rights .
I will conclude by thanking all of you for your attention and by expressing my belief that , in the end , stimulated by this deadline of the 50th anniversary of the Declaration of Human Rights , we can do something more and better .
Just one final word : if the death penalty was at least mentioned in this document at the Luxembourg Council - I know there is a problem in one member country - we might have taken a concrete step forward in relation to all the resolutions of the past .
Madam President , I can concur directly with the remarks made by Mr Imbeni and I shall also try to respond to his comments .
A week ago we observed Human Rights Day and it has to be admitted that human rights are still being seriously violated throughout the world .
On the other hand , institutions and organizations are increasingly taking up the mantle of human rights and this has caused something of a contradictory situation .
The European Union should be one of the main institutions involved in providing effective and wide-ranging support for the cause of human rights , from individual projects to programmes promoting human rights and democracy .
We began in the 1980s with Latin America , followed by the ACP zone and the developing nations . Now we have the Phare and Tacis programmes for central and eastern Europe and the Meda programmes for the Mediterranean area .
With the backing of the Council and Commission , the European Union has laid down basic directives through numerous declarations made in this House , and it is now attempting , via treaties of cooperation and association , to implement a human rights and democracy proviso which will be a pre-condition for the said treaties .
So far , so good .
However , when one realises that within the Commission there are more than 15 departments , plus several external institutions - or satellites , involved in the administration and drafting of human rights and democracy policies , then one is hardly surprised to learn that the European Parliament has for years been concerned that these matters have not been organized in as coherent , efficient and transparent a manner as we might imagine .
The Treaty of Amsterdam consolidated the EU 's commitment to uphold freedom , democracy , human rights , basic freedoms and constitutionality and established that the Union as a body is obligated to the principle of coherency in its foreign policy .
Council and Commission share this responsibility and the Commission has followed this up by submitting to the Council a proposal for a uniform legal structure which will serve as a framework for human rights and democracy .
The European Parliament 's call for the control , monitoring and evaluation of the EU 's actions now appears all the more urgent since a substantial amount of funding has been accumulated over the years with the extension of EU activities into the area of human rights .
These actions are becoming more and more varied and the number of actors is also increasing .
Parliament 's own " European democracy initiative ' currently holds funding of ECU 96 million .
The fragmentation of budgetary resources for human rights and democracy projects into numerous budget categories and the lack of a coherent strategy and the division of responsibilities for its implementation within the Commission , have all contributed to this lack of transparency .
In 1994 the Commission had more than 30 budget lines for development cooperation and humanitarian aid alone .
Then there are the funds from budget heading B-8 for monies agreed under the CFSP .
My report on the creation of a uniform coordination structure is directed at a greater streamlining of responsibilities as well as the implementation of projects .
In accordance with the Committee on Budgets this report therefore opposes external structures .
I do not wish to see any external structure and if my practical proposal recommends an office for human rights and democracy within the Commission , Mr Imbeni , then that is not an office whose activities should be divided , but rather one which the Commission should set up and administer in the same way as the ECHO , so that these matters are not coordinated by an anonymous department but by an outwardly transparent operations centre - and this office may do just that .
A second proposal which I wish to make concerns the setting up of a dedicated data network for this sector . Such a network would help the institutions of the European Union , as well as outside agencies , to concentrate the available body of information and to put this into practical effect in a more efficient way .
I also want to see the institutions dovetailed into a working group for democracy and human rights , as also agreed in the budget , which is something you also address ; such a group , whose role would be an advisory one , could be constituted from representatives of Parliament and of the Commission as part of the annual programme .
The effective coordination of institutions and international organizations , whose role is to monitor and assist the process of free elections , is essential for the establishment of an effective , financially viable and transparent system .
The consolidation of the 1998 budget will also help do the groundwork here .
If we are to achieve as broad a synergy and multiplier effect as possible , the EU must coordinate its human rights policy measures more effectively , and this includes international organizations such as the Council of Europe , the OSCE and others , by concluding the sort of cooperation agreements which we really want to see .
The aid which we provide in this area often goes unnoticed .
I can only agree with the report which has been presented by Mr Imbeni .
We really are on the same wavelength in this respect .
We both call for better information on the EP and on the efficiency , or failure , of the various programmes and projects , as measured against their impact on human rights and democracy in third countries . We also call for a transparent strategy for the use of funds and improved procedures for the implementation of projects - and this is also the underlying message of my report on the simplification of structures .
I too followed the conference on the Phare and Tacis programmes , which involved the NGOs , and I was also able to obtain useful information for my report .
A further basic requirement is the need for better coordination within the Commission and between the various institutions , as well as the removal of the geographical divisions .
On this point we all totally agreed .
A superposed coordination structure , under the jurisdiction of a Commissioner for human rights and democracy , would be required not only to administer the programmes and projects but also to coordinate the guarantee and sanction policies .
After Amsterdam the Commission promised to introduce a uniform Commission structure for human rights and democracy for the next period and I hope very much that this will become a reality .
I would like to ask the Commission quite openly what it intends doing to bring this about .
Ladies and gentlemen , let me close by stating that one of the most difficult and yet rewarding tasks of the European Union must surely be for its institutions to carry to the world the message of peace and freedom which is based on the respect of human rights and the ability to live together in accordance with democratic principles .
We hope that after the Amsterdam Treaty this part of the EU 's foreign policy will play an even greater role and will help carry our message even further afield .
Madam President , shortly after I was first elected to Parliament in 1989 , I was asked to take part in a parliamentary delegation to observe the first ever democratic elections in Chile following the Pinochet dictatorship .
While I was there I was struck by the number of people who came up to me quite spontaneously to thank me and others in our delegation for the work the European Union had done in preserving and developing democracy in Chile during the years of the dictatorship .
That made a very deep impression on me because it made me realize just how important the European Union 's work on human rights is , and the effect of often quite small amounts of money , especially the effect they can have on developing democracy in countries which are suffering from a lack of human rights .
That is why I am very strongly supportive of the policies the European Union pursues .
However , it has to be said that the human rights policy of the European Union has grown up on a very ad hoc basis .
In many ways Mrs Lenz has indicated that in her earlier remarks .
It is still very ad hoc as we can see from Parliament 's work .
Our monthly saga of Thursday afternoon urgencies shows a certain lack of coordination and coherence when we are looking at human rights situations
Similarly , as we have heard , the Commission 's organization of its work on human rights also shows a lack of coherence and coordination .
In the Council the CFSP has had its weaknesses as we have outlined before and there is not sufficient evidence of a coherence of approach .
Now , with the Treaty of Amsterdam and the Commission report which we are debating today , we should move towards a situation where human rights is much more closely integrated within the common foreign and security policy .
In particular , I am looking to the Council and the Commission , working on the development of the policy planning unit that is an essential part of the Amsterdam Treaty , to ensure there is an effective human rights dimension and conflict prevention dimension in the work of that unit .
We need to try to define what we mean by an ethically orientated foreign policy for the European Union and we need to try to find a better balance between the institutions .
In the light of the Amsterdam Treaty and the work in Parliament by Mr Avgerinos , for example , on improving the way we deal with urgencies , we have to try to make a fresh start on human rights and to have a trialogue between the Council , the Commission and Parliament where we can sit down and start to define where we are going on human rights and how we can improve the administration of human rights .
In particular , we should look at how we assess value for money from our projects .
The Commission is very good at developing new ideas but less good at managing these ideas once they are up and running .
We ought to look at how we release funds .
Far too often funds are held up and NGOs run into difficulties because of the delays in getting funds released .
In conclusion , we ought to look also at what we do with countries like , for example , Hong Kong - which I only mention because it is fresh in my mind - where the administration argues that money we give for support of human rights is actually political interference and refuses to allow us to spend that money .
Finally , I welcome both these reports but I urge that ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Madam President , in this debate on human rights one almost invariably immediately starts talking about concrete problems ; Algeria , Burma , Nigeria or about the plight of refugees , child slaves , or abused women , and one immediately asks for action .
But this debate is about something else .
Mr Imbeni and Mrs Lenz in their report primarily talked about the structures within the European Commission for human rights policy .
This is a good thing , because if you want expose something , and wish to see action , the appropriate instruments are needed .
They have to be effective , that is what counts .
Against this background both reports are extremely useful .
Mr Imbeni 's report , which is a response to the European Commission document , uncovers in great detail a number of weak points in the Commission 's organization of its work on human rights .
In its document the Commission has tried to circumnavigate these problems by giving a kind of catalogue of the actual human rights and democratisation projects from a regional perspective .
We can safely say that most of these projects are fine , and that it is likely that the Commission will implement them properly , but the Commission 's document contains no evaluation .
This is no surprise , because Mr Imbeni concludes quite rightly that the Commission 's organization of the human rights policy is rather chaotic .
Too many budget items , too many directorates-general who step in , too much red tape , and too little coordination , evaluation and effectiveness .
When we examine these different approaches , they can also be found in Mrs Lenz ' report .
It is a miracle in fact that so many good things still happen when you read those two reports .
That does not alter the fact that I agree with both colleagues .
If one examines all activities , one has to conclude that more coordination and better streamlining of actions is urgently needed .
That is why Mrs Lenz 's idea of arriving at one coordinating body within the Commission , primarily aimed at programmes and actions in the sphere of human rights , minority rights and democratisation , is a good idea .
I think it should be something like ECHO for humanitarian aid , but as part of the Commission .
Mr President , it is a good idea , as it may not only save much money and energy , but one might also be able to do a great deal more , and much more effectively , with this same money .
In addition I think it is excellent if a European network for human rights is made available to allow the necessary information flow smoothly .
Finally I would like to support for the idea for a unit at European level for monitoring elections .
Our socialist colleague spoke just now about the way the elections in Chile were observed - I was there in 1989 - and this happened in an excellent way .
Still we frequently see that American or other delegations handle their work efficiently and better than ours .
Yet it is important , because the preventative effects of these kind of monitoring committees is excellent .
Mr President , I conclude by saying that both rapporteurs have delivered excellent work .
They have submitted good proposals to the Commission and we would like to ask of the European Commission to take these reports to heart , and to take up the proposals .
The European Union itself is a stronghold of human rights and democracy ; let us emanate this in an efficient manner throughout the world .
Madam President , though we may question whether the human rights policy pursued by the European Union is consistent , outside Europe it is experienced a great deal more positively , considering the many times appeal is made to our human rights policy .
You also heard Mr Titley and Mrs Maij-Weggen say this just now .
Yet on the eve of the Euro-Asian summit we have to accept the fact that entire continents distance themselves from our policy .
That is why it is good that by coincidence the Commissioner who is to some extent an expert in the field is here tonight .
I would like him to tell me a bit more about how he sees the proposals on the table being implemented .
Anyhow , because some countries distance themselves from our continuous persistence on human rights , the better gearing of the human rights policy within the institutions is all the more necessary , as well as making them more transparent , quicker to implement and more effective .
On the eve of the celebration of the 50th Declaration of Human Rights , Mr Imbeni and Mrs Lenz have submitted two excellent , clear and to my mind implementable reports .
The proposal to establish a coordination unit very much appeals to me .
I believe , as Mrs Lenz remarked , that it requires a Commissioner who is entirely responsible for this policy .
For the sake of the general public I think it is an excellent idea to publicize what were are doing in the institutions in future via the electronic highway or the Internet .
This is a good thing .
Our showpiece during the recent past was observations at elections .
The Union managed to appear consistent to the outside world , as visible responsibility .
It is therefore very right that Mrs Lenz requests a material foundation for this in the specific budget .
It seems a good idea to me to hold an annual evaluation conference , as suggested by Mr Imbeni .
It gives the Commission , as well as this Parliament , more power in its functioning .
It will probably direct more individuals and NGOs in our direction , which will have to make us even more selective , and we will have to give more meaning to our programmes , but with these proposals as they are before us , this must be possible in the sense of coordinating them .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , the Lenz and Imbeni reports are an excellent culmination of this year .
I congratulate both colleagues , and look forward to the time when , with these reports as a solid support at the end of our mandate , we will be able to promote human rights within the European Union as well as outside .
Madam President , Mrs Lenz and Mr Imbeni speak with one voice ; that saves me one response .
She calls for more coordination , consistency , coherence and this deserves full support , from the Liberal Group .
The Commission , too , occasionally deserves praise for its dedication to increased effectiveness and transparency .
But at the same time both rapporteurs ' proposals for better ideas to improve consistency have not just sprung up overnight .
Our group supports the proposal for the setting up of one single service for human rights and democratization within the Commission .
But this should not mean we should get a common administrative structure for all agencies offering foreign aid .
Aid should continue to be part of the main thrust of the policy .
Aid is the means of the policy , not an end in itself .
Annual evaluation conferences on human rights and democratisation programmes for third countries are much more effective .
I gladly support the strengthened role of Union delegations in third countries , the inclusion of human rights in the job responsibilities of the planning unit of the CFSP and in the creation of an interinstitutional working group to set up a European network for human rights and democratization .
Then we come to the observers , and as Mrs Lenz knows , the monitoring of elections ; I , for example , have been able to experience this as a recipient from this Parliament in various third world countries some time ago , and also as a participant in observation delegations , and I have been embarrassed , Madam President , Mr Commissioner .
I hope it will become true that in this Parliament we will have an " A-team ' from which we will be able to recruit those who will be able to observe in a truly professional way .
I have said it before in the foreign affairs committee , as Mrs Lenz and Mr Imbeni both know .
I think these two reports provide useful starting points .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the possession of human rights allows each individual man and woman to retain his or her dignity .
Human rights are indivisible and universal .
I stress this yet again because it is a fact which is sometimes overlooked in the daily routine of EU politics .
The protection of human rights and minorities and the furtherance of democracy must be priority issues for a combined foreign and defence policy .
We strongly reject any attempt to reverse these priorities in order to promote the cause of economic relations .
Parliament will be keeping the pressure on and , what is more , has even established a budget line for the promotion of democracy and the protection of human rights to the effect that a financial basis has now been laid for real action .
However , the EU is still a long way from having a coherent civil foreign policy .
As long as departmentalized thinking continues , as long as foreign policy is divided geographically within the Commission and as long as development policy is subjected to constant budget cuts , we shall never succeed in evolving a consistent and integrated human rights policy .
Such a sound concept is of course the basis for a credible foreign policy .
The Commission itself is not in a position to carry through the human rights programme because there simply is no comprehensive strategy for all EU policies .
In this respect Mr Lenz 's report on proposals for improving our administrative structure is particularly valuable .
We support the proposal for setting up an office of human rights and democracy within the Commission .
This would also facilitate collaboration with non-governmental organizations , which are an important part of a durable policy on human rights and democratization .
I refer in particular to decentralized projects based on local initiatives which make a vital contribution to social stability and to human rights activities which seek to protect and restore the dignity of individual men and women .
Madam President , Mr Vice-President , ladies and gentlemen , I , like the rest of my group , am in complete agreement with the need to increase coordination , unify services , and rationalize a number of things .
But a political responsibility is essential , and we frequently have difficulty in finding out where it lies within the Commission .
May I congratulate Mrs Lenz , and Mr Imbeni who have written reports to that effect ?
However , Point 7 of Mr Imbeni 's report , in which he proposes to report on the public bodies of third countries , which hinder human rights projects , seems rather disputable to me .
I think we could have an annex and add ' to the bodies of the European Union ' , because as some Members know , although a number of projects remain blocked in the Commission for many months , waiting to obtain the funding , which has been agreed , there are other projects .
I am very pleased that Commissioner Brittan is present , because some very important projects regarding democratization and human rights have been sitting in drawers in the Commission 's departments for two years .
A radio project ' Boys of Tibet ' has been waiting for the Commission 's go-ahead for two years .
I would be very pleased if the Commissioner could answer this point .
I should also like him to reply to the requests made , on many occasions , by this Parliament , regarding a number of persons who are imprisoned .
They are Mr Wang Dan , Mr Hada , Mr Nawang Choepel , and the young Panchen Lama ( Gedhun Choekyi Nyima ) of whom we have no news , although we have many times asked the Commission to intervene with regard to the liberation of thousands , or even hundreds of thousands of political prisoners in China , and other Asian countries .
I would be very pleased , Mr Commissioner if , like the United States , which has obtained the liberation of Mr Wei Jinsheng , the Commission were also soon to announce the liberation of the above four people , and of any other people to whom I have not referred today .
Madam President , the political systems are all the more democratic and pluralist as their political institutions become more effective and their legal systems more independent .
The calling to the protection of human rights , even outside the Union , is sanctioned by the preambles to the treaties , and therefore constitutes a priority which we do not always manage to satisfy even if we , as the European Union , are one of the largest sources for the financing and promotion of initiatives aimed at the protection of these rights .
A European Union which , however , is not managing to provide the necessary transparency to make its overall effort for the promotion of human rights as visible as possible .
In our opinion , given its natural democratic specificity , the European Parliament should be more effective in defining policies on human rights , firstly by placing the financing allocated to the sector in one single budget entry and , even if this happened recently , exercising the additional budget power provided by the Treaty , which has still not seemed sufficient .
Above all , our Parliament should be able to operate in the context of a necessary unity in the disbursement sector ; the Directorates General of the Commission seem to be called upon too much to draw up lists of priorities of activities and to exercise priorities of spending .
Although this could contribute towards a greater knowledge of sectoral and specific problems , it would certainly not improve the possibility and efficacy of Union intervention .
The geographic compartmentalization within the Commission is made worse by the various budget entries , that waste funds allocated to spending .
In addition to the managerial problems of aid for the sector , the practice of policies actually aimed at the protection of human rights seems lame to us .
Several examples include the Council resolution which , with regard to asylum procedure , provides for the application of the concept of the safe third country , actually requires the transit country bordering the Member States to readmit persons seeking asylum without providing sufficient legal guarantees , particularly for the victims of acts of violence , women and children , and belittles the quality of the protection of human rights , which we are deciding upon .
Another example of family protection is the protection of human rights in the sector , which is also a priority of our family policies , which is thwarted when we do not recognize that the immigrant citizens of third countries have the right to live in families , the right to reunite the family .
The extension of Europol 's competence , particularly the drugs unit , that could effectively combat the plague of the trafficking in human beings and the paedophilia and child prostitution networks , although established in September , during the course of a Union Council , has not yet begun , while the same Europol Convention has not yet been ratified by all the Member States .
The European citizen asks us for assurance and we therefore consider it essential , in defining the policies on the right to the protection of human rights , to take measures to coordinate the criminal legislation of the Member States so as to establish a clause of universal extraterritoriality , which makes it possible to make inquiries , prosecute and penalize individuals committing offences abroad and then avoiding the punishment by hiding in the folds of an incomplete legal system which , in our opinion , should be defined as a matter of urgency on pain of our credibility in the protection of human rights .
Madam President , I wish to thank the rapporteurs for these reports on measures intended to promote observance of human rights .
The overall objective of any development policy must be to strive to build and strengthen democracy and the rule of law , with respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms .
In all agreements with third countries the European Union must continue to press for the inclusion of specific human rights clauses .
The fact that the European Union is the world 's principal donor of humanitarian aid , is neither known nor understood by many of our citizens .
I believe we should draw clear guidelines for the acknowledgement and publication of the very important financial contribution the European Union makes to human rights and development of the third world .
While I do not agree with the policy of the US - a policy of no aid without trade - it is essential that we remain rigorous and firm with our policy of no aid without linkage to democracy , human rights and freedom .
In relation to statistics - and many other speakers have already made reference to this - we need a clear breakdown of the funding from all sources , whether they are governmental , semi-state , NGOs or whatever , and we need clear evaluation of the effectiveness of human rights projects funded by the Commission .
Unfortunately , the report does not compare projects for effectiveness , nor does it set down the criteria on which projects are or should be assessed .
In the context of the forthcoming negotiations on future relations between the European Union and the ACP countries under the Lomé Convention , a stable political system , full respect for human rights , effective participation by society , allied to good government and sound administration , should be recognized as fundamental foundations for sustainable development and the focus of our development policy .
Madam President , firstly I think one of our most important tasks in Parliament is to keep watch on human rights and democracy .
People expect that of us , and in this area we also have strong public support .
This is , of course , particularly important for countries with which we have agreements , countries with which we have some connection .
Perhaps this is most important for applicant countries like Slovakia and Turkey , where shortcomings need to be corrected .
I would , however , stress that it is important that the aim of our measures and efforts should be to help to solve problems and not simply to point out countries which do not fulfil the requirements .
The control , support , effectiveness and reporting of our measures need to be improved .
I would particularly like to emphasize some of the ELDR Group 's amendments in the report .
These relate to paragraphs 6 , 8 and 9 in the Imbeni report .
A collective agreement on human rights is good .
In addition the Commission should collect information from international organizations such as Amnesty , the OSCE and the Council of Europe .
Madam President , I wish to congratulate Mr Imbeni and Mrs Lenz on their reports and to state that naturally we must focus our efforts on increasing the effectiveness of the Commission itself in all its policies , rather than shifting responsibility away from the Commission by way of various offices and other structures .
I believe that this has become quite clear .
I also wish to refer to a particular matter which has been discussed in detail in the Committee on Budgets , namely a change in the structure of interinstitutional cooperation .
I believe that this is very important .
We are dissolving the old advisory group , which used to draw up recommendations for individual projects in conjunction with the Commission and the various institutions , and intend setting up an interinstitutional consultative working group whose role will be to assess the annual Work Programme .
This proposal is set out in our amendment .
This seems to be a more rational way for Parliament and Commission to deal with one another .
And I hope that by discussing a Work Programme at the beginning of the year we will really introduce greater transparency and control into this area .
Madam President , today we are discussing a document from the European Commission on the implementation in 1995 of its actions to promote human rights and democratisation .
The rapporteur , Mr Imbeni , has already laid his finger on the problem in his introduction , and I quote : ' the communication ... has the character of a catalogue of good works ... ( but ) does not present itself as an assessment of the effectiveness of human rightsrelated activities ' .
It is curious that very large sums , fortunes in fact , have been invested in all kinds of projects , but that apparently there were no interim criteria to verify the usefulness of these investments , or in any case afterwards , and that no investigations were made either into whether the subsidized projects and organizations were also supported by third parties , for example the Member States , independently .
As far as that is concerned I can only agree wholeheartedly with paragraphs 16 and 17 of the report .
I have to admit , however , that my criticism is more fundamental , and that we will have to ask ourselves whether it should be the responsibility of European common institutions in the first place to play a kind of UN , a kind of reduced United Nations , with a truly opaque subsidizing policy , and especially , and this my basic remark , without being this encapsulated in a coherent foreign policy .
Please do not misunderstand me .
I am not saying that all the money in this budget area has been spent fruitlessly .
But I do question in a major way the lack of monitoring when subsidies are given , the lack of evaluation afterwards , the fundamental desirability of leaving the implementation of this policy , which should form part of a coherent foreign policy when it is deemed necessary , in the hands of the European Commission .
Besides , I am not able to check the expenditure of these funds on my own .
But I do know the way in which Commission officials in my own country use all kinds of subsidies to all kinds of organizations .
I can only ascertain that organizations are subsidised which either only represent themselves , or are not worthy of receiving anything , or already get their fair share from various other subsidy sources .
I am thinking of a number of trade unions , for instance .
It might be the case , and I hope so , that the Commission manages the budgets we are talking about today more usefully .
But if this is the case , then I cannot deduce this from the document the Commission is submitting .
I in any case will continue to go on about the fact that in our own Member States millions of people live in abject poverty , so that it is not acceptable in my view to spend large amounts if and when the usefulness of this expenditure of these sums is not even investigated and above all evaluated .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the defence of human rights has been one of the great causes , one of the strongest causes in the political aims of the European Union .
It would be good for human beings all over the world if those aims could be increasingly present and effective in the European Union 's decisions and initiatives .
Unfortunately the Union 's actions are not particularly visible - I mean in so far as European citizens are not familiar with them , because I know they support us in those decisions and therefore ought to be familiar with them - and the political reflections of those actions are normally confined to our parliamentary discussions .
There are not sufficient institutional structures in the European Union for the adequate processing of information on infringements of human rights .
There is a lack of coordination of actions to defend human rights , and the available financial resources are patently insufficient and lacking in coordination to promote actions to defend the dignity of being human .
It is also regrettably clear in many cases that economic interests , which have a certain control over information , override and almost nullify the political and humanitarian positions in defence of human rights which we have come here to uphold .
All these comments are mentioned and well analysed in the reports by Mr Imbeni and Mrs Lenz , whom I would like to compliment on their work .
We support their reports and we would ask this House to approve them .
Madam President , Mr Commissioner , human rights are valued very highly in Austria .
Looking ahead to Austria 's Council presidency in the second half of next year we are conscious of the fact that in 1998 we are celebrating Human Rights Year , and this is an issue which will assume increasing significance .
Next autumn , an experts conference on this theme is to be held in Vienna and on the eve of the summit meeting of Heads of State and of Government in Vienna the Foreign Ministers will commemorate the 50th anniversary of the Declaration of Human Rights .
This will also see the adoption of action plan " Human Rights 2000 ' .
Such actions serve to illustrate the high priority which Austria attaches to the subject of human rights .
I welcome the proposals being put forward by the rapporteur and by Mr Imbeni , since I too believe that it is sensible to have a uniform structure to deal with human rights and democratisation .
Better coordination within the Commission , a strengthening of the Council 's authority over human rights issues and greater cooperation with the European Parliament , all these would be very welcome moves indeed .
The aim of the 1998 Year of Human Rights must be to underpin the respect of universal standards of human rights at national level by effective control , support and deterrence .
Over the last 50 years the international system has laid the legal and practical foundation for the protection of human rights .
Now it is time for these principles to be implemented at national and local level .
All too often , unfortunately , economic interests take precedence over human rights issues .
We in the European Parliament must , therefore , never relax in our determination to draw attention to human rights violations .
But to put something into practice also means ratifying it , and in international law this is regrettably not always possible .
Consequently , in this Year of Human Rights 1998 , we must assert our democratically legitimate role as a guardian of these principles .
Madam President , I wish firstly to thank Mrs Lenz and Mr Imbeni most heartily for the excellent work which they have undertaken .
In this respect I would like to make a number of comments which are indirectly connected with their report and which have probably been engendered by it .
The first of these concerns the fact that we have far too many organizations working against each other and generally getting in each other 's way .
We have to establish some kind of order here .
I am looking at his mainly from the perspective of those peoples who are in direct contact with the actions concerned , since I frequently travel to central and eastern Europe , where I am witness to the major problems which arise , and this is something which we must bear in mind .
My second point is one which has already been touched on , namely that we must exercise stricter control on the assistance we provide , for this is an important matter .
We already have a very good Committee on Budgetary Control , and its work is exemplary , but this body is hardly in a position to take on additional responsibilities .
However , there is no doubt that some similar type of organization would be required here .
As far as the annual reports are concerned , I consider these to be absolutely essential , particularly when they are entrusted to people who really know something about the subject .
In conclusion let me add one more thing : The respect of human rights is a very laudable principle .
However , all too often this can be used by certain regimes to conceal the fact that they do not adequately recognize collective rights .
I see this especially in the treatment of minority groups - linguistic minorities , racial minorities and ethnic minorities .
I believe we should draw attention to the fact that a European bill of rights for ethnic groups and minorities is absolutely imperative .
This must be made prosecutable in law so that we can ultimately bring real order to this area of human affairs .
Madam President , in the course of the debate not surprisingly a number of broader considerations have been raised and I hope the House will forgive me if I am not able to follow even the fruitful avenues that have been pursued .
I would like to comment on some of the specific points but I should first of all like to say how much Mr van den Broek would have liked to have been present , in particular , because of his high regard for the reports of Mrs Lenz and Mr Imbeni .
I shall firstly deal with the very specific point made by Mr Imbeni about the Amsterdam Summit conclusions .
These refer to an initiative for a post-graduate course for a European master 's degree in human rights and democracy .
It is envisaged that ten universities from ten countries will participate and it will be handled , as I understand it , by the University of Venice , although further details obviously still have to be worked out .
I shall now comment on some more general points .
Firstly , Mrs Lenz and others talked about the possibility of there being one Commissioner in charge .
I am not sure that would solve the problem .
The real problem is not so much that there are different Commissioners but that there are different considerations relating to geographical situation and a human rights consideration generally .
It is impossible to deal with that by isolating human rights and putting it in one Commissioner 's hands .
For example , to take an area for which I am responsible as I am answering this debate , namely China , there is a very important human rights dimension and at the same time a broader China policy .
You cannot simply solve that by saying that the human rights aspect should be dealt with by a Commissioner responsible for human rights .
That would weaken the policy for human rights itself .
It is only handling China as such that one can have the proper balance in handling things between a broader policy and a human rights policy .
As far as I am concerned , the human rights policy is an integral part of China policy and not just an add-on that you could give to someone else .
So that is not necessarily the most attractive solution although one can continue to reflect on it .
Incidentally , Mr de Vries referred to individual cases .
I am not in a position to give a list of answers on individual cases .
I am not sure that is the purpose of this debate but he happened to mention the Panchen Lama and I can only say that I raised that matter myself at the highest level .
I cannot pretend that I received a satisfactory answer .
The mystery , I fear , remains .
Reference has also been made to the delay between a project being suggested and it being taken up or implemented .
The reasons are various .
Sometimes it is because the idea is of such a general character that it needs to be worked up and that takes time .
Sometimes it is because it raises controversial questions and you need to hear different people 's views on whether it is a good idea or not .
And sometimes it is because of the question of access to money for the particular project .
Incidentally , I am not saying that in the Commission any more than in any other organization there are never failings of an administrative character .
Of course there are sometimes .
But it is useful to mention some of the broader factors that may lead to delays , annoying though they always are .
Finally , on these general points , I should say a word about visibility .
A number of people have spoken about the importance of visibility and I entirely agree .
There is not much point in doing something in this area if people do not know what is going on .
If you are advising people and helping people to build a bridge , it is useful and good for the image of the European Union that people should know that the European Union is giving help .
But , in the case of human rights activities , I would suggest that the visibility is a much more central feature of what we are doing .
It shows not only that we are doing something but also that our concern about the country is one in which human rights is central .
I will now deal with some of the more specific points , thanking both Mrs Lenz and Mr Imbeni for their admirable reports .
The Commission shares their views in considering that priority should be given to ensuring coherence of the initiatives taken and the best use of the financial resources provided .
That is why , since his appointment Mr Santer has personally taken charge of this very sensitive and delicate facet of external policy and Mr van den Broek has been assigned responsibility for the thematic and horizontal aspects of the subject .
Within the departments , the role of coordination has been assigned to the Human Rights and Democratization Unit of Directorate-General IA , and that unit also provides a secretariat to the Steering Committee which is a coordinating body at the level of Deputy Director General set up in 1997 .
In addition , the unit provides the chairmanship of the interdepartmental human rights group set up in 1991 .
Implementation of human rights and democratization policy at the geographical level , to which I have referred , is the responsibility of the Commissioners in charge of political , economic and trade ties with the various non-member countries .
The Commission has restructured the departments of its Directorates General , managing the human rights budget headings by creating in each of them a unit in charge of ensuring that all activities carried out in the field of human rights , democracy and the rule of law dovetail with cooperation activities .
It is by maintaining this unity of competence and management of resources at the geographical level that human rights and democratization issues , which are part and parcel of cooperation with third countries , can be effectively pursued . While recognizing that this coordination could be improved , we have made a real effort and will continue to do so .
With regard to some of the more specific requests in the draft resolutions relating to the measures aimed at defining a joint strategy for using financial resources allocated to human rights , the interdepartmental group for human rights and democracy identifies each year the thematic priorities and target groups corresponding to the budget headings of chapter B7-70 .
For the future the Commissioners propose , in a proposal for a regulation aimed at providing a legal basis for the human rights headings , the implementation of programmes designed to give a coherent framework of action in a given country or region or on a particular topic .
With regard to the request to be notified regularly by the Commission of action taken in non-member countries , I would like to point out that various reports take stock of such action , such as the reports on action taken on the resolution on human rights , democracy and development , and the annual reports on the implementation of action to promote human rights and democratization which review the use of all funds under Chapter B7-70 .
Moreover , the Commission also draws up an annual report on the utilization of the headings : ' democratization process in Latin America ' and ' Meda for democracy ' .
The Commission will take account of Parliament 's requests in drawing up the annual reports , starting with 1996-97 report , which is currently under way .
The need to improve coordination with international and regional organizations is a continuous concern of ours .
I should like to stress that we and the Council of Europe have long been engaged in substantial cooperation by financing joint programmes in central and eastern Europe and in the former Soviet Union .
As regards the United Nations , it is examining at the moment the possibility of strengthening cooperation with the office of High Commissioner on Human Rights .
The monitoring of elections has been referred to .
That has for some years given rise to an increasing number of requests .
The Commission takes the view that priority should be given to a professional approach - which a number of people have favoured in the debate - in terms of methodology , logistics and training .
Thanks to the funds that have been made available , pilot schemes have been carried out over the last couple of years .
We will also examine the proposal to create a European network for human rights and democracy in the light of experience gained and also taking due account of other networks such as the office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights and that of the Council of Europe .
We have noted Mr Imbeni 's proposal for the annual organization of an evaluation conference based on the model of the Phare and Tacis programmes conference .
To respond to your concern about interinstitutional cooperation , I should like to point out that as early as 1989 , the Commission approved the proposal aimed at facilitating interinstitutional contacts by creating a working group with the task of setting up an information exchange network and mapping out a joint action on human rights .
At the same time we have taken note of the proposal to amend the 1998 budget to create a consultative committee on human rights action programmes .
Let me stress that coherence , effectiveness and flexibility are the criteria which drive our positions in the various fields involving human rights .
Thank you , Commissioner Brittan .
Does either of the two rapporteurs wish to take the floor ?
No .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
Benchmarking
The next item is the report ( A4-0387 / 97 ) by Mr Murphy , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the communication from the Commission to the Council , the European Parliament , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions on Benchmarking - implementation of an instrument available to economic actors and public authorities ( COM ( 97 ) 0153 - C4-0387 / 97 ) .
Mr President , as I am going to represent the thoughts of our British colleague I thought I might do it in his own language .
As you know , the British are justly famous for their punctuality and the Greeks are sadly notorious for their inconsistency , so I cannot help but take malicious pleasure from this temporary reversal of roles .
I am glad to say to the Commissioner that the rapporteur welcomes the Commission 's intention to establish a European network of expertise for enterprises to ensure the availability of coherent , trustworthy and equivalent services , especially for small and medium-sized enterprises throughout the European Union .
The rapporteur also welcomes the Commission 's announcement of a High Level Group on benchmarking , composed of industrialists , representatives of Chambers of Commerce and employers ' associations , trade unions , consumers and the civil society .
He stresses the importance for the High Level Group to utilize the highest quality statistical information available , and draws attention to the potential of Eurostat in this respect , to the potential of which I also gladly add my own testimonial .
The rapporteur believes that the full value added of benchmarking to the European Union will be best realized if the particular needs of small and medium-sized enterprises are taken into account as a priority and calls in particular for small and medium-sized enterprises to be directly involved in the High Level Group through participants specifically representing SMEs , and also with the establishment of the European Network of benchmarking expertise .
He calls for the European Parliament to be directly involved with the work of the High Level Group through observer status of a small number of MEPs , and reasserts the call for the European Parliament to be invited to participate in the annual tripartite Commission organized benchmark assessment visits to Japan and the United States of America .
I believe this is a demand of particular relevance .
Finally , he calls for a specific amendment to the ' Development of Human Resources ' benchmarking pilot project to give much higher priority to the quality of managerial skills and training in the European Union , given that cost differentials between European firms and their Japanese and American counterparts are frequently due to operational inefficiencies and not labour market inefficiencies .
I believe that this means that bosses should be benchmarked as well as workers , in an attempt to imitate the Japanese application to work rather than escape early on Friday in order to return back late on Monday and in the meantime shoot grouse or other beasts in the forests of England 's green and pleasant land .
High priority should be given to the interface between education and training on the one hand and the workplace on the other , as this is an area where the EU is clearly lagging behind other leading world economies .
This should be done firmly within the context of lifelong learning .
Human resources benchmarking is especially important .
The comparative weakness of EU managerial skills and culture needs to be seriously investigated and addressed .
Finally , the rapporteur congratulates the Commission once again and commends the report to the House .
Let me balance what I said at the beginning by stressing that there was a great need for Mr Murphy to be absent today as he had to be in Britain on political business .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , four year after the White Paper on growth , competitiveness and employment , I notice with satisfaction that benchmarking occupies an important place on the European employment agenda .
When as far back as 1995 everyone was talking about European employment strategies and the European employment union , the liberals pointed out that the fight against unemployment is primarily a concern of national and regional authorities , and not Europe .
We have always been great advocates of the principle of exchange of best competitive practice .
Authorities want to know which labour market policy offers the best guarantees for more jobs , and entrepreneurs for their part want to learn how foreign competitors manage to increase their market share .
Except that both public authorities and businesses lack comparable , reliable and coherent information .
We therefore support the idea of a European knowledge based network for business , and of a High Level Group on Benchmarking .
The rapporteur rightly argues for the direct involvement of SMEs in this context .
I would like to hear from the Commission whether the SMEs will have active representation , and not merely be included .
After all we should not forget that SMEs are still the biggest job creators .
Without active cooperation from SMEs the whole affair will be rather pointless , it seems to me .
We also look forward to the results of the pilot projects which the Commission has started .
Is the Commission able to give any news on this yet ?
Finally , I would to like to congratulate the rapporteur on his excellent report .
He has highlighted the right things and stated that benchmarking should be integrated into the competition policy of Member States .
We support his request for this Parliament to be directly involved in the High Level Working Group .
I would like to know from the Commission if it is able to inform us yet if this request can be met .
Mr President , benchmarking is fashionable .
Many people are talking about benchmarking in all sorts of contexts .
The Commission has already carried out a number of pilot projects and found that benchmarking is an enormously important method for investigating and finding out what shortcomings there are in the European business climate , and how we shall find solutions to these shortcomings .
According to the Commission , and also to the report which we shall decide upon today , benchmarking should not only be applied at the company and industry level , but also in relation to framework conditions for companies .
Benchmarking is not a new discovery , as people might easily think . It has been used for many years , both by European companies and especially in the USA since the method was developed in the 1970s .
Benchmarking is certainly a very good method for measuring competitiveness , even in small and medium-sized companies .
But at the same time I would advise against having too much faith in a single method which is still a very blunt instrument , particularly when comparing framework conditions , because tradition and culture are also reflected .
That is indeed not something which is so easily measured or benchmarked .
I am very satisfied with what the rapporteur writes in paragraph 10 that people should not identify competitiveness and the connection between the Union 's losses in industrial markets with wage conditions .
I also think it is good that he points out that , in fact , directors and company managements also need to be benchmarked .
Finally , Mr President , I am a bit sceptical about taking up methods development at a political level .
I think it would be more suitable for that to be done by a university or institute which is involved in methods development .
Mr President , there can be no two ways about the usefulness of benchmarking as an instrument for improving European competitiveness as a whole .
What we should be careful of , however , is to start seeing benchmarking as the miracle cure which releases us from all economic problems , such as unemployment , declining productivity , and reduced growth .
The danger threatening us is the infamous reversal of means and objectives .
We should also consider that applying this method will show up both the strong and the weak sides of the European economy .
When we rule out possible conclusions beforehand , we are on the wrong track .
Paragraph 10 gives an example of this .
The link between the loss in market share and labour costs which are too high cannot be proven , it is true , but a reasonable case can be made for it .
Benchmarking is primarily intended to make a comparison between expediency and effectiveness , as a result of which yardsticks and standards can be developed for the input of resources and the results which have be achieved by this .
The working of the economy as a whole , of institutions and government organizations , this way is observed from the outside , as it were .
This can be extremely educational , and will give rise to proper improvements .
Finally , a remark about paragraph 11 , in which a better matching of acquired skills through training and skills wanted in the workplace is urged for .
I agree with the general tenor of this , but at the same time I set store by the fact that it is not industry which determines the substance of educational programmes and learning targets .
Teaching is a multi-faceted process with specific characteristics which must not be dominated by financial motives .
The consequences of the mental impoverishment of future generations are child 's play in the comparison with the present unemployment problem in Europe .
Mr President , may I first of all thank the Parliament for its interest in the communication and congratulate Mr Murphy in his absence on his admirable report .
The integration of the Community 's internal market , the prospects of economic and monetary union and globalization together all mean that European industry has to improve its competitiveness all the time .
As has been stressed on a number of occasions , progress has been made but there is still a lot to be done for Europe to be able to face the challenges before it .
That is the context in which the Commission proposed the benchmarking of competitive performance as a tool for continually monitoring the progress made and encouraging the adoption of the best competitive practices found at world level .
I would agree with what has been said in the debate : it is a tool but not a panacea .
The aim was to provide the European Union with a powerful instrument to boost its competitiveness and Parliament has supported that .
The communication that we are discussing today is in response to subsequent calls by Parliament and the Council for the development of pilot projects designed to give concrete expression to our contribution .
The projects formulated are aimed at improving the competitive performance of businesses , industries and the environment in which people work .
Benchmarking the performance of businesses is first and foremost a task for industry itself .
Public authorities can , however , help in the promotion of such investment .
In this context and in agreement with Parliament 's proposal , the Commission plans to give priority to the needs of small and medium-sized enterprises in setting up a European network for the benchmarking of business performance .
Benchmarking the performance of sectors depends on the specific conditions in each sector and we duly noted Parliament 's request to examine why some sectors perform better than others in their global competitiveness .
In terms of overall economic competitiveness , it is the Member States that are primarily responsible for implementing the pilot projects and the Commission welcomes Parliament 's request to the Member States to do what they can to play a full part in them . We will transmit Parliament 's call that greater priority should be given to the standard of training of business managers during the pilot project on the development of human resources .
We would also like to draw Parliament 's attention to our recent report on the benchmarking of competitive performance in Ireland and New Zealand .
This report could be regarded as a first step towards benchmarking the good performance of some Member States of the European Union as Parliament suggested in its report .
As indicated in its communication , the Commission will set up a high-level advisory group on benchmarking early in the New Year .
It will ensure that the make-up of the group represents varied interests ; we welcome Parliament 's request to be associated with the group 's work and would ask it to designate a Member to be an observer .
The Commission and the Member States have now launched this initiative for benchmarking the competitive performance of European industry .
At the end of the pilot phase the results will be made available to Parliament and all others concerned .
We are convinced that the experience will show the value of the benchmarking of competitive performance as a tool for improving the competitiveness of European industry .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
Expenditure on CFSP
The next item is the report ( A4-0339 / 97 ) by Mrs Müller , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on Opinion No 1 / 97 of the Court of Auditors of the European Communities on the conditions governing the implementation of expenditure under the common foreign and security policy ( C4-0220 / 97 ) .
Mr President , foreign policy is the political area in which it is most difficult to anticipate events , in which the unexpected happens without warning and in which quick-thinking and well-reasoned decisions are of fundamental importance .
A glance at joint actions already taken by the European Union , particularly the administration of Mostar , followed by electoral monitoring , as in Palestine and Bosnia , mine-clearance , special missions such as that to Ruanda , and the Kedo actions , all portray an extreme lack of coherence in the way in which these activities are being implemented and administered .
This lack of uniformity also signifies a lack of transparency , a lack of structures and a lack of effective control .
This can be blamed on a constructional defect in the Maastricht Treaty , which , while determining that decisions in respect of a common foreign and security policy were to be made in accordance with the rules of intergovernmental cooperation , also ruled that such actions would be implemented from the Community budget - and therefore in line with conventional practice .
From the outset this loophole in the treaty inevitably led to conflicts between Parliament and the Council , and indeed also between Parliament and the Commission .
Sadly , our hope that this deficiency might be rectified in Amsterdam was not fulfilled .
The interinstitutional agreement merely related to issues associated with the rapid provision of funds for joint foreign and security actions and rejected the Council 's attempt to declare these budget monies as mandatory .
However , the question of how actions financed from the Community budget are to be implemented and controlled continued to be ignored .
The credit for openly naming the deficiencies in this area , and for furnishing Parliament and the Commission with a guide-rule for resolving outstanding issues , must go to the Court of Auditors .
It is therefore only logical that my report should propose further developing the current interinstitutional agreement .
What is the point of all this ?
Firstly , the biannual change in the presidency of the Council undermines the continuous control and management which is so vital for joint actions .
Clearer operational rules are therefore needed in future .
Secondly , Commission control must be clearly assured .
It must participate extensively in the preparatory planning - and by this I mean the Council decision making stage - and implementation of joint actions , so that efficiency is ensured in financial , legal and operational terms .
The many weaknesses in the system , particularly in the Mostar action , the lack of clarity on the management of funds and the collaboration between Commission departments in Brussels and special envoys in the field , indicate that the Commission must carry out its functions to the full .
This is after all the most important pre-requisite if the Parliament is not to be refused its right to give good discharge to the Commission , especially as the Council is not covered by the judgement after trial process with the Court of Auditors .
Thirdly , the European Union is increasingly associated with various financial backers via joint actions in international structures , such as in the case of Kedo , for example .
To be able to assess the success of such actions , it is important not only to carry out an audit of the quota of funds allocated by the European Union , but also of course to have access to all available data associated with the project , particularly in respect of the contributions made by the individual Member States .
The effectiveness of the European Union 's foreign policy must be drastically increased .
The additional arrangements provided under the Amsterdam Treaty are , in my opinion , not enough .
But in all events Council and Parliament should together strive to ensure that this situation is not aggravated further by administrative and technical obstacles .
The development of an interinstitutional agreement along the lines I have proposed , which has also been basically endorsed by the Commission in its Committee discussions , can constitute the next small step forwards .
I would be pleased if the Council would confront this matter in a positive way .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Mrs Müller not only for her report , but also for the thorough and unremitting way in which she has attended to the concerns of the common foreign and security policy , especially in the former Yugoslavia .
She is very committed to her work there , and unfortunately the true message about this commitment is not being properly reflected in the contribution being made here today .
The report itself was worthy of discussion , but was not controversial .
It was supported by all Groups in the Committee on Budgetary Control and I hope that the lack of debate is not seen as a lack of interest , for that would indeed be regrettable .
The report again demonstrates something which we have also seen elsewhere .
It obviously has to do mainly with aspects of budgetary control and auditing , but ultimately the problems which Mrs Müller mentions in her report conceal far-reaching and fundamental political questions and it would be good if Members of this House , including those outside the Committee on Budgetary Control , could just give this matter some attention .
The common foreign and security policy is a major undertaking and many more people than we sometimes think are hoping to get something out of this common European policy .
Many also believe that this common foreign and defence policy is much further developed than is actually the case .
But grand projects of this kind are often followed by that morning-after feeling when it comes to their actual implementation .
These problems will of course be dealt with primarily in a report from the Court of Auditors .
Lack of clear jurisdiction - a problem already mentioned by the rapporteur - , clashes of interest and confusion over the main objectives as well as over tasks which actually lie within the remit of the common development policy - all these problems make it difficult , and not only from the point of view of budget control , to say " yes ' and to say " yes ' unreservedly .
And underlying all this are also political implications and these too are problems which we will have to deal with .
The criticism which has been voiced is , as has been said , not that of an accountant declaring that individual bookkeeping items are difficult to separate .
We need greater transparency and clarity so that the figures can be examined more easily .
It is therefore much more a political criticism , to the effect that if we no longer know who is responsible for what , if we no longer know who decides what , then the whole system will be extremely difficult to assess .
It will then be well nigh impossible to support decisions , since a decision viewed externally can only be approved or rejected , and from our point of view defended when it is attacked , when one knows what lies behind it .
To this extent the clash of interests , the simultaneousness , which Mrs Müller touches on in her report and which has also been criticized by the Court of Auditors , is more than a question of the clear separation of the finances , more than a matter of finding a different way to regulate the financing and the control of this financing .
I would ask you to bear in mind that the Common Foreign and Security Policy is also our coat of arms , a coat of arms which the European Union displays to the world .
If there is confusion , if there is a lack of transparency , then let us carry out an internal examination of our budgetary control procedure , but you must see that the confusion which we find in this area is a sign , a symptom of a more far-reaching disarray , and this may well be seen around the world , even by people who do not even know that there is a Committee for Budgetary Control or even a European Court of Auditors .
If this confusion , this lack of transparency , should give rise to a loss of credibility , then this will not be directed at our financial control procedure but will impact upon the political standing of the European Union .
In this respect I would ask Mrs Müller just to carry on exactly as she has been doing .
And I would also like to ask the other Members of this House to continue to examine these issues outside of this debate .
Before Mrs Müller leaves us , for I know that she is extremely pressed for time , I would just like to state openly how much I welcome her report and to congratulate her on her work .
My Party supports the report and its theme , the financing of the Common Foreign and Security Policy , constitutes a real interface between the first and the second pillar of the EU Treaty .
The rapporteur has therefore been dealing with an area in which the temptation to be drawn into dogmatism , a religious war as it were , is very great indeed .
Mrs Müller has not succumbed to this temptation and has instead opted for a constructive approach .
This does not mean that we should be satisfied with the outcome of Amsterdam as far as the Common Foreign and Security Policy is concerned .
Mrs Müller 's report makes this all too clear .
We in this Parliament would have liked the European Council to have shown a lot more courage here , rather than the fainthearted approach adopted to date .
But let us accept things just as they are .
In future , the political will of the Governments for joint action will continue to hold sway over the Common Foreign and Security Policy .
Nothing will happen without this political will from the Member States and where there is no political will , the Common Foreign and Security Policy will not even have the effect of a fig-leaf .
Sadly , this has been our experience over the course of the last four years .
On the other side of the coin , however , it can be said that where there is a will for collaboration , or at least where the chance exists for developing one , then the Community can make a useful contribution .
And this does not only apply to the issue of financing .
The Court of Auditors has summed up the figures for previous years and the result is clear-cut : more than 90 % of the funds allocated for joint actions came from the EU budget .
We in the European Parliament have therefore to take full responsibility vis-à-vis the electors .
We want to live up to that responsibility .
We do not want to seize the reins of European foreign policy ourselves - that would not be the role of any Parliament , and certainly not a European one - but we also want to be able to monitor the situation and to satisfy ourselves that European taxpayers ' money is being used wisely and well .
In July we reached an agreement with the Commission and the Council that should facilitate cooperation on these issues .
Here I can only reiterate what was clearly stated in Mrs Müller 's report , namely that the consent embodied in this agreement is a clear sign of the goodwill and trust which we intend to demonstrate .
It is to be hoped that the agreement will not only put an end to the long smouldering conflict between Council and Parliament , but will also lay the foundation for a constructive new beginning .
We must therefore be allowed to develop this agreement further .
As ever , our main attention is directed at the former Yugoslavia .
To date , almost ECU 200 million have been spent in this region as part of the Common Foreign and Security Policy .
The lion 's share of this has gone to Mostar .
Our Committee has developed an excellent relationship with Hans Koschnick , the former administrator of Mostar .
Carlos Westendorp , the High Representative in Sarajevo , has agreed to attend a meeting of our Committee in January , when we will mainly be discussing the issue of fraud in the distribution of aid subsidies .
We continue to hear and read disturbing stories on this subject .
Also underlying this , however , is the question of what changes should be brought to the remit and to the work of the Commission in the former Yugoslavia .
To put it concisely , it would seem that for a long time some members of the Commission have failed to comprehend just how much has been , and is , expected of them in respect of the challenge there .
To react to this with even more red-tape is the worst response imaginable .
Here the Commission is on the point of gambling away the substantial amount of trust which has been built up .
In this connection we eagerly await a special report from the Court of Auditors and in closing may I express my thanks to the latter for the position it has adopted , which is the subject of today 's debate , and request that this report be passed on to us as quickly as possible .
Mr President , I have a feeling , when I analyse the Müller report , that the technical opinion of the Court of Auditors of the European Communities on the difficulties relating to the implementation of expenditure under the CFSP is in fact only an excuse for the Committee on Budgetary Control to reaffirm the philosophy of integral communitarization which is dominant at present .
Mrs Müller is however right to point out the existence of a flaw in the CFSP .
What is particularly serious , is that this flaw is now written into the Treaty of Amsterdam .
In a totally incoherent way , the Treaty first of all reaffirms the obviously intergovernmental nature of the CFSP , and then creates a Community competence with regard to the funding of the operating expenditure of the CFSP out of nothing , thus reversing the economy of the Treaty of Maastricht .
There are two possible attitudes to this observation .
One attitude is to accept the Müller report , which , based on an apparent concern for efficiency , sees in the financial provisions of the new article 28 of the treaty , a need to increase the communitarization of the whole of the CFSP , by reinforcing the powers of the Commission , and of course , the powers of the European Parliament , within the framework of a new inter-institutional agreement .
But if this Parliament is really concerned about the efficiency of the CFSP , and not only concerned with increasing its powers rapaciously , it should recommend a different attitude in order to overcome the contradiction between the institutional nature of the CFSP , and its method of financing .
If the intergovernmental nature of the CFSP is really , as we believe it is , a necessary condition in order for it to be in touch with reality and efficient , the priority is therefore , above all , to preserve its intergovernmental nature , its control by national parliaments and therefore , to set up a method of funding which is coherent with it , without however , increasing the overall amount of expenditure devoted to the CFSP by the various Member States .
25 % of the operating expenditure of the CFSP is already directly financed by the Member States .
This percentage should be increased to cover all its expenditure .
It is therefore particularly important to emphasize , during the ratification debates which will take place in our various countries , the need to correct the division introduced by the Treaty of Amsterdam , as soon as possible , by finding the required technical solution so that the conditions of funding of the CFSP are suited to its intergovernmental nature .
Mr President , on behalf of the Commission , I should like to welcome Mrs Müller 's report which has sought in a very practical way to deal with some of the difficulties we have to face in implementing CFSP actions and suggest some improvements .
I should like today to deal with three key questions which can be asked about the CFSP and its practical implementation , the first of which is what have we done so far to tackle the points made by the Court of Auditors in its report .
Secondly , what is our approach to implementation of the interinstitutional agreement of July of this year ?
Thirdly , what is still to be done to improve CFSP joint actions ?
In looking at the general context of the CFSP , we should not forget that the power to take CFSP decisions lies with the Council .
It is , after all , the Council that decides on joint actions and it then decides how they should be financed .
It is the presidency that is responsible for implementing them , as is very clear by article J5 of the Union Treaty .
It is only because the costs of the actions are charged to the general Community budget that the job of administering them lies with the Commission , as provided by article J11 of the Union Treaty .
This division of responsibilities has created problems in the past and the Court of Auditors has identified them in its report .
So what have we done in 1997 to tackle the points made by the Court ?
In the first place , the Commission has asked the budget authority for credits to be made available to prepare properly each joint action and it has obtained them .
In the 1998 budget ECU 500 , 000 should be on the line B 8014 .
Secondly , in addition to that , the Commission has drawn up a special specific financial sheet for the CFSP which encodes the global context of each action , including financial contributions from the Member States and also from other international organizations .
Then the Commission has been able to make improvements on the management of special envoys .
I welcome the recognition that Mrs Müller has given to this point in her report , paragraph 4 , and there was also a reference to special envoys during the course of the debate .
I now turn to the question of our approach to the implementation of the interinstitutional agreement .
Thanks to the interinstitutional agreement on the financing of CFSP , the delay for implementing a joint action will , in my view at least , be substantially reduced .
For example , there is no longer a budgetary reserve .
Nonetheless , the Commission still thinks it is desirable for the budgetary authority to have an upstream control on expenditure when a joint action is being decided .
We think that should be done on the basis of the specific financial sheet that has been drafted by Commission services .
Finally , what still has to be done to improve CFSP joint actions ?
Mrs Müller stresses the need to associate the Commission at the very beginning of the preparation of each joint action in recital Q of her report .
That is a point which is raised by the Court of Auditors as well .
I can only repeat that in our view it makes operational sense for the Commission to be associated well before the adoption of every joint action .
There is some overlap in the budget between CFSP credits and other credits such as mine-clearing or electoral process actions .
Sometimes the Commission wishes to make a political gesture by giving resources to international organizations .
We must not let the Council forget that needs to be carefully controlled , monitored and evaluated .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 19 : 55 )
Approval of the Minutes
Ladies and gentlemen , a very , very Merry Christmas and Happy New Year to one and all .
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
( The Minutes were approved )
Mr President , I indicated at the beginning that I wanted to speak on the Minutes .
I just wanted to say that page 26 of the Minutes indicates that before the vote on topical and urgent motions for resolutions I pointed out to Mr Cot that only the joint motions were available in all languages and not the motions on which they were based .
Mr Cot replied that this was an exception , and that there had been translation problems .
I made further enquiries at the documentation service afterwards , and they specifically told me that a decision had been taken that the text of original motions on which joint motions were based was no longer to be translated and made available .
I must protest against this , although I am all in favour of economy measures , as it is always possible for us to reject a joint motion , as has often happened , which means voting on the original motions .
We must therefore insist that the original motions should be translated and made available in good time .
Mr Posselt , I have made a note of your comments and I will ask that this issue be re-examined .
Votes
Mr President , it emerged from yesterday 's debate that we considered it desirable for the opinion to be published in the Official Journal , but that does not alter the actual text .
This is an insertion into paragraph 7 , and I understand that it reflects the rapporteur 's intentions .
I have also spoken to other members of the Committee on Budgetary Control about this .
This insertion , which is the subject of an oral amendment by Mr Fabra Vallés , does not cause any problems and is not being opposed .
I would therefore recommend that we accept this oral amendment .
Mrs Müller has asked me to say that she fully agrees with the oral amendment .
Does Parliament have any objection to my putting the oral amendment from Mr Fabra Vallés to the vote ?
I do not see any , so I can put it to the vote , together with the entire motion for a resolution , for which we have no amendments .
It is approved .
Mr President , an oral amendment has been proposed .
You have asked if there are any objections . There are none .
However I still think that it would be more correct to vote first on this oral amendment before voting on the whole report .
Personally , I am in favour of this oral amendment , however I have considerable reservations about the report as a whole .
I will therefore ask you to proceed to the vote on the entire report as usual and also for the oral amendment .
Even on the last day of the session this year !
Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , I am trying to simplify the work of Parliament and not to insist on formalities when I see that there is general agreement .
But , if you wish , I have no objection to holding another vote to confirm this .
The vote was held , with the oral amendment , as is often the case .
I saw that the entire Chamber was in agreement and there was not a single objection .
Let us now please vote on the amendment .
( Parliament adopted the proposal )
Mr President , the conditions under which we are proceeding to the vote have led me to speak .
Thank you for agreeing to my request . However I would have hoped that you would have us proceed formally to the vote for or against the report .
I would like to say that the report by Mrs Müller is given over to a very important report from the Court of Auditors on the functioning of the common foreign and security policy .
This is an area of the European Union where spending decisions are made at intergovernmental level .
As I say , expenditure is decided and the major decisions are taken at intergovernmental level , even though the Community budget is often called upon .
The report also indicates that some 75 % of spending is taken from the Community budget , so of course our Parliament concludes that not only should it be included in decision-making , but also in the whole process of spending control .
Recently , in conditions which were open to criticism , an interinstitutional agreement placing itself within the framework of the Amsterdam Treaty was adopted , and this agreement aims to alter the conditions in which this common foreign and security policy is implemented .
We were critical of the implementation of this interinstitutional agreement .
And what is more , we are criticizing Mrs Müller 's report because it has a perspective which is much more ideological than financial .
Quite often the reports from the Court of Auditors , which provide us with information enabling us to measure the degree to which community funds are sometimes employed less than strictly , give rise not to criticism on a financial basis , nor to financial reform proposals - as they ought - but to ideological proposals . And this is true of the present report .
This is why , Mr President , we have voted against , although that will not be obvious thanks to the conditions in which we have proceeded to the vote .
The report presents a number of institutional views on the Common Foreign and Security Policy as well as views of a more general institutional character to which we take exception .
These include , for example , that the system of changing Council Presidencies every six months complicates and impedes the continuous implementation of and supervision of joint actions .
We believe quite categorically that there must and shall be a right for every Member State of the European Union to occupy the presidency on a rotational basis as the case is today .
We have all heard of proposals for one-year EU Presidencies consisting of a large , a medium-sized and a small Member State .
There is no doubt that such proposals conflict with the principle that every country is equally qualified to occupy the position of President .
Just because a country is a large country , that does not mean that it is more qualified to be the holder of the title of President .
We therefore also believe that the CFSP should continue to have the character of an intergovernmental cooperation .
Furthermore , it is suggested to the Member States that they set up a CFSP personnel reserve for joint actions .
Firstly , this disregards the express desire of many Member States to remain neutral , and secondly , it should be up to the individual country whether it wishes to participate in a joint action ; there is nothing automatic in that .
The CFSP , the common foreign and security policy of the European Union still has not really got off the ground , four years after the Treaty of Maastricht entered into force .
Concrete experiences , such as the EU administration of Mostar , the European electoral unit for the Palestinian elections and the EU action in Bosnia speak for themselves .
As far as the latter is concerned , the European Parliament has , in the context of the second reading of the 1998 budget , expressed its concern about the implementation of EU financing for actions in connection with the return of refugees to Bosnia .
But it is not only the European Parliament which is concerned about the implementation of the CFSP .
The Court of Auditors does not hesitate in its advice to take stock of three years ' experience with joint actions as part of the CFSP , and to point the finger at continuing weak points and failings .
The core of the CFSP problem is the conflict between the exclusive powers of the Council to approve CFSP actions , and the authority of the European Parliament to release the necessary resources for these .
As rapporteur of the report on the funding of the CFSP as far back as 1994 , I pointed to the existing area of tension between substantive authority for the CFSP , which is in the hands of the Council , and budgetary power .
At the time I warned urgently that no one benefits from a persistent , permanent squabbling between European Parliament and Council .
EU citizens are not the least bit interested in an endless discussion about who is responsible for what part , but want to see a Union which operates efficiently , and which also carries out its responsibilities to the outside world by means of a powerful foreign policy .
Does this mean that between 1994 and now , absolutely nothing has happened ?
Have the difficulties concerning the EU administration of Mostar , the European electoral unit for the Palestinian elections , and management of budget appropriations of the post of High Representative for Bosnia led to nothing ?
Were the numerous discussions of the Committee on Budgets , during which it was asked to make available financial resources for CFSP actions on the basis of flimsy and extremely ill-founded information , a measure for nothing ?
The answer , in my opinion , is no .
The International Agreement of Amsterdam offers considerable progress with regard to the financing of the CFSP .
Clear rules must better set out the respective powers of both partners in the budgetary power , Council and Parliament , and bring about the necessary interaction between the two .
That way financial resources for realistic requirements of the CFSP can , in future , be released more quickly and more efficiently .
But that is not the end of the matter .
The Court of Auditors rightly points out in its well-founded evaluation , a series of issues in which the CFSP is remiss , particularly :
Lack of transparency .
Information is available on policy expenditure paid from the EU budget ( 90.94 % ) ; there are still problems with administrative expenses and the Member States ' contributions .
As far as the latter is concerned , except for a few measures , there is little or no information about the contributions which were paid out by Member States or other donors.-The half-yearly rotation of presidency of the Council sits uncomfortably with the need for continuity in the administration of a joint action ( a concrete reference to Mostar ) .-There are still shortcomings in the Commission 's management of the CFSP.-Lack of clear separation criteria which means that too often there is an overlap between the objectives of the CFSP and the responsibilities of the Community in the sphere of development cooperation .
This translates into a lack of cohesion in the management of resources which does little for budgetary transparency.To put right these shortcomings the interinstitutional agreement might have to be specified more precisely .
On this point I fully endorse the conclusions of the Müller report .
The only thing I would like to add is that this will only succeed through a pragmatic approach .
Specifically referring to budget powers , this means that the European Parliament may not abuse its authority over the financial aspect of the CFSP actions .
Commission , Council and European Parliament ( both the Committee on Budgets and the Committee on Budgetary Control ) must , by means of intense and constructive cooperation , gave shape to a powerful CFSP .
Labelling of genetically modified soya and maize
The next item is the joint debate on the following oral questions to the Commission :
B4-0908 / 97 - O-0139 / 97 by Mrs Breyer and Mr Lannoye , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on labelling of genetically modified soya and maize products ; -B4-0909 / 97 - O-0141 / 97 by Mr Florenz , Mrs Schleicher and Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on labelling of products made from genetically modified soya and maize ; -B4-0910 / 97 - O-0143 / 97 by Mrs Roth-Behrendt , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on implementing provisions for the labelling of genetically modified soya beans and maize ; -B4-0912 / 97 - O-0145 / 97 by Mr Pasty and Mr Azzolini , on behalf of the Group Union for Europe , on the labelling of certain foodstuffs produced from genetically modified organisms ; -B4-0913 / 97 - O-0154 / 97 by Mr Eisma , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , -B4-1003 / 97 - O-0164 / 97 by Mr Papayannakis and Mrs Gonzalez Alvarez , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the labelling of genetically modified soya and maize ; -B4-1006 / 97 - O-0170 / 97 by Mr Souchet and Mr Nicholson , on behalf of the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations , on the labelling of products made from genetically modified soya and maize .
Mr President , I would like to refer to a regulation regarding the labelling of genetically modified products .
My quote is from article 37 of our regulation on statements and oral questions which states that a committee , a political group or a minimum of 29 members can table a motion for a resolution .
My colleagues , Édouard Des Places and Dominique Souchet , tabled a motion for a resolution last week within the correct time period and in accordance with the regulation , yet now the Conference of Presidents decides that there will be neither a resolution nor a vote .
We believe that this decision is completely contradictory to the regulation and we regret it all the more because this is the second time this has happened this week .
In effect we were refused a vote on the Commission 's statement - which we considered to be very negative - on mad cow disease .
This occurrence is symptomatic of a worrying problem .
The European Parliament keeps asking for more power but does not dare to vote on resolutions if it thinks that it might oppose the Commission .
My group would like to express clearly its disagreement with the report on banning products at risk and the policy regarding genetically modified organisms .
So , Mr President , in accordance with the Rules of Procedure , we would ask for a vote on the resolution which we had tabled following the correct procedure .
Mr Berthu , I think that we have already had a debate on this issue .
The Conference of the Presidents of the Political Groups came round to this way of thinking , as you yourself have said .
Your group is represented at this Conference and of course , regardless of the position of the Conference , which I think was a unanimous position , from what we have been told , you could have tabled a motion for a resolution without being bound by the Conference of the Presidents of the political groups .
Mr President , the decision of the Conference of Presidents was not unanimous .
I was representing my own group and I very firmly opposed the decision .
In my opinion , the Conference of Presidents was not entitled to take this decision as it contradicts the Rules of Procedure .
Mr Berthu , as you can understand , I am not here to answer on behalf of the Conference of Presidents of the political groups .
There are presidents of the political groups here , who could take up the matter .
But my impression is that this debate is now closed .
Mr President , this was an initiative by the Green Group in the European Parliament because , although the novel foods regulation has been in force since 15 May , the Commission has been keeping us waiting , saying that there would also be provisions for genetically modified maize and soya . But what has happened ?
Nothing ! When are you finally going to stop your delaying tactics towards consumers and towards this Parliament ?
How much longer do you intend to keep consumers in the dark ?
When are the Commission and the Standing Committee on Foodstuffs finally going to agree on clear labelling of maize and soya ?
Mrs Cresson , I see that you are with us today .
In other contexts we are always hearing about the latest progress in genetic engineering .
Why has DNA analysis not been accepted , when it is very much state-of-the-art ?
Why has the Commission suggested protein analysis , which is very old-fashioned ?
Are we to believe the rumours that only a voluntary agreement by industry is planned ?
What is happening about baby food ?
Are we going to endorse the Scientific Committee for Food 's opinion and exclude novel foods from baby food , including maize and soya ?
Why does the Commission not let the producers come up with the analysis method ?
Why are millions of ecus of taxpayers ' money being wasted , with the analysis methods being funded from the public purse ?
Why can you not make a proposal at last ?
When is the proposal on additives , flavourings and enzymes coming ?
When is the veil of secrecy finally going to be lifted ?
When can consumers and we here in this House expect a meaningful proposal on the labelling of genetically modified maize and soya products , which is what both we and consumers want ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we put this topic on the agenda because we wanted to make sure that something was finally done .
The Commission then brought forward a proposal on 3 December , after we had already set the wheels in motion .
I have looked at the explanatory statement for the regulation , which was adopted without reference to the Parliament , as the joint Committee for Foodstuffs is responsible for it .
I was amazed .
We have been arguing with the Commission for nearly half a year , and the Commission has always said that it was not necessary to adopt a special regime .
Now , in points 8 , 9 and 20 of its explanatory statement it has used precisely the argument that we have always put forward .
I do not quite understand that .
I am grateful that the Commission has now seen its way to doing this , but I would like the Commission to explain to me why it battled for so long against the Parliament 's ideas .
We naturally support the DNA checking envisaged by the Commission , subject - as Mrs Breyer has just commented - to the analysis method to be used for this check being prescribed at the same time .
This is the only way to make this proposal practicable and to ensure that proper information is forthcoming .
The European Commission 's Standing Committee on Foodstuffs had a very intensive session on this proposal yesterday involving the Member States , and it now looks as if the Commission and Council will make a decision in January .
This will clear the way , at least in the case of the labelling of genetically modified soya beans and genetically modified maize , for the provisions of the Regulation adopted on 19 September 1997 , which came into force on 1 November 1997 , but whose implementation subsequently had to be delayed until 1 February 1998 , to be implemented by the Member States by the new deadline .
We welcome all this , but why has it taken so long ?
However , I have a few more questions for the Commission .
First of all , I would be grateful if the Commissioner could tell us something about the outcome of yesterday 's meeting of the Committee on Foodstuffs .
My second question is this : this year 's soya and maize harvest in the USA has finished , but we can assume that genetically modified products are already on the way to Europe or are even already in Europe .
What is the Commission 's estimate of the risk that genetically modified maize and genetically modified soya will be exported to Europe mixed with conventional products , without the necessary approval for marketing in the countries of the European Union under Part C of the 1990 Directive ?
How many applications for such marketing approval have been submitted to the European Commission ?
How will the Commission ensure that a decision can be reached in good time on all pending applications for marketing approval ?
Does the Commission have an idea of the extent of deliveries of such organisms to Europe from the USA and Canada ?
How does the Commission rate the risk of trade conflicts with our North American trading partners , if products cannot be marketed in the European Union without approval for the parts containing genetically modified organisms ?
I am conscious , Commissioner , that you are probably not in a position to answer all my questions in detail today .
But I would like to put these questions to you and I would be grateful if they could be answered by the beginning of January .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , we have put these oral questions to you today because we think that the Parliament needs to be provided with comprehensive information on genetically modified foodstuffs at an early stage , and certainly at an earlier point than is usually the case .
The fact that you were unable to arrange for the Regulation to come into force on 1 November because the provisions required for implementation were not available , and that you therefore had to delay this until February , was bad not only for consumers in Europe , but also for European industry .
In the case of foodstuffs to be distributed within the internal market , uniform regulations about labelling as a whole are needed before these foodstuffs are produced .
This is necessary both for industry and for consumer protection .
I fail to understand why this has taken so long , given that the novel foods regulation was finalized in the Conciliation Committee over a year ago , that it has been in force since May and that it has been clear since then that transitional arrangements would have to be made for maize and soya .
I would also suggest that we should consider now , before the new agreement between the institutions comes into force in early summer next year , whether the Parliament could be given information earlier and more promptly , so that it does not have to go to great lengths to have proposals drawn up for discussion in the Commission 's Standing Committee on Foodstuffs .
What I would like you to tell me , since you are responsible for science and for the Joint Research Centre , is the following : what progress has been made on work to develop an analysis method that can be used throughout the Union to test for genetic modification of DNA , and to what extent is the Joint Research Centre involved with this work , given that it has already developed analysis methods for a whole string of food products using ring tests , thus ensuring uniformity within the Union , rather than leaving things to chance ?
I do not think that we can just leave this decision to industry alone .
In this connection , I would like to ask you another question , Madam Commissioner . Would it not be more meaningful , instead of introducing a scheme whereby a product can be marked ' may contain genetically modified ingredients ' , to determine a threshold value and stipulate that the labelling ' genetically modified foodstuff ' or ' non genetically modified foodstuff ' can only be used above that threshold ?
In Austria we had a case of contamination .
It is particularly easy for soya and maize transported in railway wagons to be contaminated , even it is only by 1 % , so it is better to say that there is a threshold value than to label something with ' may contain ' and make consumers uncertain .
Madam Commissioner , I think all these questions will have to be answered very quickly if we really want the arrangements to be adopted by all Member States in February and implemented by industry then .
It is high time that a proposal to this effect was brought forward covering everything that the consumer needs to know and everything that industry needs for producing and labelling its products .
Mr President , could you please ask the Commissioner to pay attention while we are speaking ; it makes communication easier .
It is not only the consumer and industry who continue to be confused about the use of genetically modified organisms in food .
The European Parliament , all of us here , also frequently have to ask for clarification .
Hence the debate this morning .
It is becoming increasingly clear to me that the Commission is still not quite sure what policy to follow as regards genetically modified organisms .
It produces regulations with timetables which industry not only finds difficult , but which leave it at a loss , too .
The most important question this morning is why the Commission did not produce the regulations for implementation earlier : it has taken this long for there to be a temporary proposal .
For industry a somewhat unworkable situation has arisen , with many uncertainties .
More importantly , the there is still no guarantee for the consumer when buying products , as to whether they contain genetically modified ingredients or not .
Therefore my group feels that the situation which has arisen is unacceptable .
Labelling is extremely important .
We believe in free choice for consumers as long as the labelling provides them with sufficient information .
Consumers will have to be able to decide for themselves whether to buy genetically modified foods or not .
It is up to the Commission to ensure that information on labels becomes statutory , and that it can be established by means of a reliable method whether a product contains genetically modified organisms .
It is this method which has caused so much confusion .
Initially , a majority of Member States , and the Commission itself , appeared to opt for the so-called protein method , and yet in the recent proposal the Commission suddenly chose the DNA method - also to the amazement of the Standing Committee for Food which met yesterday , or so I heard .
It looks as if the recent draft regulation is too unclear for industry to be able to start labelling products in a responsible way .
I would therefore like the Commission to explain why it opted for this new method , and to hear when it intends the implementing regulation to come into force .
To put it mildly , Mr President , it is well overdue , and I ask the Commission once more to fulfil its responsibilities at last , because it has been extremely remiss .
Mr President , I think at this stage in the debate , in the light of the contributions by other Members who have expressed their concern , which is no more than the concern of ordinary people , there is little more to be said and I do not intend to waste the time I have .
We had also submitted a question which basically expresses the same concern as our fellow-Members ' questions , and that is : why do we not put these implementing measures into practice , why do we not have analyses approved at European level , and why do we not have proper labels which will enable consumers to choose ?
The United States says that the European Union is putting obstacles in the way of importing genetically-modified products and that the European Union bases its actions more on public opinion than on scientific evidence .
We think the anxiety manifested in European public opinion is reasonable .
It has become sensitive as a result of other food problems .
But in addition to that , the recent approval of the possibility of producing genetically-engineered maize in France gave rise to the publication in the Spanish press , and I think in the European press , of the statement that this maize will contain three genes : one with a toxic product to deter insects , another that has a product which is resistant to antibiotics , and a third which has a product which is tolerant to herbicides .
It is reasonable for European public opinion - and any opinion - to be concerned about the effects on health of any of these products .
For these reasons proper labelling and an appropriate implementation are essential .
Madam Commissioner , it is probable that the change taking place in DG XXIV to safeguard the safety of food is a step in the right direction , since there is provision for a risk analysis unit whose basic objective is to analyze the risks to human health that each of these products represents .
In any event , Madam Commissioner , I believe that all our fellow-Members here have expressed a reasonable concern on the part of the people of the European Union , who do not want to take the risk of consuming products which are a health risk .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am delighted to be with you today and to have the opportunity to clarify the situation regarding the labelling of food products which come from genetically modified soya beans or maize .
This is of course a very complex subject and I may not be able to meet your expectations and answer all your questions . However , if you are in agreement , we will use this session to review the Commission 's position , since you - quite rightly - have put questions to it on this issue .
I will not go back over the history of the case , since you are as familiar with it as I am , but I will respond directly to your questions which in some cases deal with the same issue .
Firstly I will address the first series of questions about the legal situation at the time of the entry into force on 1 November 1997 of the Commission 's Regulation CE 1813 / 97 from September 19 , 1997 .

Regulation 1813 / 97 which came into force on 1 November establishes rules for additional labelling for food and ingredients which are produced from genetically modified soya and maize .
This regulation applies directly to all Member States and therefore it cannot be considered that there would be any shortcomings on this issue .
Operators are bound , as of 1 November , to label their products which are not equivalent within the meaning of article 2 of Regulation 1813 / 97 / EEC .
As regards the adoption of detailed labelling rules for these foods or ingredients , the Commission , at the meeting of the Permanent Committee on Foodstuffs on 31 July 1997 undertook to present them as soon as possible ; it also indicated on this occasion that it would consult the Scientific Committee on Human Diet for its opinion on the concept of non-equivalence which had been put in place by the regulation mentioned above .
This consultation and the desire to work together with interested parties , as well as the evaluation of different approaches which could be used , all explain the time we needed to take before adopting the relevant draft regulation .
And so I can fully appreciate the impatience felt by some of you which is entirely justified , but this method of proceeding obviously required a certain amount of time .
Another series of questions refer to the interpretation of the concept of non-equivalence and , more particularly , to the criteria selected to trigger the labelling of food produced from genetically modified soya beans and maize .
Article 2 of Regulation 1813 / 97 / EC , which repeats article 8 of Regulation 258 / 97 / EC relating to novel food products , states that the final consumer must be informed of all food characteristics or properties , such as composition , nutritional value or the nutritional effects , or the use for which it is intended , stating that a food product or ingredient is no longer equivalent to a food product or ingredient which already exists .
As a result , the foodstuffs and ingredients produced from genetically modified soya bean or from genetically modified maize which are not equivalent to their traditional counterparts are subject to labelling requirements .
The key concept of non-equivalence has been defined as evidence of a scientifically demonstrable difference which goes beyond the natural admissible variations .
At the same time , on 23 July 1997 the Commission made public these general guidelines on labelling for modern biotechnology . They recommend , on the one hand , labelling requirements when the origin of a product can be scientifically verified as GMO , that is " genetically modified organism ' , and on the other hand the need to define clear rules for labelling to enable official controls to be carried out which are reliable , reproducible and practicable .
If we take into account both the concept of non-equivalence , and the approach recommended by these Commission guidelines , it appeared at this stage that the presence , in foodstuffs and ingredients of foodstuffs , of DNA resulting from genetic modification is the criteria which responds best to the requirements mentioned above .
Therefore on this basis the Commission approved , on 3 December , a draft regulation which established detailed regulations for labelling which apply to foodstuffs and ingredients made from genetically modified soya beans or maize .
This draft was discussed in the Permanent Committee on Foodstuffs on 18 December and proposed for voting in this committee in mid-January .
I should tell you that , at the Permanent Committee on Foodstuffs which met on 18 December to exchange views on the draft proposed by the Commission , a majority of Member States was opposed the draft !
They prefer the protein criterion and the establishment of a list of products to be included on labels before the products to be included on the list are specified .
This draft regulation proposes that the foodstuffs and ingredients produced from genetically modified soya beans or maize which contain DNA resulting from a genetic modification are not equivalent in the sense of article 2 , point A of Regulation 1813 / 97 / EEC and therefore are subject to labelling requirements .
However those which no longer contain DNA , notably due to its destruction by successive stages of processing , are not subject to these requirements since they must be considered to be equivalent to their traditional counterparts .
However , as the possibility has not been scientifically excluded that methods of food production can permit the elimination of all traces of DNA , whilst leaving proteins present , the DNA approach was supplemented in order to cover this case , which is still theoretical .
Moreover , the draft provides for a standard formula for labelling without a possible alternative to facilitate the consumer 's selection and information and to avoid different interpretations within the European Union of the possible equivalence of formulas which could create new difficulties in the internal market .
This indication will be formulated as follows , and I quote : ' produced from genetically modified soya ' , or , and I quote again ' produced from genetically modified maize ' , respectively .
This should appear in the list of ingredients in brackets immediately after the name of the ingredient concerned .
This note could also be added legibly to the bottom of the list of ingredients , printed in characters of at least the same size as those used for the list of ingredients proper .
For those products which do not have a list of ingredients , the necessary information must appear clearly on the product label .
This regulation does not affect the right of operators to include voluntary statements on their product labels in addition to those set out by this regulation , on condition that these statements are in accordance with the clauses of Directive 79 / 112 / EEC , which stipulates that they must not mislead the consumer .
This is also true for statements concerning the absence of foodstuffs or ingredients made from genetically modified soya or maize , or statements concerning the presence of such foodstuffs or ingredients in cases where this cannot be scientifically verified but the proof is available by other means .
The mixture of products which contain genetically modified organisms with conventional products is not banned by the ruling .
However , Council and European Parliament Regulation 258 / 97 / EEC provides for this possibility , notably for bulk deliveries , and states that , in this case , the consumer information on the possible presence of genetically modified organisms in foodstuffs is supposed to satisfy the labelling requirements in the aforementioned regulation .
According to this approach , the draft regulation concerning labelling of foodstuffs and ingredients made from genetically modified soya or maize allows for the possibility of including the following on the label , and I quote : ' may contain , for products in which the presence of material produced from genetically modified soya / maize cannot be excluded , nor be proven ' .
In addition , this note conforms to the general guidelines of the Commission on labelling of modern biotechnology .
This formulation will avoid the separation of products and the obligation to test each consignment which may combine these products in different amounts , whilst also enabling the consumer to choose whether to buy these products or not .
In response to the important question which deals with imports of genetically modified products from the United States or Canada , in accordance with the clauses of article 43 of Directive 90 / 220 / EEC , the Member States are bound to see that this directive is observed , in other words they are responsible for monitoring the conformity of products containing genetically modified organisms which appear on the market in the European Union , and must see that the relevant authorities organize inspections and , if necessary , other control measures in an adequate way .
On 3 December , at its twenty-second meeting , the committee responsible for Directive 90 / 220 / EEC requested that the Commission put in place harmonized control and inspection measures .
An ad hoc technical working group for inspections and control measures for genetically modified organisms was set up .
On 16 December , this working group looked at the availability and applicability of specific technical methods to detect or identify genetically modified organisms and their derivative products which would not have been granted authorization for voluntary dissemination with a view to their being put on the market .
Today , thirteen products are the subject of notification within the framework of part C of Directive 90 / 220 / EEC .
During the revision of Directive 90 / 220 / EEC , the Commission decided that any product in the process of being authorized under the current directive must undergo an examination by the relevant scientific committees before being approved by the Member States in the regulation committee for this directive .
As the opinions of the scientific committees will not be available until the end of January and as it would be appropriate to follow the procedure of the regulation committee for Directive 90 / 220 , it seems unlikely that the Commission envisages the adoption of these authorization decisions before mid-March 1998 .
Between the fourth term of 1996 , the date of the first change , and 31 May 1997 , it has been indicated that 8 , 300 , 000 tonnes of soya beans and 650 , 000 tonnes of soya powder entered Europe from the United States . 2 % of this originated from genetically modified organisms , in other words 166 , 000 tonnes of soya beans and 13 , 000 tonnes of soya powder .
Imports of Novartis maize made up some 0.6 % of the total maize imports from the United States ( 4 , 422 tonnes ) .
The Commission has always endeavoured to ensure that Community legislation conforms with international obligations and this means that the risk of disagreement on commercial matters is avoided as far as possible .
It is not the role of the Commission to comment upon the interpretation of the rules of international business as provided by our commercial partners , nor upon their opinions on the conformity of European Union legislation with the above rules .
So , ladies and gentlemen , I have responded to your serious questions as best I can .
It is clear that the debate will not end here .
However I would like to say that the Commission is very vigilant .
Of course the various consultations take time , but we will continue to work on this together , I hope - even though there are differences within the Member States as we have seen in this last session - and we will unite our efforts to reach a universally satisfactory solution .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Madam Commissioner .
Even if the various opinions expressed do not always totally coincide , the European Parliament seems to consider that it has already said the last word on the need for clear and full labelling of foodstuffs and ingredients affected by genetic engineering .
If that were true , today 's debate would be superfluous and a repetitive waste of time .
However , my view and that of my group is that this debate is urgently needed .
We are unhappy about the way the Commission is handling the sensitive subject of labelling genetically modified foods and the scant regard it pays - sometimes at least - to Council and Parliament regulations .
We as Members of the European Parliament are being criticized from all quarters when it is the Commission which is actually at fault .
The European Commission has let our citizens down by causing confusion about the labelling of genetically modified foods .
It is not acceptable to stipulate justifiably demanded labelling requirements in a regulation and then not implement the regulation .
As a consumer , I assumed back at the beginning of this year that we had passed a turning point with the novel foods regulation .
I assumed that novel , and in particular technically modified , foodstuffs would be clearly and fully labelled .
Not a bit of it !
The relevant products containing genetically modified maize and soya are no longer considered new .
The attempt to improve matters by means of the Regulation that came into force on 1 November has not helped .
It does not include the guidelines on implementation needed to ensure a uniform protection level throughout the European Union and legal certainty for manufacturers and traders .
And it gets worse .
Regulation 81 / 13 will not even come into force , instead it will be replaced by a further amended version .
How can you explain all this to the average consumer ?
Madam Commissioner , I believe that the type of labelling that you have described is correct .
But you have not answered the following questions : why could it not actually come into force on 1 November , given that we had been discussing the novel foods regulation and labelling for over five years ?
There was time enough for preparatory discussions and clarification , even if it was not quite clear at the outset what form it would take .
But it was always evident that labelling would and must come .
So why was that not possible ?
Why is it not possible until 1 February or even March , when so many new products will already be on the market ?
If this regulation does come into force then , will it apply to products which are new at that time ?
This issue has not been resolved at all .
I would ask you not to forget the third point , the problems surrounding methods of detection and analysis .
Suitable methods do in fact exist for detecting genetic modification of maize and soya products .
So even if it is slow to act , the Commission has no justification for denying consumers any longer a comprehensive labelling system consistent across all Member States .
From the consumer 's point of view , there is now nothing to stop comprehensive labelling of our food , and it has everything going for it .
That is why my group is being so tenacious about this .
Consumers ought to be making purchasing decisions armed with proper information , not at the mercy of bureaucrats .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we , the European Parliament , decided upon full labelling of novel foods with the implementation of the novel foods regulation , so that consumers would be given the option of making their own purchasing decisions .
I would like to remind you that we resolved to provide consumers with information about all the characteristics and nutritional properties of food products , such as composition , nutritional value and intended use , which distinguish genetically modified food from conventional food .
Labelling of foodstuffs produced using genetic engineering does not amount to some kind of health warning as far as I am concerned .
I see it rather as being essential if society is to accept and trust new technology .
Nevertheless , labelling does give anyone wanting to steer clear of genetically engineered products for any reason the option of deliberately avoiding them .
I should stress again that our overriding concern must be to ensure that consumers are not exposed to nutritional deficiencies or other health risks through the consumption of novel foods and ingredients .
These products should only be put on the market once three requirements have been met : first , these products should not represent any danger to the consumer ; second , there should be no attempt to mislead ; and third , they should not be so different from conventional foodstuffs that when eaten normally they can result in nutritional deficiencies .
Because of the wide variety of products covered by the novel foods regulation , they generally need to be considered case by case .
The Commission has attempted to set out the arrangements for genetically modified maize and soya in its draft Regulation .
The Commission 's proposal stipulates that genetically modified products must always be labelled if they contain genetically modified DNA .
This method is bound to lead to the labelling of more foodstuffs than if proteins only had to be checked .
The label for any foodstuff containing genetically modified DNA or modified proteins must include the following words in the list of ingredients or in another clearly visible place : ' Produced from genetically modified maize / soya ' .
Even so , the analysis method suggested by the Commission is not compatible with the novel foods regulation or with the Luxembourg Summit Declaration .
I therefore call upon the Commission to amend its proposal so that the labelling scheme under the novel foods regulation is fully and comprehensively implemented .
Any limitation of the labelling scheme put forward by the European Parliament is unacceptable as far as I am concerned .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , as has been very clearly shown in these talks , the labelling of packaged genetically modified soya and maize has become a serious problem , which could have been avoided by the Commission and which now we must address without delay .
In this respect I consider the Commissioner 's response was very timely , although I must say that there are still very many questions left unanswered and there is still a lot of work to be done before we can talk of safety with regard to this very serious matter .
It was obviously a mistake not to have implemented legislation on the new food , before genetic maize or soya came on to the market .
Consequently , these products can now be marketed with no clear labelling on the packaging , which has led to uncertainty , confusion and understandable concern , as different Member States have gone their own way in the matter , which has caused even more confusion .
As Madam Commissioner remarked , the regulation which came into force on 1 November was absolutely vital , but I have to say , the work of the Commission had lagged badly behind , there being no proposals for enforcement .
None at all .
Like many of my colleagues , I cannot but wonder why no proposals or guidance were given before the decree came into force .
Now the situation remains vague and awkward for both industry and the consumer .
Manufacturers do not actually know what they ought to be labelling or how .
We are also still in the dark as to scientific criteria which could decide , for example , whether a genetically modified product corresponds exactly to the original .
Thus , labelling requirements must be brought in for scientific evaluation to take place .
Madam Commissioner , in her response , stressed that the end-user must have clearer information .
We all agree on this , certainly .
The consumer has to have clear and comprehensible information on the quality and content of a product before he or she can make a conscious , free choice .
For this it is essential that labelling is unambiguous and as simple as possible to understand .
Too much detail can obscure what the consumer needs to know .
However , alternative and supplementary labelling can give essential information , especially when a type of food or ingredient might contain a genetically modified product or products , although it cannot be proved with certainty or ignored either .
This , however , must appear on the labelling .
All in all , both the food manufacturer and the consumer have a right to more precise information to increase food safety .
And further research needs to be done on the combined and cumulative effects of genetically modified ingredients and products on the whole food chain .
Mr President , almost a year ago the Parliament approved the work of the Committee on Conciliation on the novel foods regulation .
At that time we were the only group to express any serious reservations and indeed we then voted against the regulation .
And now , one year later , I see that our reticence , which was more than just reticence - a serious criticism in fact - has turned out to be justified .
The Commissioner has confirmed what we said : that the notion of substantial equivalence was completely confusing and ill-defined .
What is a foodstuff which is substantially equivalent ?
We still do not know this today and our fears have been confirmed .
Secondly , as regards labelling , article 8 of this regulation was riddled with deficiencies and today these seem even more blatant than they were a year ago .
Of course I do not necessarily mean to say that we are the heroes of the piece , but I am delighted that everyone is now saying the same thing as us .
As regards the situation today , we can confirm that we are in a legal vacuum , and on this I cannot agree with Mrs Cresson .
We have a legal vacuum now , because we do not know what this substantial equivalent is .
We are struggling to keep up with a high-speed train , and we have no hope of catching it unless we make some radical changes .
Consequently , I would like to draw attention to the fact that consumers have never asked for genetically modified foods .
Amongst my acquaintances , I know of no consumer who wishes to have genetically modified foodstuffs , especially those modified to resist herbicides .
And what of the scientists ?
Well , one year on , many scientists are posing new questions and raising new doubts : notably , herbicide tolerance means that the vegetables concerned accumulate these herbicides within their organisms .
Not a word has been said about this !
There is nothing in the regulations , we do not know what this could do to our health , nor do we know what effect it could have on the environment .
Two Member States , Luxembourg and Austria took a courageous stance .
I note that others are now hesitating and questioning their original ideas .
NGOs and health and environmental associations are stepping up their intervention against the situation .
So what has the Commission to say today ?
I would like to thank Mrs Cresson for making a speech which was perfectly correct , at least as regards information , for now we are up to date .
But she is proposing labelling based on the detection of modified DNA or modified proteins .
But how many foodstuffs will be labelled which are made from genetically engineered soya and maize ?
I would like to know the exact figure !
I can report that the 2 % of genetically modified soya in the consignments imported from elsewhere , according to my information sources , will be around 15 % this year .
Soya consignments are already here and so is the next crop , so the problem is growing .
We still haven 't solved the problem of additives , flavouring and extraction solvents .
And so my conclusion is that we are about to make a big mistake by adopting a method based on the analysis of finished products .
What we need - and it is our leitmotiv - is a system of certification of origin with product traceability so we can give the consumer real information about the origins of and about the use of genetic engineering in the products which end up on his or her plate .
I think this is essential .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , genetically modified organisms have entered the European Union and the Parliament can only lament this state of affairs .
In this context , the labelling motion is only a minimal measure .
Two aspects of this question should make us increase our vigilance .
Firstly , labelling of genetically modified organisms and the observance and control of this , secondly , the circulation of living genetically modified organisms , their cultivation and the risks which they could spell out for the environment of which we are an integral part .
As far as labelling is concerned , we know that in order to inform the consumer we need the means by which to detect genetically modified organisms in a product and we need to be able to measure genetically modified organisms .
And yet , in spite of the excellent account you provided , Madam Commissioner , notably concerning the DNA approach , recent highly credible scientific articles reveal that the methods which enable us to check foodstuffs have not been perfected , indeed they are very expensive and depend greatly on information provided by the inventors .
And - let us not delude ourselves - any research done blindly will be very dangerous .
I do not wish to be a prophet of doom , but I think that this regulation which my group will approve because it is necessary to do so , will be hard to apply .
Basically , as regards the distribution of genetically modified organisms , both they and transgenesis have created a situation never before known in human history : man 's introduction of modified genes into cultivated plants , and indirectly into wild plants .
Although the risks of cross-fertilization are slim for maize , which has no equivalent in the wild , at least within Europe , the same cannot be said for rape-seed , which is related to the cabbage plant and the mustard plant , nor for soya which belongs to the legume family for which the risk of cross-fertilization is absolutely guaranteed .
Furthermore , the introduction of insect-resistant genes will make parasites more and more resistant , until eventually we find ourselves without any further biological defences .
Let 's not allow ourselves to be overwhelmed too easily by these techniques in the name of the progress which benefits a few multinationals , without having really measured their effects and without applying the indispensable principle of caution .
This is what European consumers want - and they are quite right in this .
My fear is that the labelling in question will be like a plaster on a wooden leg .
Creating separate procedures for genetically modified organisms seems somewhat unrealistic to anyone who knows the least thing about production , transport , stocks and the processing of agricultural products .
In five years ' time , genetically modified organisms will be everywhere , in our vegetables and cereals , all in the name of the sacrosanct globalization of trade .
So , to ensure that European consumers can still aspire to the legitimate choice of natural foodstuffs , the least the European Union can do for now is to support biological production consistently .
In the meantime , let 's follow Austria 's example with its labelling policy .
Mr President , in the short time I have I would just like to say that the whole area surrounding the labelling of genetically modified foods is one of the greatest challenges we face today in the European Union .
We must be prepared to face the maximum challenge from those countries , especially America , who quite clearly have a vested interest in developing and promoting this new area .
I personally am opposed to such a policy being adopted within the European Union .
We do not need this new technology to produce more food into a market which is already oversupplied .
As someone who has had first-hand experience of the BSE crisis where ingredients were placed in compound feed which were not up to the standard one could have had expected , I find it hard to believe we are now going to create a new monster with genetically modified food .
I do not believe there is any demand anywhere in the European Union for the widespread use of this genetically modified food .
I feel we must exercise extreme caution in any decisions relating to this area .
We must also ensure that grain or any other material developed in this area is not imported into the European Union .
Mr President , I am very glad that this debate is taking place this morning .
I am also very happy that , while exercising maximum caution in the approach to genetically modified foods , this Parliament is prepared to move substantially from the totally negative position adopted by most MEPs two years ago .
Against this more open-minded background , I wish to make a few points .
Firstly , from the environmental viewpoint , the use of varieties which genetic alteration has made more resistant to soil-borne and air-borne diseases has drastically reduced the need for herbicides , fungicides and other chemical plant protection product which leave very damaging residues in the soil .
These genetically modified varieties will make decisive contributions to feeding the world 's rapidly growing population .
Secondly , genetically modified foodstuffs are now a fact of life , whether we like it or not , in the US and Japan , and have been tested over multi-generation cycles , have been cleared for safety and efficacy and , indeed , have long since entered the food chain and the international food-trading market .
Thirdly , genetic engineering is achieving , in a very short period , even better results than plant breeders could achieve through conventional propagation and crossing methods over years of trials , thus enhancing food values , proteins , starches , oil contents and yields and , most importantly , offering the prospect of better uptake of soil nutrients , thus requiring less fertilizer .
However , this debate is about labelling .
I recognize that decisions have already been taken but labelling may well be only a short-term or , at least , a medium-term solution to the use of genetically modified products .
I am not sure about its long-term value .
It seems to me to have two fundamental flaws .
Firstly , labelling food such as soya beans , which are used in thousands of food preparations , is not practical .
Sometimes very small quantities of soya are used , for example in sauces and soups . These small quantities are further diluted to almost non-existence .
Labelling in this type of circumstance would be meaningless and , in any event , would be impossible to identify or evaluate in any test .
If it is not possible to measure , then the rule on labelling will be brought into disrepute .
Secondly , establishing special labelling requirements for products which have been fully tested and found to be completely safe , seems wrong to me and makes bad law .
Either there is something wrong with the foods in question , in which case they should be banned , or they are safe , in which case no special rules are required .
Genetic modification has been part of food production since the beginning of agriculture .
Cattle breeds are different because the gene pool to which they belong has been modified through selection for certain characteristics .
Genetic modification by itself is not harmful and it is wrong for us to confuse the public by suggesting that it is .
Finally , I believe that within an ever-increasing global market operating under WTO rules , which , by the way , the EU is strongly supporting , this differentiation will become irrelevant , if not a complete nonsense .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , the Commissioner said that we need more time , but I would like to say that the time is already up .
Developments in industry and research have actually overtaken us politicians .
Consumers have every right to know what they are eating .
History proves that .
We have the BSE crisis behind us , or at least mostly behind us , and we have the experience of that crisis .
It is therefore natural that there are demands like this on the part of consumers .
As the people 's representatives , we must ensure that consumers get reasonable information .
The question , however , is whether it is realistic at all today to think that we can have a comprehensive labelling system .
I would very much like to elaborate on what Mr Lannoye said about equivalence .
We still do not know what is equivalent to ordinary food .
The problem is also that we already have so many genetically modified organisms in the system that we will soon be forced to put labels on almost all food , at least all complex foods , to say they may contain genetically modified organisms .
That is not , of course , satisfactory , because for a long time consumers have been saying that they want to know when genetically modified organisms are included and , if they are , how dangerous it is .
We have not been able to give answers to these questions .
On the other hand , I would also like to pick up on a little of what Mr Gillis talked about , namely that we have in fact worked on modifying the genes in crop plants and domestic animals since we left the hunter-gatherer stage around 10 , 000 years ago .
We have always looked for strange plants which could be better than those we have .
The very existence of maize is an example of this .
We heard Mrs Barthet-Mayer say that maize has no cousins .
No , instead it is by some kind of strange chance that we grow maize ; it should not really have existed , but even nature is very strange sometimes .
I believe it is important for European agriculture for us to be able to use the same means of production , the same methods of production as other countries in order to remain competitive in the long term .
But if we are to use gene modification in our production , consumers have to be able to feel safe , otherwise it is impossible .
Through tardiness and a lack of clarity , consumers , producers and scientists are all now in a quagmire in which consumers do not know what is dangerous , and producers and scientists do not know what it is they should be looking for .
Mr President , I am sorry to say ' I told you so ' , but the Green Group in the European Parliament argued back in January that we could not vote for this regulation without an implementing regulation , because it would not then be sufficiently clear how it would be implemented .
If you buy a pig in a poke , as our colleagues here have done , then you should not be surprised if you end up with a mess .
If think it is shameful , Madam Commissioner , how the wishes of consumers have been trampled upon .
You have not made it clear today when labelling will be required .
You have again brought equivalence into the debate , which makes me worry that a little back door is being kept open to mislead consumers .
Nor have you said when there will be clear labelling for additives , flavourings and enzymes .
In the absence of such labelling , over 80 % of these foodstuffs will still be subject to secrecy , even if there is DNA analysis , and that cannot be in the interest of consumers . We have to be open with them and offer them the option of making up their own minds for or against .
Mrs Schleicher also asked which products had been notified and approved under the novel foods regulation .
Madam Commissioner , in your reply you referred to the directive on deliberate release - but that was not the question .
May I therefore ask you once again which products have already been notified and which other products we can expect in the near future besides genetically modified maize and soya .
Nor did you reply to our question about positive labelling .
There are a great many industrial companies and traders who would like to meet consumers ' desire for clear labelling , including labelling of products that have not been genetically modified .
Just when can we expect labelling criteria to be available for these products ?
Now to my last point . Mrs Cresson , you told us that there is no labelling regulation because the Member States opposed it .
I think that you should name the guilty men , the Member States who were against it , so that we in the European Parliament can cooperate with those Member States who are in favour to win over the ones continuing to block consumer protection and ride roughshod over health protection .
Madam Commissioner , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in Austria genetic engineering is meeting widespread resistance .
The scale of this protest is evident from a petition for a referendum which was supported by 1.3 million people .
Consequently , the Austrian government has in the past reacted extremely sensitively to EU regulations which make it easier to use and release genetically modified plants .
The reason for this often justified mistrust is no secret - genetic modification affects a clearly visible part of our citizens ' lives , their food .
Consumers want to know what they are eating , otherwise they lose faith in food products .
To prevent this happening , an important step is to create a system for labelling genetically modified foods so that all consumers can immediately see what they are putting on their children 's plates .
It must say on the outside what is inside , it is that simple .
That is why I wonder if it is not tantamount to deceiving consumers if labelling is only required once a discernible amount of modified proteins is present , that is , above a specific limit value .
Should labelling be compulsory as soon as there is a difference from natural products , or only once the difference is detectable ?
As genetically modified products are in any case supposed to be an exception , I would also like to know when there will be positive labelling for conventional products as well , or whether a comprehensive and panEuropean uniform labelling system is envisaged only for modified products .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have listened to your comments on this very important subject with great interest and would like to thank you for your part in this discussion .
I have occasionally had the impression that what I said was not always heard - maybe because this is a passionate debate , and rightly so since it concerns a fundamental issue such as public health .
So I will repeat what I said earlier , that is that operators are bound , as of 1 November , to label products which are not equivalent within the meaning of article 2 of Regulation 1813 / 97 / EEC .
Clearly it is up to Member States to check that these products are labelled .
In response to what has just been said , there is no threshold .
As soon as there is even a trace , labelling is obligatory , even if the trace is not very clear .
The indications have been formulated clearly , as follows , and I quote : ' Produced from genetically modified soya or produced from genetically modified maize ' .
It could not be clearer .
Only a trace is required , there is no threshold amount .
And this formula which clearly explains , in sufficiently large letters , that the foodstuff is produced from genetically modified maize or soya seems sufficiently clear to me .
Just now , someone said that there were no positive indications .
But this is not the case , and I said so earlier .
There are positive indications for the statements concerning the absence of foodstuffs or ingredients produced from genetically modified soya or maize , or the statements concerning the presence of a certain foodstuff or ingredient in cases where this is not scientifically verifiable and the proof is available by other means .
We have also looked to provide positive indications .
In response to other observations , I would like to say that labelling does not concern the finished product , but the ingredients .
So , each time an ingredient containing - I will say it again - simply a trace of a substance which can be considered as having been genetically modified is found in an end product , this information will be provided on the label .
The Commission has chosen the criterion which is most scientifically reliable - DNA - and which is also the most product-specific .
Unfortunately this point of view is not shared by the Member States , as we have seen during the meeting which has just been held .
So it is true that the discussions of the Member States run the risk of prolonging the debate .
Of course this regulation will be hard to apply , as mentioned earlier .
It will be hard to apply because this is a difficult area , but we must proceed in a scientific way in order to develop methods of detection .
Science never stops moving forward hand in hand with the new discoveries that are made , and we can observe both the positive aspects of this and sometimes , fatally , the negative aspects .
However this is the crux of the problem , and in my opinion it will remain the big issue in the years to come .
During the last few decades there has been total confidence in science , but this is no longer the case .
Science and the progress it makes - which is clear from the prolongation of human life - can also bring threats .
Consumers must be informed about these threats and in this I share your viewpoint completely .
So , as far as I am concerned , the Commission - we can always criticize it , it is used to being a sort of scapegoat - has done its duty by stressing to Member States which support the DNA criteria - the broadest criteria - that labelling must be clear , that progress must be made rapidly , and that even if there is only a trace of the product , it should be mentioned .
Of course all this will take time because different committees must meet , because Member States cannot be brought together overnight and because they cannot agree amongst themselves .
So this debate is far from over .
However you can be sure that the Commission will be extremely vigilant in taking precautions where the health of consumers is concerned .
Mr President , I would just like to ask the Commission very quickly if it will seek to establish where infringements of these labelling requirements take place .
If Mrs Cresson wishes to reply , I invite her to speak .
Mr President , I will be happy to respond .
As I said before , it is in fact the Member States which are responsible for the application of the regulation .
So , as far as breaches of the regulation are concerned , the Member States must take action .
Naturally if shortcomings were noted , the Commission would intervene as usual .
The joint debate is now closed .
Interim agreement with Uzbekistan
The next item is the report ( A4-0304 / 97 ) by Mr Wiersma , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , on theproposal for a Council Decision on the conclusion by the European Community of the Interim Agreement on trade and trade-related matters between the European Community , the European Coal and Steel Community and the European Atomic Energy Community , of the one part , and the Republic of Uzbekistan , of the other part ( COM ( 96 ) 466-10521 / 96 - C4-0082 / 97-96 / 0236 ( CNS ) ) .
Mrs Mann will deputize for the rapporteur .
Mr President , I am delighted to introduce this report on behalf of Mr Wiersma , for whom I have the greatest respect .
He cannot be here today as he has important business in Holland , and I offer his apologies .
A Partnership and Cooperation Agreement with Uzbekistan was signed on 21 June 1996 , but it will only come into force when it has been ratified by the European Parliament and by the parliaments of all the EU Member States .
An Interim Agreement was initialled on 17 July 1996 .
The European Parliament has been asked by Council for its opinion on this agreement , in a simple consultation .
Uzbekistan is an important partner of the European Union in the central Asian region , and it makes political and economic sense to have a trade agreement with Uzbekistan which will facilitate the development of reliable and also to some extent regulated relations .
Uzbekistan will be the second central Asian state , after Kazakhstan , with which we will sign an Interim Agreement .
The most important goods for Uzbekistan 's economy and trade are cotton , gold , oil and natural gas .
EU enterprises are already engaged in tough competition with US , Turkish , Korean and Iranian companies .
Trade with the European Union increased by 30 % in 1996 , admittedly from very low levels .
Community exports rose by more than 60 % , resulting in a balance of trade surplus of some 180 million ECU .
A more balanced trading relationship would be of particular interest to Uzbekistan .
There are substantial problems with reform of the finance sector .
The IMF and the World Bank have provisionally suspended payments on loans granted to Uzbekistan .
Under the Tacis programme , the European Union is supporting projects that can act as a model for the reforms needed .
This includes support under the Tacis Democracy Programme .
On 14 November 1996 , the European Community and the Republic of Uzbekistan signed an Interim Agreement on trade and trade-related matters , aimed at speedy implementation of the trade provisions contained in the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement signed on 21 July 1996 .
The Interim Agreement falls under the exclusive competence of the Community , whereas the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement has to be implemented by the Member States , which experience has taught us is very timeconsuming .
But there is one problem , and this , as so often , is in the field of democracy and human rights .
The Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , or to be precise its draftsman , Mrs Anne AndréLéonard , recommended suspending a decision on the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement until spring 1998 , as the democratic and human rights position in Uzbekistan is regarded as extremely unsatisfactory .
The situation of both the media and the various NGOs , and also that of the very popular Islamic figure Obidkhon Nazarov is regarded as extremely unsatisfactory and was the subject of a very negative assessment in the last Human Rights Watch report .
So we find ourselves in a situation where once again this Parliament has to try to strike an appropriate balance between the need to promote economic stability in an East European country and the need to support democratic movements and democratic stabilization .
We have discussed this situation on several occasions before , so it is nothing new to us .
However , the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy considers it necessary to conclude the Interim Agreement , as a general improvement and stabilization of trade conditions can also lead to improvement and stabilization in the democratic situation .
The Committee on Budgets also shares this opinion , and you can of course take it that our rapporteur , Mr Wiersma , also subscribes to this assessment on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations .
Like the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement , the Interim Agreement also includes the human rights clause .
It is an agreement on trade-related matters and does not offer a formal framework for a political dialogue on democracy and human rights , as the Community does not have any delegated powers in this area , as Commissioner van den Broek commented in a letter to Mrs Castellina , the chairperson of the Committee on External Economic Relations .
Although the Joint Committee does provide an opportunity for a dialogue on democracy-related issues , the correct framework for this has still to be identified .
It will , furthermore , be an important task for the Commission and the Council to formulate and define such a framework .
In the case of Kazakhstan a successful solution has of course been found .
I would ask the Commission and the Council to make a determined effort to use the opportunities available in the Joint Committee .
However , I must point out that the Interim Agreement contains a suspense clause , which is an innovation in comparison to the 1989 agreement originally concluded with the USSR .
This clause enables the Community to threaten Uzbekistan with the suspension of the agreement , should its human rights record significantly deteriorate .
But we should only consider using this clause if there is a fundamental deterioration .
We should not regard it as a mechanism to be used at the slightest provocation .
Once again , the rapporteur , Mr Wiersma , despite various reservations , recommends that the Parliament should approve the conclusion of the agreement .
This agreement will allow us to cooperate more closely and will facilitate a rapprochement of common values .
That is what we want to achieve .
I therefore hope , ladies and gentlemen , that you will feel able to support Mr Wiersma on this occasion
Mr President , rapporteurs Wiersma and Mrs Mann have formulated their recommendations to enter into an interim trade agreement with Uzbekistan convincingly .
Such an agreement would contribute to the bringing into effect of the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement signed in July 1996 .
The interim agreement contains a reference to a democratic form of government and human rights .
This is goes without saying to us , but the reports we are receiving about it are not positive .
I think that the members of the committee would like the Commission to give us more information about this as soon as possible .
The interim agreement may be able to strengthen European cooperation in achieving the objectives .
Applying sanctions in the event of aggravated violation of human rights remains a possibility .
The question I would like to give some thought to concerns the improvement of the economic situation as a result of the interim agreement .
When I asked a compatriot what he thought of it , he summarized his opinion , based on experience , in one phrase .
He said : trading with Uzbekistan is very smooth , trading in the country is very difficult .
Uzbekistan specializes in exporting raw materials .
We all know when it concerns gas , oil , and so on .
But the balance of payments is largely determined by the price of gold and cotton on the world market .
However , the foreign reserves allow far-reaching reforms in the country itself .
Most European insurers of public credit do not cover Uzbekistan .
In those places where it does happen it does so at the expense of the state .
Inflation remains high , as do interest rates ; the banking system leaves something to be desired ; the central bank does not appear fully to understand its role , there is little progress in the development of trade ; the government 's grip on the economy continues to be strong ; the market economy is underdeveloped .
Bearing all this in mind we can follow the rapporteur and agree to an interim trade agreement .
Approval of a partnership and cooperation agreement requires much time .
It may take a long time .
The Interim Agreement may nonetheless help to speed up evolution for the better .
This is extremely important for both Uzbekistan and Europe .
Mr President , the Committee on External Economic Relations unanimously agreed to support Mr Wiersma 's report and thus the Interim Agreement , because it considers that it would not only be wrong but also very dangerous to isolate Uzbekistan at a time of serious crisis .
We must take every opportunity to develop this country and to build up a strong relationship with it .
This is not just for economic reasons , although they also suggest the same course .
Uzbekistan has abundant resources of raw materials .
After years of crisis , in 1996 the country experienced a modest growth rate of 1 % .
However , in addition to economic reasons there are important political ones .
Human rights have been mentioned here again and again .
We must of course press for the observance of democracy , the rule of law and human rights .
But we should not forget that Uzbekistan was a central Asian colony first of Russia and then of the Soviet Union , and suffered from classic colonialism , by contrast with the Ukraine , which Mrs Mann and I constantly deal with in the Committee on External Economic Relations , or to Belarus , which gives us serious cause for concern . These are European countries .
Uzbekistan has the classic symptoms of an immediately post-colonial situation : a cotton-based single-commodity economy , over-reliance on world markets , an almost total absence of manufacturing industry , and a need to export raw materials which it cannot make use of itself .
Combined with decades of effective dictatorship under a totalitarian system , this means that we cannot measure this country by our own standards .
That is why I believe that we should refrain from being arrogant and simply say that we should apply the same yardsticks to this country as we would , for example , to an ACP country .
Although the ACP countries already have many years of development and cooperation with Europe behind them , there are of course enormous deficits there too , and democracies are in a minority .
We must therefore conclude this Interim Agreement , and we must develop an intensive dialogue and trading relationship with Uzbekistan . On the other hand , by virtue of the human rights clause and the ' suspension clause ' , we have an opportunity to use our influence systematically to support democracy , human rights , nationality rights and religious freedom .
I rise to endorse Mr Posselt 's comments .
I certainly do not intend to oppose these proposals , but I would nevertheless like to emphasize that we in this Parliament fail to understand just what an enormous influence we can have , and what we can achieve in this area .
I would like to mention in particular the case of Michael Arzinkov .
Because he was an Islamic activist , he had his passport withdrawn and was forbidden to leave the country , and when he demanded his passport back , he was told that he would not be given it until he had submitted to a psychiatric examination .
Mr President , these are the kind of facts that define President Islam Karimov 's policies .
As Mr Posselt has quite rightly said , it has to be recognized that this is a people which has been demeaned by years of suppression , so we need to give them our understanding .
However , the fact that after our delegation there intervened the passport was at least returned demonstrates that we can achieve something !
For that reason , it might have a decisive impact if we associated the acceptance of this agreement - which I support - with a statement that there is still an enormous amount of catching up to do on human rights .
This applies above all to religious rights , as Islam is very fiercely repressed there .
For example , the calls of the muezzin are forbidden , a sign of extreme political persecution .
Not to mention the fact that a whole string of leading Islamic figures , such as Mr Nazarov , are constantly locked up or threatened in their own homes , and their families subjected to various pressures .
The same applies to Christians .
For example , the Baptist representative , Mr Rashid Durebayev , has also been tried and may possibly face three years in prison .
It is well known that conditions in these prisons are so fearful that people die from illness or mistreatment in a relatively short time .
So I implore you , let us support this Agreement , but let us also make use of the influence that we can bring to bear .
The case I have quoted demonstrates that Uzbekistan has a capacity for decency not only in religious matters but also on all other problems .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission would like to thank the European Parliament and the rapporteur , Mr Wiersma for his report enabling the entry into force of the Interim Agreement with Uzbekistan .
The positive approach to forge ahead thanks to this report , despite the decision to defer a decision on the partnership agreement , is accepted by the Commission .
The objective of the Interim Agreement with Uzbekistan is to enable the implementation of the commercial clauses of the partnership agreement which was signed on 21 June 1996 incidental to the European Council of Florence and pending the ratification of the partnership agreement by the European Parliament and all the parliaments of the Member States .
To date , this partnership agreement has been ratified by the national parliaments of five Member States . They are : Greece , Spain , Austria , Finland and Sweden .
Uzbekistan represents a pole of stability in a region which could prove to be important in geo-strategic terms and which could soon be part of a wider Europe .
It has proven to be a reliable and predictable partner and this has been noted by other partners , such as the United States , Japan and Korea .
Today , Uzbekistan is seeking to strengthen its links with the European Union as a way of affirming its independence , notably from Russia .
The entry into force of the Interim Agreement will enable and will favour the development of commercial relations between the European Union and Uzbekistan .
These are already showing great promise .
In the course of 1996 , bilateral trade increased by around 30 % compared with the previous year , and Community exports registered a rise of over 60 % , thus consolidating a trade surplus of approximately ECU 180 million .
Furthermore , it is likely that with its population of 22 million and its abundant cotton , gold and natural gas resources Uzbekistan will become an important partner for the European Union during the next few years .
Many of our companies have already taken this on board and are operating over there against stiff competition from companies from America , Asia , Turkey , Iran and other countries .
In this context , a swift entry into force of the Interim Agreement takes on even more significance .
In addition , article 1 of the Interim Agreement contains clauses regarding respect for democracy and human rights .
Several of you mentioned this point , and I would make special mention of the eloquent intervention from Mr von Habsburg whom I thank for his words .
Thanks to these clauses , the Interim Agreement will permit discussion about respect for human rights , and if need be , will exert pressure on the Uzbek authorities if respect for human rights slips in this young and fragile country .
If need be , the Interim Agreement could be used as a lever to push the Uzbek authorities in the right direction .
In reality , the suspension clause included in the Interim Agreement enables the Community to threaten Uzbekistan with suspension of the agreement if the human rights situation deteriorates .
In this instance , the questions relating to human rights could be examined formally by joint committees provided for in the Interim Agreement .
In effect , these joint committees offer the opportunity incidentally to hold political dialogue with the relevant commissioner , Mr van den Broek , with the services of the Commission and with representatives of other institutions .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Mrs van Bladel wishes to raise a point of order .
Mr President , as Vice-Chairman for Human Rights I have just received word from the human rights organization in Angola , and this was confirmed by the UN , that people have been tortured and have died in dozens of provinces .
Commissioner Brittan said at the end of the topical debate that human rights form an essential part of the Lomé Convention .
These prisoners run greater risks .
You would give me a much more peaceful Christmas if you were to ask the Commission or the Council to ask all parties in Angola to uphold human rights and observe the peace process .
I would also like to wish you a Happy New Year , Mr President .
Thank you , Mrs van Bladel .
You may rest assured that the whole House shares your concern , that your comments will be recorded in the Minutes and that I will notify the President of our Parliament directly of that concern .
UEFA decisions on Coca-Cola Cup winners
The next item is the statement by the Commission on UEFA 's decision not to allow the winners of the Coca-Cola Cup to take part in European cup matches .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission is aware of the problems which UEFA 's decision to bar the winners of the Coca-Cola Cup from participating in the UEFA cup causes small and medium-sized clubs which participate in this national competition .
The Commission confirms that it is holding investigations to try to establish the facts in their proper economic context .
These investigations are carried out as appropriate , within the framework of the procedures established by Council Regulation 17 of 6 February 1962 .
These procedural rules aim to guarantee the rights of parties to be heard and to give to third parties , whose interests could be affected by a Commission decision , the opportunity to highlight to their observations beforehand .
The Commission has already received the observations of UEFA concerning this complaint and has also had a response to some questions which were put to it to clarify the reasons which formed the basis of the adoption of the rule in question .
The assessment of UEFA 's response highlighted the need to ask the Premier League and the Football Association of England to present their comments , both on the complaint and on UEFA 's response .
They were also asked to explain why this conflict could not be resolved at a national level .
At the same time , the Football League was called to present its comments on the response from UEFA .
The Commission has not yet received a response from the complainant nor from the two other organizations .
It will not be possible therefore to take a position on the direction to take in this matter until we have assessed thoroughly the arguments of the parties involved .
Owing to the procedural rules which must be respected and the limited resources of the services of DG IV , we do not envisage reaching this position for several months .
In any case , the Commission would like to remind the honourable Members that , in terms of implementing the competition rules of the treaty , it cannot have as its objective to set itself up as arbiter in private conflicts of interest .
It will ensure in the first instance that the public interest is respected , and this is associated with the restoration of a situation which is in accordance in fact and in law with articles 85 and 86 of the treaty .
This action of the Commission as an administrative authority differs from the role of a civil judge whose vocation is to safeguard the subjective rights of private individuals in their reciprocal relationships .
Mr President , Mr Ford , who has raised this issue on a number of occasions , has had to go to Luxembourg to speak so I am speaking on his behalf .
I want to put this into some sort of context .
UEFA were requiring the Premier League in England be reduced from 20 clubs down to 18 .
Because they were not prepared to do that , they withdrew the winners of the Coca-Cola Cup , the League Cup , from UEFA 's competitions .
The Coca-Cola Cup is , however , the responsibility of the Football League , not the Premier League .
Therefore it seems ridiculous to me to prevent this competition having a team in the UEFA cup when in fact it is the Premier League with whom UEFA has a dispute .
It is grossly unfair and I believe that it is against the letter and the spirit of European law .
But it is not only unfair , it is extremely damaging and I will explain why .
The bigger clubs in England , and I am told by Mr Miller , my colleague from Glasgow , that the same thing applies to Scotland , are sending weakened teams into this competition because they do not see a UEFA place at the end of it .
As a result , you will inevitably get smaller crowds , you will get less television revenue , you will get less sponsorship and as a result of all that there will be an increased financial burden on the smaller clubs .
Now Mrs Cresson was not actually correct in saying that it was the smaller clubs in this competition ; certainly clubs like Manchester United , Liverpool , Tottenham , Leeds and so on are in the competition .
But as the competition has evolved , because there is no UEFA place at the end of it , these clubs may well not only send weaker teams but eventually pull out .
That will result in difficulties , problems and financial uncertainty for the smaller clubs .
They are community clubs and there are also jobs at stake as well .
So this might just sound like a football story , but it is a very serious issue .
We think it is grossly unfair , we think it is illegal and we can see that unless something is done quickly - and I hope it is done quickly - some of these smaller clubs , because of the loss of revenue , may actually go to the wall .
We have seen a number of these clubs do so in the past and therefore I would urge the Commission to move as speedily as possible to resolve this issue so that in future in England , in Scotland and perhaps in other parts of the United Kingdom , we get a place for the winners of the Coca-Cola Cup so that the competition is seen as a prestigious competition and we get the proper sort of television sponsorship and money from this competition for the good of all the smaller clubs .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mrs Cresson for her statement .
But I rise to speak in a very similar vein to the remarks by Mr Cunningham .
This may be the last debate of the week and indeed the last debate of the year in this Parliament , but it is not on an obscure or unimportant issue .
It actually touches on matters of major significance to Europe and Europeans : it touches on football .
We deceive ourselves if we think the affairs of this Parliament are of more concern to millions of our citizens than football .
Over the Christmas holiday there will be millions of European citizens going out to watch football .
It is vital and crucial to them .
They - certainly in the United Kingdom - will be looking to this Parliament and the Commission to deal with this problem .
Football is in Europe .
The development of European football competitions not only creates good sport that , again , our citizens enjoy , but it makes Europe more real for many of our citizens .
We in this Parliament , therefore - and I would urge - the Commission have a responsibility to see that football can continue to operate in Europe and that all clubs have an opportunity to participate in European championships .
Football is big business .
We are not just talking about people kicking a leather ball about .
We are talking about very substantial sums of money and big decisions that are going to have serious impact upon the clubs .
We have to make it clear that we are not just talking about little local football clubs . We are talking about quite significant businesses that now operate in the various football leagues in the United Kingdom .
Where there is professional sport there is a lot of money involved .
The commercial rules that we would expect to apply in other businesses have to be made to apply properly and fairly in football as well .
Having studied this matter it is quite clear , in my view , that UEFA is very definitely abusing its dominant position .
When I contacted them and asked for information , all they were prepared to give me was the address of their lawyer .
That always smacks , to me , of an organization that is not 100 % sure of its position or of its facts .
In Britain , the Football Association and the League both support keeping the Coca Cola Cup winner in the European championship .
Of course football wants and needs a league competition , but we should not forget that the grassroots teams in the lower divisions , who themselves want to participate in European football , like that opportunity .
As Europeans we should say that is good .
But they also need the revenue that comes from the Coca Cola Cup .
It is estimated that something like 20 % of their revenue - some £ 32 million - comes from the Coca Cola Cup .
If there is not the prize of European football at the end of it then they face the risk of losing television money , of losing Coca Cola sponsorship of that competition .
So it is a serious matter for them .
Most serious of all , I have received today a letter from Portsmouth Football Club .
They say : ' Here at Portsmouth we feel that there should be another place in Europe for the winners of the Coca Cola Cup .
Any move likely to bring pressure on UEFA will get our backing . '
Anything that gets the backing of Portsmouth Football Club gets my backing as well .
Mr President , I am not sure that the Commission fully understands what is at issue here , and I would just like to make it absolutely clear to Mrs Cresson .
One organization - the Football League - is being punished for the actions of another organization - the Premier League - over which it has no control .
That discrimination is contrary to the principles of the Treaty of Rome and the principles of a single market .
That is what we must focus on .

As both Mr Cunningham and Mr Perry have quite rightly said , we must not underestimate the economic damage that will come from this decision .
Clearly , playing in a competition , which at the end of the day brings with it a place in Europe , provides a major economic motivation for clubs .
For the very big football clubs such as Manchester United in the United Kingdom perhaps that is not such a motivation .
But clubs such as Bolton Wanderers , for example , need the revenue that could come from a successful cup run and a place in Europe , which is extremely lucrative , because not only does it bring participation and competition , it also brings television rights .
Equally , lesser clubs in the football league , for example Bury Football Club in my constituency , depend on having matches played against the glamour clubs as well as on the prospect of themselves getting through to the final .
If the glamour clubs do not participate , as is a possibility , or send out deliberately weakened teams , clearly they are not going to get the revenue for those matches which they depend on for their survival .
In the light of the Bosman ruling , which I entirely support , the smaller clubs in the United Kingdom are struggling because of the loss of transfer fees .
I hope the Commission will take this with the seriousness it deserves because this is a very important economic matter .
Thank you , Mr Titley , but this presidency , catching today 's mood , wishes to say that it regrets that while you nominated Madrid as a great team you forgot to mention the Barcelona Football Club .
In any event , however , I am here to remedy the omission .
I now invite Mr Wynn to speak for one m